© 2017 Christine D’Arpa

“PROCURE, PROPAGATE, AND DISTRIBUTE AMONG THE PEOPLE”:
THE INFORMATION SERVICES OF THE U.S DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
1862–1888

BY
CHRISTINE D’ARPA

DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2017

Urbana, Illinois

Doctoral Committee:
Associate Professor Emerita Christine A. Jenkins, Chair and Research Director
Professor Alistair Black
Professor Emeritus Dan Schiller
Professor Linda C. Smith








ProQuest Number: 10903463





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10903463
Published by ProQuest LLC (2018 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT
Prior to the establishment of the Department of Agriculture in 1862 and concurrent with
its growth and development, farmers had myriad ways of sharing and communicating
agricultural information. Some of that information was rooted in experimental practice
but much of it was anecdotal and based on years of farming experience. The
historiography of U.S. agriculture demonstrates that farmers both needed and used that
information – information they created, circulated, and consumed in their work as
farmers. The introduction of information work at the Department of Agriculture not only
altered the kind and amount of information that farmers had access to but effectively
sought to redefine who the “experts” were through the production and dissemination of
the results of applied scientific research for agriculture conducted by scientists at the
newly formed Department or work by others filtered through the institution and thus
vetted by it. The vehicle for much of this information transfer was the Annual Reports of
the Department of Agriculture. This dissertation is an historical examination of the
development of the Department of Agriculture that looks specifically at its information
functions from 1862-1888 – the period under the commissionership and before it was
elevated to cabinet-level status. Using the Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture to identify and examine those functions, I situate the information work of the
Department of Agriculture within the context of the emergence of the modern state and
American empire, industrializing capitalism, and the history of information.

ii

For Lucy

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Though this document has my name on it, it is far from an individual effort. Christine Jenkins
guided me through this process with insight, perspective, and humor. She challenged me to
dig deeper and think more expansively. Her enthusiasm for this project was infectious and
the intellectual connections she made as well as her questions about my work provided
insight and perspective that I greatly appreciated. She made my work better. I cannot thank
her enough. I also want to thank my committee members: Alistair Black was generous with
his time and advice from the outset; I am grateful to Dan Schiller for asking hard questions,
offering good advice, and introducing me to the annual reports of the Department of
Agriculture; Linda Smith never waivered with her support or her enthusiasm. I offer a
special thanks to Melissa Cragin who served on my committee at the proposal stage.
Thanks to the many colleagues, friends, and family who listened to me talk about this project
over the years. My fellow Information in Society Fellows, Caroline Nappo and Shinjoung
Yeo, helped make this a more challenging, interesting, and satisfying journey. Conversations
with Naomi Bloch, Irene Catalán, Tom Dousa, Noah Lenstra, Robbie Lieberman, Jerry
Shenk, and Mikki Smith always included good, hard questions and insight that provoked new
ways of seeing and nourished my enthusiasm for this research project.
The culture and community at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the
University of Illinois are remarkable. In addition to my committee members, I am especially
grateful I had the opportunity to work with faculty at the School and at the University Library
and Archives. These people included Pauline Cochrane, Susan G. Davis, Leigh Estabrook,
Don Krummel, Bill Maher, Carole Palmer, Chris Prom, Boyd Rayward, Ellen Swain, and
Anke Voss. I learned right away that the IT and the support staff at GSLIS are the real heart
of the operation and I have nothing but sincere thanks for each of them.
This type of work cannot happen without libraries and archives and the people who work in
them. I owe a debt of thanks to the many librarians and archivists who helped me locate
resources, engaged in conversations about sources, and pointed me to new material. Among
iv

them staff at the Library of Congress, the National Agricultural Library, and the Mann
Library at Cornell University. The University Library at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign has collections so deep one could drown and I owe a special thanks to the
librarians and staff who kept sending me into the depths but who also helped me keep my
head above water! There is no question that I have a strong bias in favor of public libraries
and the work librarians, archivists, and other staff do to build collections and make them
accessible. Without question, search engines pale in comparison to the skills, smarts, and
humor these folks have. I would not trade them for the world!
Lucy Moynihan deserves more thanks than can fit on this page. She shared my interest in and
passion for this topic, served as my personal reference librarian, and never lost faith. I am
grateful for her love and for her friendship.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................1
CHAPTER 2: FORMATION OF THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN
THE 19TH CENTURY .......................................................................................................12
CHAPTER 3: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888 ..........................................................29
CHAPTER 4: THE REPORTS OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888 ......................................................................................44
CHAPTER 5: THE REPORTS OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE GARDEN AND
GROUNDS, 1862-1888 ...................................................................................................119
CHAPTER 6: THE REPORTS OF THE STATISTICIAN, 1862-1888 .........................147
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSION ........................................................................................181
BIBLIOGRAPHY — SOURCES CITED AND CONSULTED ....................................193
APPENDIX A: OVERVIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, 1862-1889 ..........................................................................................202
APPENDIX B: SEED PACKET DISTRIBUTION BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, 1865-1910 ..........................................................................................203
APPENDIX C: PRINT RUNS FOR THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888 ........................................................204

vi

It is conceded on all hands that the farming interest is the
basis of all other interests and the primary source of
national prosperity. The outlines of the rise and decay of
the Roman empire could have been written in the fields
which environed the capitol as well as in her libraries amid
historical records.
Report of Mr. Owen Lovejoy (IL) from the
House Committee on Agriculture, February 11,
1862 (Congressional Globe)
[The American farmer] belongs to a class of citizens who
hold in their hands five-sixths of the wealth of the country
and its entire political power; and the hands which have
wrought this wealth are able to defend the Constitution
which makes us one people.
Isaac Newton, Commissioner of Agriculture,
January 1, 1863 (Report of the Commissioner of
Agriculture for the Year 1862, 14)
“Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities
will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms
and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the
country.”
William Jennings Bryan,
Cross of Gold speech, July 9, 1896.1
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
The second half of the 19th century was a period of dramatic change in the United States.
The federal government was growing and building an economic and political
infrastructure that asserted a national identity. Although we often associate this period
with the growth of cities, industrialization, and factory work it is worth noting that,
according to the U.S. census of 1840, more than half of the nation’s population was
employed in agricultural work.2 The growth in the number of farms in this period was
staggering: “Between 1860 and 1890 the number of farms in the United States nearly
tripled. Land under the plow rose from 407 million to 828 million acres,...” and was
1

This speech, delivered by Bryan to the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in the summer of
1896 is attributed only to “that prairie avenger” by Bardolph in the preface to his book, Agricultural
Literature and the Early Illinois Farmer.
2
The census of 1840 was the first federal census to include agricultural statistics. Compiled by the
Department of State the census for 1840, 1850, and 1860 include free and slave states as well as territories.
Census figures show that the population of the United States nearly doubled between 1840 and 1860.
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/Historical_Publications/index.asp accessed April 10, 2012.

1

directly tied to westward expansion by the U.S. government.3 In 1862 there were 1.5
million farms averaging 200 acres and, in the 1860s, 80 percent of exports were the
products of agriculture.4 Immigration, the growth of urban areas, industrialization,
western expansion, emerging transportation and communications networks, and the Civil
War each had profound impact on agricultural production.5 Many of the challenges
associated with these changes centered on the need for larger crop yields, new types of
crops, and new techniques to ensure soil health. Though there had been support and
pressure for a federal agricultural agency for decades, it was not until 1862 that the
Congress of the United States established the Department of Agriculture.6 The
Department of Agriculture was established in the late spring of 1862 during the Civil
War. It was the first executive agency created in a period in which the federal
government begins to assert an expansive and authoritative role.7 This dissertation will
demonstrate and discuss how the Department of Agriculture was, perhaps more than any
other federal agency in the middle of the 19th century, a place where we can see evidence
of the emergence of a modern state and the exercise of a central state authority leveraging
information in various formats including seeds, plants, and statistics to assert and ground
that authority. Throughout the mid and late 19th century, the Department of Agriculture
was an arena in which the role and authority of the federal government and that of the
states was contested and negotiated. In its work we can also see instantiations of an
emerging infrastructure of empire intimately tied to a global market economy, with

3

Charles Postel, The Populist Vision. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 26.
Wayne D. Rasmussen, “The People’s Department: Myth or Reality?” Agricultural History 64, n. 2
(1990): 291. The 2007 Census of Agriculture reports more than 2.2 million farms averaging 418 acres in
size. The American Farmland Trust notes that census data collection methods changed over time thus
making comparisons less than perfect. See Census of Agriculture American Farmland Trust, Jennifer
Dempsey; Northampton, MA: American Farmland Trust; FIC Fact Sheet and Technical Memo.
5
Historian Hal S. Barron (1997) in his study of the rural North after the U.S. Civil War calls the years
between 1870 and 1930 “the second transformation, which was characterized by the centralization of the
economy, the expansion of state power and professional expertise.” (10) Also at play for Barron is the
emergence of a class of bureaucrats and managers – the new “middle class” – growth in consumer goods
and the expansion of mass culture, and, finally, and perhaps most importantly for the purposes of this study,
the growth of the power of the state and its expansion as empire. Barron’s focus is on the rural North. His
“mixed harvest” refers to the ways rural values changed and adapted to a new consumer culture while at the
same time demonstrating “continuity” with rural traditions.
6
Hereafter may be referred to simply as the Department.
7
The size and composition of the President’s cabinet grew slowly from Washington to Lincoln. War,
State, Treasury, and Postmaster General, Attorney General, and Vice-President in 1789; Navy (Marine) in
1798; Post Office Department 1829; Interior in 1849; Agriculture in 1889.
4

2

imperial aspirations made possible in large part by the agricultural information it
collected, produced, and distributed.
Information Work at the Department of Agriculture
Information work conducted by the Department of Agriculture focused on applied
science and agricultural statistics intended to bolster a nascent market economy through
increased efficiency and scale in agricultural production while also anticipating an end to
the slave economy of the American South. The Department solicited and gathered
information in the form of seeds, plants, and statistics from domestic and international
sources. It generated, organized, and disseminated information that offered farmers
information on new practices, new seeds and plants, and new tools that would result in
increased crop yields and improve the efficiency of farm production.8 Statistical
information from the Department of Agriculture allowed farmers and other stakeholders
in the economy of agricultural production and circulation to anticipate future crop yields
and demand, and manipulate prices and distribution.
The Department of Agriculture was established by an act, formally titled “An Act to
Establish a Department of Agriculture” of the Thirty-Seventh Congress of the United
States in its Second Session and signed into law by President Lincoln on May 15, 1862.
The new agency’s duties were outlined in the first paragraph:
Be It Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled, That there is hereby established at the seat of
government of the United States a Department of Agriculture, the general designs
and duties of which shall be to acquire and to diffuse among the people of the
United States useful information on subjects connected with agriculture in the

8

The seeds and plants were both information, too. In her book, Trading the Genome: Investigating the
Commodification of Bio-information (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), Bronwyn Parry argues
“seeds became useful proxies” for plants. And, unlike botanical illustrations or descriptions, contained
within them the information necessary for reproduction (70). See Kloppenburg (2004) and Schiller (2007)
for more on plant biotechnology and the commmodification of seeds and plant germ-plasm. In First the
Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 1492-2000 (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press, 2004), Kloppenburg looks specifically at the historical role of the state in agricultural research on
seeds and argues that this work began as a public good.

3

most general and comprehensive sense of that word, and to procure, propagate,
and distribute among the people new and valuable seeds and plants.9
This legislation, which I will refer to as the “Organic Act,” gave the President authority
to appoint a Commissioner of Agriculture “to acquire and preserve all information
concerning agriculture which he can obtain by means of books and correspondence, and
by practical and scientific experiments, (accurate records of which experiments shall be
kept in his office,) by the collection of statistics, and by any other appropriate means
within his power; to collect, as he may be able, new and valuable seeds and plants; to test,
by cultivation, the value of such of them as may require such tests; to propagate such as
may be worthy of propagation, and to distribute them among agriculturists.” The
Commissioner was required to report to Congress annually on the progress of the
Department, submit a financial report to account for money received and spent. He was
also tasked by Congress with hiring a “chief clerk” who in turn hired, under the direction
of Congress, “other persons, for such time as their services may be needed, including
chemists, botanists, entomologists, and other persons skilled in the natural sciences
pertaining to agriculture.”10
At the heart of the mission of the Department of Agriculture was the acquisition,
production, and dissemination of agricultural information. That information and the
systems developed to gather, produce, and share it are the focus of this dissertation. The
Department of Agriculture was the first federal agency to engage in scientific research
and the collection, creation, and dissemination of new knowledge on a massive scale and
it did so at a critical moment in the history of the United States between 1862 and 1888.
As this dissertation will demonstrate, the need for reliable and “accurate” information
was emphasized by commissioners of the Department of Agriculture in the Annual
Reports of the Department throughout the late 19th century. The accuracy of that
information served to rationalize agricultural production in an emerging global market

9

The full text of the legislation is digitized as part of the American Memory Project of the Library of
Congress. A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 17741875. Statutes at Large, 37th Congress, 2nd Session (1862), 387-388. http://memory.loc.gov/cgibin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=012/llsl012.db&recNum=418 accessed February 15, 2017.
10
Ibid., 388.

4

economy. That information also served to assert and then reinforce the authority of the
federal government and its role as a source of resources and information critical to
agricultural production in that growing market economy. The work of the Department of
Agriculture and the systems of information that characterized it were integral to the
transformation of agricultural practice, agricultural knowledge, and the agricultural
economy in the United States. More specifically, the Department of Agriculture’s
information work helped define, feed, and nurture that transformation. It was a
prodigious collector, producer, and distributor of information that served complicated and
complex purposes.
Methods and Sources
Defining the project and the resources
The project of this dissertation is to trace the history of information work and identify the
systems of information collection, production, and dissemination at the Department of
Agriculture during its first years as a federal agency. My research for it began at the
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) where I expected to find a paper
trail of administrative records for the Department, from its founding in 1862 to its
elevation to a cabinet post in 1889, that would shed light on its day-to-day functions and
particularly how it worked to fulfill its mission “to acquire and to diffuse” and to
“procure, propagate, and distribute among the people” agricultural information.11 After
several weeks working in the archives and talking with archivists at NARA I realized that
Harold Pinkett’s discussion of the status of the historical record for the Department still
held true. Pinkett, the first African-American to be appointed archivist at the U.S.
National Archives in 1942, was the first archivist to process the records of the
Department of Agriculture. In an article focused on United States government work with
plants published in the Journal of Agricultural History in 1955, Pinkett noted that the
administrative record for the Department of Agriculture was “very incomplete” generally
and especially so for the records pertaining to the Department’s work with plants and

11

An Act to Establish a Department of Agriculture reprinted in the Annual Report of the Commissioner of
Agriculture for 1862. (n.p.)

5

seeds prior to the 1890s.12 Pinkett pointed to an earlier article in the same journal by
another archivist working with the Department’s records at the National Archives, Guy
A. Lee. Lee’s article was, in his words, “essentially a summary of a Preliminary
Checklist of the Records of the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture” he produced for the
National Archives in 1945.13 Pinkett noted that the Chief of the Agricultural Department
Archives, T.R. Schellenberg, offered a critical note to Lee’s discussion of the Record
sub-group for the Commissioner of Agriculture. Schellenberg suggests in a footnote in
Lee’s article that researchers consult the personal papers of the commissioners to fill the
significant “gaps” in the administrative record, “The records of the Department of
Agriculture while it was administered by the Commissioners from 1862 to 1889 are very
incomplete. Practically none of the official records of the Commissioners are extant,
though the gaps in the documentation of the activities of the Department are partially
filled by the records of various bureaus, particularly those of Chemistry, Entomology,
and Plant Industry. Investigators interested in the careers of the Commissioners must
perforce use the scattered papers in the custody of various historical societies. Among
such papers, the existence of which is known, are those of Commissioners Horace
Capron (1867-71) and William G. Le Duc (1877-81).”14
I turned next to the Special Collections of the National Agricultural Library to evaluate
the usefulness of Capron’s papers to this project.15 I soon realized that to follow
Schellenberg’s advice would be a project beyond the scope and resources of this
dissertation and decided on another path. It was at this point that this dissertation research
took shape. Given the issues outlined above with the administrative record for the
Department of Agriculture in this period, I turned to the Annual Reports under the
commissionership (1862-1888). Because of the size of and information contained in each
annual report, I restricted my study to the formal reports of the commissioners, the

12

Harold T. Pinkett. “Records of the First Century of Interest of the United States Government in Plant
Industries.” Journal of Agricultural History 29, n. 1 (1955): 39-40.
13
Guy A. Lee. “The General Records of the United States Department of Agriculture in the National
Archives.” Journal of Agricultural History 19, n. 4 (1945): 242.
14
Ibid., 243.
15
The collection is a typed manuscript copy of Capron’s two-volume autobiography. Capron, Horace M.
Memoirs of Horace Capron (1884). Special Collections, National Agricultural Library.

6

reports of the gardener, and the reports of the statistician.16 Between 1862 and 1888 there
were seven commissioners.17 The position of gardener was one of the first appointments
made by the first commissioner.18 Newton selected William Saunders for that post.
Saunders was responsible for the collection, production, and distribution of plants and
seeds and he stayed with the Department in that role for the full period of my study. I
settled on the statistical work of the Department because it, too, was part of each Annual
Report between 1862 and 1888.
The University of Illinois Library collection included a full run of the Annual Reports of
the Department of Agriculture for the years under the Commissionership, 1862-1888.
Those reports form a discrete and cohesive body of primary source material and
government documents and publications that had not been previously used to identify and
understand the information work and systems of information at the Department under the
Commissionership. The Annual Reports proved to be rich in detail pertaining to what I
am calling the information work of the Department.
In addition to these primary sources I examined newspapers (especially the agricultural
press), monographs and journal literature on the emerging area of information history and
the history and work of the Department in this period, relevant dissertations, and webbased resources that included the websites of the National Agricultural Library and the
USDA to help establish the historical and intellectual context for my work.
Information History and Information Studies
There is a long tradition of historical scholarship in Library and Information Science but
only recently has that come to include explicit and critical engagement with information
16

Even in the first years of reporting for the new agency its annual reports were hundreds of pages long and
included formal reports, solicited essays, charts, illustrations, maps, and examples of correspondence both
to and by the Department. I will discuss the annual reports as sources and evidence in Chapter Two of this
dissertation.
17
Newton, 1862-1867; Stokes, 1867-1867; Capron, 1867-1870; Watts, 1871-1876; LeDuc, 1877-1880;
Loring, 1881-1884; and Colman, 1885-1889. Their reports are discussed in Chapter Four of this
dissertation.
18
I refer to this section at the Department of Agriculture in a few ways: “the Gardener” and by the section
name as it appeared in the Annual Reports for the period of my study, “Superintendent of the Garden and
Grounds.”

7

in society.19 I situate the history of agricultural information work at the Department of
Agriculture in terms of that recent discussion and offer it as a contribution to what Toni
Weller sees as “the bigger discourse” that acknowledges “information as a distinct
historical subject . . . multifarious and complex.”20 The information work at the
Department is best understood in terms of what Black and Schiller call systems of
information situated in society and examined in terms of the historical circumstances “in
which they originated and operated.”21 The society of the second half of the nineteenth
century United States was one teeming with dramatic changes in communication and
transportation technologies – the telegraph and the railroad – that were critical factors in
the growth and development of agriculture work and production. The growing culture of
reading and increase in production and distribution of books, newspaper, and magazines
are also examples of systems of information emerging and changing in this period.22 By
taking an approach that considers systems of information in this larger sense this
dissertation is able to expand the discussion of the Department’s work to consider both its
reach and scope and how it fulfilled its mission to “procure, propagate, and distribute”
agricultural information to the people of the nation. This dissertation illuminates ways
that information work in agriculture at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through
1888 was a foundation on which the authority of the federal government was asserted.
Limitations
It has been clear to me from the outset that this research topic could be taken in a number
of directions. Even without a traditional archival record for the Department of
Agriculture from its founding in 1862 through 1888, the historical record is sufficiently
rich and complex to uncover and weave stories that bring together people, places, and
money in ways that contributed to our understanding of the work of the Department and

19

See, for example, Mikki Smith and Christine D’Arpa, “What’s History Got to Do with It? Seventy Years
of Historical Dissertation Research at the iSchool at Illinois.” Library Trends 65, no. 4 (2017 – in press)
and, certainly, the regular bibliographies of the literature of American library history compiled and
published by Edward A. Goedeken, since the early 1990s.
20
Toni Weller. “All the Facts: A Review of the Literature and Concepts, 2000-2009.” Library &
Information History 26, no. 1 (March 2010): 95.
21
Alistair Black and Dan Schiller. “Systems of Information: The Long View.” Library Trends 62, no. 3
(2014): 629-630.
22
See Casper (2007) on the U.S. Census for an interesting discussion of illiteracy and the Census.

8

particularly what I am calling its information work. For the purposes of this dissertation I
proposed to look at one set of resources that seemed to have not yet been examined with
an eye to information work, the Annual Reports of the commissioners from 1862 through
1888. Those reports are an official and a cohesive record of the work of the Department.
They served as one of the main ways the Department communicated its work to Congress
and were available, free of charge, to a diverse public that included farmers, educators,
scientists, and speculators and traders in agricultural information and products. The
information in the Annual Reports re-circulated in various formats including newspapers
and the agricultural press, at meetings and gatherings of agricultural societies in the
United States and overseas, and at exhibits about agricultural progress at local, regional,
and international fairs. The Annual Reports though published only once a year are long –
between 600-800 pages. They presented a massive and unwieldy volume of literature to
examine in a reasonable space of time. Further refinement was necessary to make the
research for this dissertation a manageable project that could still result in interesting
details leading to a meaningful analysis. For the purposes of this study I focus on the
Reports of the Commissioners, Reports of the Garden and Grounds, and the Reports of
the Statistician in the Department Annual Reports for 1862 through 1888 under the
Commissionership and before the agency was elevated to Cabinet status in the Executive
Branch of the U.S. Government in 1889.
The structure of the Department of Agriculture evolved and grew quickly adding a
Library and Divisions of Chemistry, Entomology, and Botany by the end of the 1860s. In
the 1870s there were new areas of work in microscopy, forestry, and the diseases of
animals. In the decade of the 1880s, work branched out to include several divisions
including veterinary, Forestry, Ornithology, Pomology, and Vegetable Physiology. A
Bureau of Animal Husbandry was established in 1884 and the Office of Experiment
Stations in 1888.23 From the outset the Department had an ambitious publication schedule
much more extensive than just the Annual Reports required by the U.S. Congress. This
included more frequent publications by the Divisions and Bureaus including a monthly
statistical report. There were also publications of research conducted at the request of the
23

See Appendix A: Overview of the Development of the Department of Agriculture, 1862-1889.

9

U.S. Congress. These publications are beyond the scope of this dissertation and do not
inform my discussion.
A final caveat: given the paucity of available data, this dissertation is not a complete
history of the United States Department of Agriculture during the period under the
Commissionership, 1862-1888.
Chapter Outline
As discussed earlier in this Introduction (Chapter 1), this dissertation elucidates and
analyzes the information functions of the Department of Agriculture as embodied in its
Annual Reports for the period 1862 through 1888. It identifies and extracts evidence of
systems of information as well as evidence of a system of grassroots or local
communication and information sharing and evidence of an international exchange of
agricultural information. It identifies some of the ways that work had an impact on the
practice of farming and the economy of agriculture. In Chapter 2: Formation of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture in the 19th Century, I situate historically the 1862 founding of
the Department of Agriculture. I examine both the advocacy and the opposition to a
federal agriculture agency by tracing some of the political, economic, social, and cultural
factors and implications associated with a centralized federal agency responsible for
collecting, producing, and distributing agricultural information to farmers and other
agriculturalists. Chapter 3: Introduction to the Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture, 1862-1888 introduces the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture
as official government documents and political texts with rich and revealing narratives
that can both illuminate and trouble our understandings of farming, government
information work in agriculture, and agricultural science in the second half of the 19th
century in the United States. In Chapter 4: The Reports of the Commissioners of the
Department of Agriculture, I dig into the primary resources used for this dissertation, the
first twenty-seven years of the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Agriculture, 1862
through 1888. Specifically, I look at the reports of the commissioners of agriculture for
each year and pose these three questions:

10

•

What and how did the department fulfill its mission to procure, propagate, and
distribute agricultural information?

•

How did the commissioners present/represent that information in their Annual
Reports to Congress?

•

What was the cycle of information procurement, propagation, and distribution at
the department? How did it change over the period of time I cover, 1862 through
1888?

Between 1862 and 1888 seven men served as commissioner of the agency, Isaac Newton,
1862-1867; John W. Stokes, 1867-1867; Horace Capron, 1867-1871; Frederick Watts,
1871-1877; William G. Le Duc, 1877-1881; George B. Loring, 1881-1885; Norman J.
Colman, 1885-1889. The next two chapters look closely at the reports of two of the
longest standing divisions at the new agency: The Superintendent of the Garden and
Grounds (Chapter 5) and Statistical Division (Chapter 6). William Saunders, the
Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds and the statistician, Jacob Richards Dodge,
served in their respective positions for all or most of the period studied for this
dissertation.24 The concluding chapter (Chapter 7) engages the political economic and
geo-political reach and influence of the agricultural information work at the Department
by positioning it in terms of the formation of the modern state in the United States and
the expression of empire by the U.S. government. I conclude that final chapter by
returning to my research questions and summarizing my findings. Finally, I discuss the
significance of my findings, the limitations of this research, and I outline opportunities to
expand and extend this work in future research.

24

There were three statisticians at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888 but, as we will
see, the work of that Division was associated with Dodge. The other two men to serve were Lewis Bollman
and Charles Worthington. Their terms of service: Lewis Bollman (1863-1864), Jacob Richards Dodge
(1865-1877), Charles Worthington (1878-1880), and Jacob Richards Dodge (1881-1888)

11

CHAPTER 2: FORMATION OF THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
IN THE 19TH CENTURY
Introduction
Agriculture was not only at the center of the economy of the United States in the mid-19th
century, it was stitched into the very fabric of consciousness and identity. Whether
viewed in the contexts of the Jeffersonian agrarian ideal of the yeoman farmer working
the land or of recent historical studies that argue the Jeffersonian ideal was more myth
than reality, agriculture has been at the center of the politics, culture, and the economy of
the United States from its founding.25 The character and future of agricultural practice
and production, as well as what institutional structure and support would best serve
agricultural advancement, were debated by politicians, farmers, the press, and members
of agricultural societies. Farmers, gentlemen farmers, gardeners, diplomats, and scientists
exchanged information about crops, weather, water, seeds, and farming tools and
techniques; they shared plants and seeds, and cultivated networks of like-minded
individuals at home and abroad with whom agricultural information was exchanged. A
vibrant and widely read agricultural press, agricultural societies, and agricultural fairs
served as forums for discussion, information exchange, advocacy, and political
organizing. That system of agricultural information was rooted in local knowledge,
informal networks, and collective experience.
Within the United States of the early 19th century there were organized efforts to identify,
produce, and share agricultural information at various levels of society, from local
communities to regional and state associations to national societies. There was also a
vibrant international exchange of information and tools as well as discussion of best
practices and standards for agricultural research.

25

See Hagenstein, Gregg, and Donahue (2011, 1): “historians like to point out that farmers have been
enthusiastic participants in America’s growing market economy from the start, and therefore the ‘agrarian
ideal’ of the yeoman standing free from the corruption of commerce might be better termed the ‘agrarian
myth’.” Eric Hobsbawm in The Age of Capital (1975) argues that the Jeffersonian yeoman is best
understood as a “rural utopia in its most literal form – the free yeoman on free soil.” (Hobsbawm, 138) It
was this sector of U.S. society in 1860 that asserted significant political power that helped form the
Republican Party.

12

One of the earliest societies to support agricultural research was the American
Philosophical Society. It was founded in Philadelphia in 1743 to address Benjamin
Franklin’s challenge to “improve the common stock of knowledge” and advance the
independence and development of the emerging nation in several areas including the
promotion of scientific agriculture.26 The Massachusetts Society for Promoting
Agriculture was founded in 1792 and began publishing semi-annually the Massachusetts
Agricultural Journal in 1813. The Maryland Agricultural Society was established in 1818
and the Illinois Agricultural Association in 1819. The establishment of state agricultural
societies followed: Ohio in 1846, Maryland in 1848, Virginia in 1877 to name a few.
The island community of Martha’s Vineyard established its own Agricultural Society in
1859 and held its first livestock show in 1861. The U.S. Agricultural Society was
established in 1852 in Washington, D.C.27
Agricultural fairs, shows, exhibits, and contests were just some of the activities promoted
and organized by state and local agricultural societies and served as places where the
diverse set of agricultural stakeholders came together to share and discuss agricultural
information. Many state agricultural societies collected statistics on the state of
agriculture in their region. Much of this activity though local was connected to similar
activities and organizations in Europe – particularly England, the Royal Agricultural
Society of England in 1838, and Germany, which before unification in 1871 were
regional. Historian Mark Finlay argues that state agricultural societies in the United
States “looked to Europe for guidance” noting that in “1862, there were 15 experiment
stations in the German states” and “about 80 such stations in 1887.” He also notes
participation by agriculturalists from the United States in the International Congress of
Farmers and Foresters in Vienna in 1873. International cooperation was evident not only
in participation but also in the reports that emerged from that and similar meetings. By

26

https://www.amphilsoc.org/about accessed March 20, 2017.
Alfred Charles True. A History of Agricultural Education in the United States: 1785-1925. Washington,
D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1929. By some accounts the U.S. Agricultural Society was founded
with the explicit goal of establishing a Department of Agriculture in the federal government.
27

13

1862, American states active internationally included Ohio, Kansas, New Jersey, Iowa,
North Carolina, and Connecticut.28
In this chapter I situate the establishment of a new Department of Agriculture at the
federal level historically and offer examples of both advocacy for and opposition to
efforts to make the gathering, production, and distribution of agricultural information
work (or science as it was often referred to29) a responsibility of the federal government
of the United States. I discuss how both advocates and opponents rooted their arguments
in their understanding of traditional agricultural knowledge and the systems and tools of
information and communication used and how that way of knowing and communicating
carried forward into the systems of information developed at the Department of
Agriculture.
Funding by the National State for Agricultural Research in the United States Prior
to 1862
Agricultural research and information was recognized early as critical to the stability and
growth of the nation. An early example of organized agricultural research by the state
was conducted by George Washington in 1791 in the early years of his presidency.
Washington, in response to an inquiry from “Arthur Young (of England),” developed and
circulated a short survey to “several gentlemen, the best informed of the agriculture”
regarding the state of agriculture in New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and
Virginia. The survey requested information on soil quality; the amount of arable land,
pasture, and woods; land cost including the percentage leased and associated cost; types
of crops; prices for those crops; prices for both working and food livestock; and prices for
iron.30

28

Mark Finlay, “Transnational Exchanges of Agricultural Scientific Thought form the Morrill Act through
the Hatch Act,” in Science as Service: Establishing and Reformulating Land-Grant Universities, 18651930. Ed. Alan I. Marcus. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press 2015: 33-60. Finlay notes that the
German stations were actually affilated with and run by other countries but employed German-trained
scientists.
29
I prefer to discuss these efforts in terms of the idea of agricultural information rather than agricultural
science as the latter requires a different sort of inquiry and discussion.
30
United States Department of Agriculture. The Story of U.S. Agricultural Estimates prepared by
Statistical Reporting Service. Miscellaneous Publication No. 1088. Washington, D.C., April 1969: 3-4

14

The first Congressional appropriation for agricultural information work by an agency of
the United States government was to the U.S. Patent Office in 1839. This came only three
years after the Patent Office was established as a separate organization within the United
States Department of State.31 The U.S. Congress allocated $1000 for the acquisition and
distribution of seeds and plants, and for the collection and distribution of agricultural
statistics.32 The latter were seen to have a predictive value by Patent Office
Commissioner Henry Ellsworth in his report to Congress for 1839, “From data [from] so
high a source, the Commissioner can safely predicate future calculations, and hopes to
present to Congress such details of domestic products as will be of importance in
financial estimates.” 33 Yet, according to historian Earle Ross, the agricultural work at the
Patent Office was “informally constituted” and often dismissed by the agricultural press
as inadequate and the workers at the Department were seen as incompetent. It was not
until 1849 when the Patent Office was moved under the newly established Department of

31

The system of patents in the United States is based on article 1, section 8 of the Constitution which was
adopted at the Constitutional Convention on September 5, 1787. It established the responsibilities and
power of Congress. Point 8 of 18 reads: [Congress shall have the power] To promote the progress of
science and the useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries. The first patent bill was passed in 1790 and authorized a board within
the Department of State the power to issue patents. The Board members were the Secretaries of State and
War, and the Attorney General. The Patent Act of 1836 established the Patent Office with a Commissioner,
a small staff, and a dedicated building.
32
Henry Leavitt Ellsworth served as the first Commissioner of the Patent Office (1836-1845) and by all
accounts had a strong personal interest in collecting foreign seeds and plants which he did through
diplomatic and consular channels as well as the military, specifically the Navy. Historian Fred A. Shannon
minces no words in describing the agricultural information work at Patent Office as Ellsworth's “pet”
(Shannon 1945, 270). In his report to Congress for the year 1837 he alerted Congress to the growing
number of patent applications for “implements of agriculture” and urges Congress to invest in agriculture:
“For commerce and manufacture, much has been done; for agriculture, the parent of both, and the ultimate
dependence of the nation, much remains to be done. Husbandry seems to be viewed as a natural blessing,
that needs no aid from legislation. Like the air we breathe, and the element of water, which sustain life, the
productions of the soil are regarded by too many as common bounties of Providence, to be gratefully
enjoyed, but without further thought or reflection” (Patent Office AR 1838, 5). Ellsworth’s focus was not
limited to the mechanical tools of agriculture. He was aware of the value of new and hardy seed varieties
and argued that the State had matured to a point that it “is able to supply its own wants, and will soon have
a surplus for exportation” (Patent Office AR 1838, 5). Directed and sustained research in agriculture will,
Ellsworth argued, “prove a great benefit to the husbandman and to the country” (Patent Office AR 1838, 6).
33
Patent Office AR 1840, 2. Ellsworth’s reports to Congress offer a very limited glimpse at the system of
agricultural statistics, and seed and plant collection by the Navy and diplomats of the United States
government. But one does begin to see in Ellsworth’s reports evidence of how those working with or
interested in agricultural information were positioning support for the formation of a federal agency
devoted to agriculture.

15

the Interior that its agricultural work was systematized and documented.34 That year
marked the first publication devoted to agricultural information work by the Patent
Office.35 Between 1855 and 1861 the average appropriation was “about $54,000.”36
Criticism, internal and external, of how agricultural information work was managed by
the Patent Office continued and with it a demand for a separate department responsible
for agriculture. Agricultural societies (state, regional, and the national society) supported
a cabinet-level Department of Agriculture. The agricultural press also supported an
independent department.37 Efforts were made to include the voices of farmers and in
1859, the Commissioner of the Patent Office, Joseph Holt, brought a group of farmers
together to form an “Advisory Board of Agriculture of the Patent Office.”38 Ross notes
that Holt’s effort was met with suspicion by the U.S. Congress and resulted in cutbacks in

34

The United States Department of Interior was established as one part of a reorganization and growth of
the federal government triggered in large part by the physical expansion of the United States in the 1840s.
Between 1845 and 1848, “the United States enlarged its domain by more than a million square miles,
reaching nearly its present size between Canada and Mexico.” (Utley and Mackintosh, 1989)
35
The second part of the annual report of the U.S. Patent Office for 1849 “is devoted exclusively to the
great and growing interests of Agriculture….” It sounded an alarm about the state of and future of
agricultural production in the United States and expressed grave concern about the lack of knowledge and
“discipline” among farmers in this country. (Patent Office AR 1849, 8) It expressed concern about the lack
of action to share information “among its citizens” about the “true principles of tillage.” (Patent Office AR
1849, 9) But even the 80,000 packets of seeds distributed by the Patent Office and the “some two hundred
thousand copies of agricultural papers and periodicals…which circulate in every State in the Union” are
limited in their impact because they are not regulated by legislation. “Truthful statistics from the
groundwork of all reform – of all progress. State legislatures must aid in this great work. If ‘knowledge is
power’, ignorance is weakness; and the removal of this weakness is one of the highest duties of every
republican government.” (Patent Office AR 1849, 12)
36
Ross (1946), 131.
37
The pages of the Chicago-based weekly agricultural newspaper, Prairie Farmer, in the decades before
the establishment of the U.S. Department of Agriculture include coverage of discussion in Congress about a
separate Department. Two articles in late 1852 argue for a “simple and efficient” agency able to gather,
process, and distribute agricultural information in a timely manner (September 1, 1852, 407-408). In
December of the same year the Prairie Farmer advocated for a federal bureau of agriculture on its front
page. It pointed with disappointment to the status of agricultural work at the Patent Office, “we are three or
four fifths of the people; and all admit that ours is the great interest of the nation; and we are represented in
the machinery of our Government by a petty clerkship, located ‘in a celaar room’ of the Patent Office.” The
article continues: With men of science, there is no question in regard to the utility of a department of
Agriculture, in our Government; and the only weighty one, urged by politicians, is the fear that a
department of the kind would degenerate into a party machine, in the hands of party politicians.This we can
never permit; ours must be economical WORKING DEPARTMENT. The article argued that the
Department’s staff should be hired based on their background in and knowledge of agricultural work and
issues. (Prairie Farmer, December 1, 1852, 535-536).
38
Ross 1946, 132; Gates 1965, 306.

16

future appropriations.39 Other suggestions included a bureau of agriculture at the
Smithsonian or a cabinet-level department of industry with bureaus of agriculture,
manufacturing, and commerce. There were several unsuccessful efforts in Congress to
move ahead with a separate agriculture department. Most of those efforts were defeated
by Southern Democrats suspicious that the increased power of the federal government
would challenge state autonomy and undermine their form of agricultural production
based on slavery.40 It was not until the establishment of the Department of Agriculture in
1862 as an independent agency in the Executive Branch of the Unites States Government
that there was a committed and organized role for the federal State in agricultural
research and information collection, production, and dissemination.41
A New Federal Agency – Department of Agriculture
Congressional legislation to establish a Department of Agriculture finally succeeded in a
political and economic moment in which opportunity and necessity converged. 42 The
secession of the South began in large part as a reaction to the consolidation of Republican
power in the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln as President of the United States. South
Carolina was the first to leave the Union in December 1860. In February 1861 six more
39

This idea of including farmers is an important one and something we see in the work of the Department
of Agriculture. It actively solicited information from farmers about the state of agricultural production in
the United Sates.
40
Gates (1965) notes that despite the fact that the former head of agricultural research in the Patent Office,
Thomas G. Clemson, was a strong voice for the elevation of agricultural research to independent status
within the federal government, the Confederacy expressed no interest in an agriculture department. “The
Southern Confederacy of Atlanta…said the bureau in Washington was a ‘stench in the nostrils of all good
men in the South.’ It was expensive, its benefits, if any, were shared by few, it used tax revenues for the
benefit of the few, its annual report as well as its seeds and plants were distributed for political effect….”
(Gates, 305).
41
Greathouse 1898; Wanlass 1920; Weist 1923; Ross 1946; Rasmussen and Baker 1972; Hoffer 2007.
42
Ross (1946) suggests the formation of the Department of Agriculture was, in a sense, inevitable: “The
war for the Union gave the occasion and opportunity rather than the impulse for the new agency. The
determining influence came from the occupation itself, from its increasing needs and growing
assertiveness. Humble and dubious as the new establishment appeared, its creation was basic in a
continuous and fairly consistent national policy that reflected the successive stages of the American
farming enterprise” (Ross, 129). Hobsbawm (1975) offers a more nuanced interpretation. He argues that the
North had the upperhand in terms of economic power and that combined with the exclusion of slavery from
the new territories of the West forced the South to situate itself against a “national government.” He
concludes, “the North was in a position to unify the continent and the South was not” (Hobsbawm, 142).
Gates (1965) notes that Congressional opposition to an independent Department of Agriculture did not end
with the secession of the southern states: “Critics feared that the supporters of the new department would
push it up to Cabinet status and that it would ‘grow and become exorbitant in its demands upon the
Treasury’” (Gates, 307).

17

southern states joined South Carolina and formed the Confederate States of America. By
the end of May 1861 four more states withdrew from the Union.43 These actions tipped
the balance of political power in Congress and on December 2, 1861 the U.S. Congress
passed three acts directly related to the future of agriculture in the United States: The
Morrill Act, the Homestead Act, and the Department of Agriculture Organic Act.44 The
Morrill Act of 1862 allowed the federal government to donate public lands to the States
to sell and use the profits to fund colleges for the “agricultural and mechanic arts.” The
Homestead Act made public lands available for “settlement and cultivation.” The Organic
Act established an independent Department of Agriculture whose “general design and
duties...shall be to acquire and to diffuse among the people of the United States useful
information on subjects connected with agriculture in the most general and
comprehensive sense of that word, and to procure, propagate, and distribute among the
people new and valuable seeds and plants.” It is worth noting that the act to establish the
Department of Agriculture also authorized the commissioner to hire “chemists, botanists,
entomologists, and other persons skilled in the natural sciences pertaining to
agriculture.”45 In addition, the Pacific Railway Act of 1862 provided government
subsidies for land to “aid in the construction of a railroad and telegraph line from the
Missouri river to the Pacific Ocean, and to secure to the government the use of the same
for postal, military, and other purposes.” This act supported the continued development
of transportation and communication infrastructure built on the groundwork already laid
by the Pacific Telegraph Act of 1860. The Pacific Telegraph Act authorized the U.S.
Congress to seek proposals for the construction of telegraph lines for government use to
“facilitate communication between the Atlantic and Pacific states.”46 These acts of
Congress employed the information gained from government surveys of the North
American continent. Together, they helped facilitate the development of a federal
43

The order of secession: South Carolina (December 20, 1860), Mississippi (January 9, 1861), Florida
(January 10, 1861), Alabama (January 11, 1861), Georgia (January 19, 1861), Louisiana (January 26,
1861), Texas (February 1, 1861 confirmed by a popular referendum on February 23, 1861), Virginia (April
17, 1861 confirmed by a referendum on May 23, 1861), Arkansas (May 6, 1861), Tennessee (May 7, 1861
confirmed by a referendum on June 8, 1861), and North Carolina (May 20, 1861).
44
The Act to Establish a Department of Agriculture was signed into law on May 15, 1862, the Homestead
Act on May 20, 1862, and the Morrill Act on July 2, 1862.
45
Marcus and Lowitt (1990) also note that the “dynamic relationship between these three agriculturerelated acts” has not been examined by scholars. (Marcus and Lowitt, 3)
46
Document transcripts accessed via NARA online: http://www.ourdocuments.gov/index.php?flash=true&

18

government with both an expanding role and emerging infrastructure that encompassed
education, transportation, and communication.
The geographic reach of the new Department of Agriculture was profound. In many of
their reports to the U.S. Congress, the commissioners of the Department of Agriculture
between 1862 and 1888 suggest that the Department’s publications, seeds, and plants
reached more individuals in every state (if not county) than material from any other
single organization in 19th century American life.47 Much of the rhetoric favoring a
federal department of agriculture supported the idea that agriculture was essential to the
nation's security and health, and that the federal government had a responsibility to
support and promote progress in agriculture toward those ends. In the midst of a civil
war, the first Commissioner of Agriculture, Isaac Newton, offered the U.S. Congress a
world history lesson that called for peace and imagined a prosperous future for the United
States, perhaps even the eternity that defied Rome. In his Annual Report to Congress he
was emphatic that the power and prosperity of the nation rested on agriculture,
“Agriculture furnishes the food of the nation, the raw materials of manufactures, and the
cargoes of domestic and foreign commerce. It is the cause and the evidence of true
civilization; for, when tillage begins barbarism ends, and the various arts commence.”48
The ethos of the United States as a nation was and has continued to be intimately tied to a
vision of agriculture and agricultural labor as essential to a healthy and vibrant
democracy. Thomas Jefferson’s personal and political writings foreshadow
Commissioner Newton’s points, which surface in political discourse even today.49 At a
47

The U.S. Postal System is another example of the effective power and reach of the federal government.
What distinguishes the Department of Agriculture from it are a few things including its outreach to collect
information, the establishment of a centralized place for research and experimentation, and the
dissemination of information in the form of publications, seeds, and plants. That said, the work of the
Department of Agriculture could not have been done without the infrastructure provided by the U.S. Postal
System and the Congressional franking privilege: “The 'bestseller' of the day received selective distribution,
for Congressmen could please voters with book favors and thus the report was excellent political
ammunition during election campaigns.” (Harrison 1961, 53)
48
AR 1862, 24. N.B.: I will refer to citations of material in the Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture throughout this dissertation in this way.
49
In 1785 Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison, "It is not too soon to provide by every possible
means that as few as possible shall be without a little portion of land. The small landholders are the most
precious part of a state." (http://www.monticello.org/site/jefferson/quotations-agriculture accessed January

19

time when agribusiness and factory farms dominate agricultural production, the ideal of
the independent farmer continues to permeate our collective identity as a nation. A close
look at agricultural practice today reveals conditions quite different from that ideal. The
late 19th century witnessed dramatic and fundamental changes in both the stakes and the
stakeholders in American agriculture and many of those changes carried into the 20th
century. At the heart of that change was the ability of the federal government to assert its
authority via a system of information transfer in the most productive and important sector
of the economy, agriculture.50
Historiographical and Evidentiary Context
Most accounts of the history of the Department of Agriculture have been written by
historians and other staff employed at the Department. In fact, for much of the 20th
century there was an Office of the Historian at the Department of Agriculture and these
official histories continue to form the basis for our general understanding of the
institution and its historical development. My research suggests that those historians had
access to a broad array of primary resource records and documents that were never
transferred to the National Archives or the National Agricultural Library’s Special
Collections.51 As discussed in the Introduction, the archival record of documents from the

10, 2012) In 2009, Barack Obama spoke of Lincoln, agriculture, and the Union: “Only a union could
harness the courage of our pioneers to settle the American west, which is why he passed a Homestead Act
giving a tract of land to anyone seeking a stake in our growing economy. Only a union could foster the
ingenuity of our farmers, which is why he set up land-grant colleges that taught them how to make the most
of their land while giving their children an education that let them dream the American dream.” (Barack
Obama in a speech marking the anniversary of Lincoln’s birthday in Springfield, Illinois on February 12,
2009.)
50
The information transfer cycle or information transfer system is a conceptual framework employed in
Library and Information Science (LIS) instruction and research. It asserts the dynamic nature of
information and is employed to identify and evaluate the stages of information production, dissemination,
and use. The system of information transfer is a ubiquitous concept in library and information science
scholarship stemming in large part from its focus on use and users. Its components begin with acquisition
(or procurement in the language of the Department of Agriculture in the 19th century) and embody a
dialectical and dynamic approach to understanding the life cycle of information that sees human agency as
fundamental in each stage. See Estabrook (2010, 3290).
51
In their short article, Marcus and Lowitt (1990) argue that the Department of Agriculture is like no other
agency in the U.S. government when it comes to telling its own history. It is one “self-consciously aware of
their past” (Marcus and Lowitt, 2-3). This may be part of the reason there is still no history of the
Department of Agriculture that critically examines its origins and work. Marcus and Lowitt acknowledge a
rich bibliographic body of articles and conference papers about the Department of Agriculture, but argue
that the “fundamental question as how and why the department came into being in 1862 and how and why

20

Department of Agriculture in its first decades is sparse. Indeed, according to Harold T.
Pinkett, the archivist responsible for processing the records of the Department of
Agriculture at the National Archives from 1942 to 1979 (with a leave during World War
II), many of the Department’s official records from the 19th century were thrown out or
lost.52 The truth of Pinkett’s claim about the lack of documentation for the Department of
Agriculture in the period of my study, 1862 through 1888, is supported by my research at
National Archives and Records Administration, the Library of Congress, and Special
Collections at the National Agricultural Library.
Contemporary historians seeking to develop a more comprehensive institutional history
of the Department of Agriculture are hindered by this lack of an archival record for the
Department itself. In the face of such a dramatic loss of the administrative records of the
Department of Agriculture, the Annual Reports for this period are a unique resource.
Although they figure prominently in the historiography of the Department, no one has yet
done a close and comprehensive reading of the reports themselves as primary source
documents for the period under the Commissionership, 1862-1888. More significantly in
the context of this dissertation, no one has looked at the systems of information and the

the department gained cabinet status in 1889” has not been addressed sufficiently and has “failed to
produce a monographic literature.”
52
Harold T. Pinkett was one of the first archivists to process material related to the work of the Department
of Agriculture after they were transferred to the new National Archives building when it was completed in
1935. In 1962, on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary of the Department of Agriculture, Pinkett
wrote: “Foremost in any account concerning material now identified as early records of the Department of
Agriculture is their scantiness, a scantiness perhaps unparalleled in the archival history of major Federal
agencies.” Pinkett, H.T. (1962). “Early records of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,” American
Archivist, v25, n1, pp. 407-16. See, too, Pinkett’s article for the American Historical Review (April 1964),
“The Archival Product of a Century of Federal Assistance to Agriculture." Pinkett was the first African
American archivist at the National Archives and was active and respected in the field. Among his many
memberships, the Cosmos Club of Washington, D.C. The American Historical Association’s Perspectives,
39: 8 November 2001(https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-onhistory/november-2001/in-memoriam-harold-t-pinkett#) includes a short article by Douglas Helms of the
Natural Resources Conservation Service remembering Pinkett. Douglas Helms in his contribution on
federal agricultural records in Farmers, Bureaucrats, and Middlemen found more supporting evidence:
“Waldo G. Leland, an important advocate of establishing a federal archival agency, and his colleague,
Claude H. Van Tyne, examined the early records of the Department of Agriculture and concluded in 1904
that the papers could 'hardly be said to possess any value for historical purposes.' In 1912, James Wilson,
nearing conclusion of the longest tenure of any cabinet secretary, assessed the documentary remains of his
and previous administrations: 'I think that not many papers of real historical value accumulate in the
Department of Agriculture'” (27).

21

agricultural information work at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888
as represented in its Annual Reports.
Recent historical scholarship has engaged the history of the Department of Agriculture
and agricultural information either indirectly or in terms of specific geographical regions,
or agricultural products. Some interesting studies locate the significant changes in U.S.
agriculture in the early 20th century rather than the 19th century. For example, Deborah
Fitzgerald, in her book, Every Farm a Factory: The Industrial Ideal in American
Agriculture (2003), looks at large wheat farms in the West and argues that an “industrial
logic” radically transformed agriculture in the United States beginning in the 1920s.
Critical to this change, according to Fitzgerald, was a system that “linked capital, raw
materials, transportation networks, communication systems, and newly trained technical
experts.” Barbara Hahn’s study of bright tobacco, Making Tobacco Bright: Creating an
American Commodity, 1617-1937 (2011), – the main type of tobacco used in the
production of cigarettes in the 19th century – examines the relationship between types of
tobacco, the tobacco industry, and the regulation of tobacco as a commodity. In First the
Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology (2004), Jack Kloppenburg traces the
social history of plant breeding. Though his work spans a much longer period of time
than my study, his conceptual framework informs my work. He argues that the work of
plant breeding began with farmers trading seeds from plants they cultivated as a “public
good” but was transformed into a commodity that became a basis for the “accumulation
and reproduction of capital.”53 Kloppenburg looks specifically at the historical role of the
state in agricultural research on seeds and the relationship of state-sponsored research to
an emerging private sector seed business. Philip J. Pauly examines the history of
horticulture in the United States in his book, Fruits and Plains: The Horticultural
Transformation of America (2007). He argues that horticulture in the 19th century meant
something analogous to what we now call plant biotechnology. Pauly suggests that the
popular notion of an “individual untutored American plantsmen” was a myth and that
there was in horticulture a network of stakeholders whose “activities fundamentally
altered not only the vegetation, but also the economic activities, social relations, and
common experiences of Americans.” He examines the history of horticulture in the
53

Kloppenburg (2004, xvi).

22

United States from the mid-18th century to the late 20th century and argues that his focus
on horticulture sheds new light on how we understand the history of the “environment,
agriculture, science, art, and national development” in the United States.54 Agricultural
history, history of science, and social and cultural histories of rural life form a significant
portion of recent dissertations in history and related disciplines. None focus specifically
on the information work or systems of agricultural information work at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture in the second half of the 19th century. However, there are
several that engage related topics.55
There are a handful of studies that seek to either document or describe the Department of
Agriculture but nothing that fully engages the work of the Department from the point of
view of its information work via its own publications as government documents or
publications and the systems of agricultural information it developed and exploited. Nor
has there been any study that examines in detail the development of those systems of
agricultural information in the Department of Agriculture’s first three decades. Adkinson
focuses on systems of information and the policies that facilitated their development, but
he takes a bird's eye view of the production of federal information and the government as
a whole over a wide span of time. While interesting especially in respect to his
foregrounding of the role of the library at the Department of Agriculture, his section on

54

Pauly (2007, 1-2). One also sees evidence of a perspective sensitive to information history in some
recent historical studies of colonialism and agriculture.
55
Ariel Ron, “Developing the Country: ‘Scientific Agriculture’ and the Roots of the Republican Party.”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 2012; Lawrence S. Mastroni, “The Conflicted
Mission of the United States Bureau of Biological Survey, 1885–1940: Wildlife, Uncertainty and
Ambivalence.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oklahoma, 2012; K.J. Sisson Lessens, “Master of
Millions: King Corn in American Culture.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 2011; Courtney
Fullilove, “The Archive of Useful Knowledge.” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 2009; Benjamin
R. Cohen, “Notes from the Ground: Science and Agricultural Improvement to the Early American
Republic.” Ph.D. dissertation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 2005; Jeffrey J. Jones,
“The World Was Our Garden: U.S. Plant Introduction, Empire, and Industrial Agri(culture), 1898–1948.”
Ph.D. dissertation, Purdue University, 2004; Hae-Gyung Geong, "Exerting Control: Biology and
Bureaucracy in the Development of American Entomology, 1870-1930." Ph.D. dissertation. The University
of Wisconsin—Madison, 1999; Nancy Gwinn, “The Origins and Development of International Publication
Exchange in Nineteenth-Century America.” Ph.D. dissertation. The George Washington University, 1996;
Kai Lum Lung “A Financial History of the United States Department of Agriculture.” Ph.D. dissertation,
Cornell University, 1924.

23

the Department covers more than 100 years in two and a half pages and barely scratches
the surface.56
Other scholarship focuses specifically on scientific research and policy in the federal
government. The history of the Department of Agriculture is a key component in their
analysis. Dupree (1980) and Rossiter (1975) focus on science rather than information per
se. Dupree frames his study in terms of scientific research in the federal government and
argues that government support for scientific research was an interest and commitment
from the nation's beginning and “prominent in all periods of the nation's history. Indeed,
before the rise of the universities, private foundations, and industrial laboratories, the fate
of science rested more exclusively with the government . . . .”57 Dupree argues that
federal legislation establishing a Department of Agriculture in 1862 was “a genuine
turning point for science in the government.”58 The teaching and research environments
of the land-grant colleges were also critical to agricultural research in the federal
government. Dupree notes that those colleges became the “source of supply for the
department’s personnel and its representatives in the states” especially later in the 19th
century as the Department and its programs expanded.59 Rossiter is of the mind that
nothing of significance happened in agricultural research in the United States until after
1890 when increased government funding and support in the form of the Hatch Act of
1887 supporting the development of regional experiment stations, increased funding for
the Department of Agriculture in the 1880s, and the explicit support for agricultural
colleges in the second Morrill Act of 1890. Rossiter argues that scientific research at the
Department was hampered by the Department's focus on the needs of farmers rather than
agricultural production.60 While these works do not directly address the research and

56

Burton W. Adkinson. Two Centuries of Government Information. Stroudsburg, Pa.: Dowden, Hutchinson
& Ross, 1978. This absence in historical scholarship about the actual work of the Department of
Agriculture is, no doubt, directly tied to the previously discussed absence of an archival record of
administrative sources. I think, too, that the sheer size of the Department and its responsibilities contribute
as well as the authoritative histories generated by in-house historians at the Department. The history of
agriculture and especially the work of the Department in this emergent period beg for critical studies that
get beyond and behind the dominant narrative.
57
Dupree (1980, 2)
58
Ibid., 151
59
Ibid., 182
60
Rossiter, 1979

24

work of the Department as information, they support my assertion that the Department of
Agriculture in the late 19th century was a unique unit of the federal government. In my
conclusion and discussion of further research I situate my work in reference to
scholarship that seeks to understand the conditions and character of an emerging modern
state and, specifically, how the agricultural information work at the Department of
Agriculture helped legitimate the authority of the federal state. What these studies have in
common is that each uses the early history of the Department of Agriculture to illustrate
the development of the modern state and as, David Hamilton claims, “modern
America.”61
Although the secondary sources do not focus on the agricultural information work and
the systems of agricultural information at the Department of Agriculture, they offer
historical context and interpretation. A close examination of the historiographical
literature of the Department of Agriculture unveils a picture of how the history of the
Department of Agriculture has been told – drawn from the official histories generated at
the Department itself – and how inadequate that narrative has been for understanding the
history of agricultural information work at the Department. Though many of these studies
focus on the context of a larger thesis, they are critical to my research. They provide
evidence that supports assertions about the growing power and authority of a modern
centralizing state in the United States. The Department of Agriculture is not their primary
focus but used as an example to illustrate their larger thesis. What they do not examine is
the unique function and value of the actual agricultural information work mandated by
the U.S. Congress and done at the Department of Agriculture, which was collecting,
systematizing, and distributing agricultural information on an unprecedented scale –
information directed to varied constituencies as authoritative and necessary to “progress”
in agriculture.
I shift the focus to the systems of agricultural information acquisition, production, and
dissemination and use three key sections of the Department’s Annual Reports to provide
a more complete picture of the agricultural information work at the Department of
61

Hamilton (1990, 208)

25

Agriculture from 1862 through 1888. I offer a more nuanced understanding of the place
and impact of agricultural research in the federal government during the second half of
the 19th century. This dissertation makes explicit the evolution, scope, mandate, and
impact of state-sponsored agricultural research, the systems of information the
Department developed and upon which it relied to fulfill its mission.
Research Questions
Broadly speaking, this study uses the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture
for 1862-1888 to understand how systems of agricultural information at the Department
of Agriculture evolved and how they drove change in the practice and economy of
agriculture in the late 19th century U.S. My research questions:
1. What were the systems of information developed at the Department of
Agriculture between 1862 and 1889?
2. Looking specifically at the report of the commissioner of the Department of
Agriculture that opened each Annual Report, I investigate the following
questions: How did the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888
understand its mission and contribution to scientific work supported by the federal
government? What did the Department of Agriculture view as its essential
mission in its early years? How did this change over time?
The reports of the gardener and the statistician will be the frame for my approach
to these questions: How was research of the Department of Agriculture prioritized
and conducted? Who and what guided those decisions? How was the resulting
information and new knowledge disseminated? To whom did it circulate?
3. What impact did the information work of the Department of Agriculture have on
the practice of farming in the United States in the second half of the 19th century?
4. How did the information work at the Department of Agriculture help transform
the political economy of agriculture in the U.S. in the second half of the 19th
century and why does this matter?

26

This historical study analyzes, too, how the agricultural information work of the
Department of Agriculture evolved and where it stood nearly 30 years later when the
Department gained greater legitimacy, support, and a place in the President's cabinet. In
many ways, this study is built upon an anatomy of the Annual Reports of the Department
of Agriculture that seeks to make explicit how they embodied the systems of agricultural
information work at the Department and how they served as vehicles for information
transfer and communication of agricultural research and information.
This dissertation research is fundamentally historical in nature and draws on both primary
and secondary resources. Given my focus on identifying and analyzing/understanding the
systems of information work at the Department of Agriculture in its first decades, I found
it useful to consider a paradigm from library and information science research, the system
of information transfer. Conceptually the system of information transfer has framed much
of the work in the field of library and information science and offers a powerful and
significant conceptual framework for engaging my research to understand the systems of
information work at the Department of Agriculture.62 The system of information transfer
encompasses and illuminates the information responsibilities articulated in the Organic
Act of 1862 that established a Department of Agriculture in the United States, “That there
is hereby established at the seat of government of the United States a Department of
Agriculture, the general designs and duties of which shall be to acquire and to diffuse
among the people of the United States useful information on subjects connected with
agriculture in the most general and comprehensive sense of that work, and to procure,
propagate, and distribute among the people new and valuable seeds and plants.”63
However, missing from the conceptual framework provided by the system of information
transfer is an engagement with the issue of power. Political economy of information
focuses on power and how it is mobilized for control that asserts authority and neutralizes
or tempers resistance.64 Its explicit concern with questions that locate and analyze
structures of power and those who hold, wield, and benefit from it adds depth to my
62

Estabrook (2010, 3290)
AR 1862, 3-4
64
Mosco (2009) and D. Schiller (2007)
63

27

work. I will use the Conclusion of this dissertation to discuss these issues in more depth
and with an especially keen eye to the ways information work at the Department of
Agriculture in this period is an example of research and information provision by a
federal agency as a public good.

28

CHAPTER 3: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888
Introduction
Government documents like agency annual reports and the reports of government surveys
and expeditions had multiple uses and tangled intentions. Their narratives are often
layered and speak to and serve multiple audiences. Annual reports are examples of the
literature of organizations and they carry complex messages. The Annual Reports of the
Department of Agriculture are a valuable resource for research on the information
functions of the Department, the priorities of the federal government, and the
institutionalization of scientific research and the centralized place for agricultural
research in the federal government of the United States in the second part of the 19th
century. Indeed, they have served as one of the primary resources for most histories of
the Department due in large part to the meager archival record mentioned earlier in this
dissertation. In the face of such a dramatic loss of documentation, the Annual Reports for
this period serve a unique purpose. As discussed earlier, this dissertation uses the Annual
Reports for the period of the Commissionership of the Department, 1862-1888, as its
primary data source. The Annual Reports’ consistency in terms of publication and format,
their length, the large size of the print runs as well as its geographic reach, whether
distributed by the Department of Agriculture itself or through Congressional frank, makes
them an essential primary resource for a study of this kind.65
Literary scholar Oz Frankel studied American and British annual reports including
agricultural reports. Frankel argues that government annual reports are critical
expressions of state authority, “nineteenth-century government reports were packaged,

65

The print run for the annual report in 1865 was 185,000 of which the Department of Agriculture was
allotted 23,000; the balance went to members of the U.S. Congress, most notably the House with 145,000
in both 1865 and 1866. The only increases in 1867 were in the allotment given Congress (the House’s
allotment jumped to 180,000 which may simply be due to the return of representatives of the southern
states to Congress); Agriculture’s remained steady at 23,000. By 1888, 400,000 copies of the annual report
were printed. Yet, as the Commissioner of Agriculture in 1880 reported, “The edition of our annual report
is usually 300,000 and while larger than that of any annual book ever published, is not yet half large
enough to meet the reasonable and pressing demand” (Harrison 1961, 53). See, too, Appendix C in this
dissertation for a chart listing print runs and distribution within the federal government.

29

disseminated, and even consumed as books and could be found in libraries or purchased
in bookstores. In fact, the antebellum public sphere was cluttered with annual and special
reports....”66 Hugh Richard Slotten's study of the work of the U.S. Coast Survey in the
middle of the 19th century offers insight into how the information gained in the survey
was politically positioned. Alexander Dallas Bache, the head of the survey, solicited
public support for his work: “Bache actively worked to shape public opinion and
synthesize the dialectic between the interests of science and those of society by
publicizing or popularizing the activities of the Coast Survey.” The Annual Reports of the
Coast Survey were not widely available but Bache managed to have the results of the
surveys published in a timely manner and distributed them himself to newspaper editors,
scientists, and influential people in communities where field research for the Coast
Survey was conducted. Survey teams also made themselves and their work highly visible
in public spaces. They used public squares as meridian markers and “erected temporary
observatories on the grounds” of several state capitols. Slotten argues that in these ways
Bache cultivated public support for public science. Were there similar tactics to build
public support for the information work in the Department of Agriculture?67
Form and Content of the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture
The Organic Act that established the United States Department of Agriculture in 1862
stipulated “the general duties and designs . . . shall be to acquire and diffuse among the

66

Oz Frankel, “The State between Orality and Textuality: Government Reports as ‘Orature’” in eds. Sandra
M. Gustafson and Caroline F. Sloat, Cultural Narratives: Textuality and Performance in American Culture
before 1900 (South Bend: University of Notre Dame Press, 2010), 279. One sees evidence of the annual
reports of the U.S. Patent Office and the Department of Agriculture in local public libraries in the 19th
century in the What Middletown Read database, http://bsu.edu/libraries/wmr/index.php and
http://bsu.edu/libraries/wmr/search.php#advanced See, too, Lynn K. Nyhart, “Voyaging and the Scientific
Expedition Report, 1800-1940,” in eds., Rima D. Apple, Gregory J. Downey, and Stephen L. Vaughn,
Science in Print: Essays on the History of Science and the Culture of Print (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 2012), 65-86.
67
Hugh R. Slotten, “The Dilemmas of Science in the United States: Alexander Dallas Bache and the U.S.
Coast Survey,” in eds. Ronald L. Numbers and Charles E. Rosenberg, The Scientific Enterprise in America:
Readings from Isis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 47-48. Slotten’s argument that survey
information was political and, as we see later in this dissertation, Porter’s (1986) discussion of what he calls
“statistical thinking,” call to mind Gyan Prakash in Another Reason: Science and the Imagination of
Modern India. Prakash argues that the modern Indian state emerging from colonial domination is
“inseparable from the authority of science.” He emphasizes the tie between science and rationality –
“science as a grammar of modern power.” For Prakash, science was not just practice but also cultural
authority (Prakash 1999, 7-8).

30

people of the United States useful information on subjects connected with agriculture in
the most general and comprehensive sense of that word, and to procure, propagate, and
distribute among the people new and valuable seeds and plants.”68 The Commissioner,
appointed by the President with the approval of the U.S. Congress, was charged “to
acquire and preserve in his department all information concerning agriculture” and to
report on the Department’s progress to Congress, “He shall annually make a general
report in writing of his acts to the President and to Congress, in which he may
recommend the publication of papers forming parts of or accompanying his report, which
report shall also contain an account of all moneys received and expended by him.” The
United States mail served as a way for the Department to both receive and circulate
information free of charge (up to thirty-two ounces).
The tradition of submitting annual reports to funders was not new either in government or
the private sector. Those focused on agricultural work and scientific investigations or
surveys follow a similar format that includes a report on money received and spent,
which vary in degrees of detail, work conducted (often including the names of the people
performing the work), findings from that work, recommendations, further work, and
requests for continued support. The early reports of the Department of Agriculture are
mixes of types of narratives including official reports, articles reporting on research or
best practices by practitioners and other experts outside the Department, reprints of
correspondence, histories of agricultural practice and products. They also include
illustrations, maps, charts, and tables. Most Reports for the years I examined included on
the back of the title page a copy of the Congressional resolution that stipulated the
number of copies to be printed and the money allocated for that print job. I will discuss
this aspect of the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture later in this chapter.69
Three Examples of Content from the Reports for 1865, 1876, and 1888
The Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture for 1865 is the first to have a Table
of Contents in the series of years that I studied, 1862 through 1888. It is fairly
68

An Act to Establish a Department of Agriculture. Full text reprinted in the Report of the Commissioner
of Agriculture for 1862, 3-4.
69
See Appendix C of this dissertation for a chart synthesizing that information.

31

representative of the diversity of topics and types of authors for the first half of the period
I cover. We see in these lists of articles some of the ways the Department of Agriculture
drew on expertise from outside the staff of the Department, how it understood the range
of relevant topics to agriculture in the United States, and some ways it engaged farmers
and other correspondents as both providers and consumers of agricultural information.
The 1865 Annual Report includes the reports of the commissioner, gardener (and a
separate report on the experimental farm), entomologist, chemist, and statistician, which
make up less than one hundred of the nearly 650 pages of the Annual Report for that
year. The report of the statistician is followed by thirty-six articles on topics including
one on the agricultural colleges by the president of the college in Massachusetts,70 market
gardens serving New York by a farmer in New Jersey,71 and several articles on specific
crops including barley, potatoes in Ohio, peaches and other stone fruits; also articles on
livestock including sheep, cattle, and pigs. There are histories of the onion, dairy farming
in America, and a botanical history of sorghum. Articles with an international focus
include cattle disease in Europe; diseases of grapes in Europe; a report on an exhibit in
Paris of entomological research; and cattle farming in South America by a Methodist
minister recently returned from mission in South America. Finally of note are articles
offering best practices for keeping farm books; types of manure and best uses; the
condition of the forests in the country; sorghum as a source for sugar; and instruction on
how and what to feed farm animals, and how best to prepare that food.72 The Annual
Report for this year ends with a list of donations to the museum of the Department of
Agriculture and a report titled, “Meteorology of 1865.”73
70

The college is now the University of Massachusetts Amherst. French was trained as a lawyer, served as
head of a local agricultural society, and was later appointed assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury by
President Grant.
71
“To supply a population of a million inhabitants daily, throughout the year, with fresh vegetables would,
it might be supposed, require an immense tract of land. Such is not the case.” (AR 1865, 243)
72
The recurring theme of being economical in one’s approach to farming can be seen in this article by
R.W. Stewart (identified only as from North Evans, New York). He writes, “A cursory survey of the
business of agriculture will at once reveal the fact that the great effort of the farmer is to supply food for his
animals, and that it requires more food to supply the animals kept in the United States than to feed its whole
population.” (“Cutting and Cooking Food for Animals,” AR 1866, 396)
73
A.B. Grosh of the “Department of Agriculture” offers an introduction to charts showing high and low
temperatures and amounts of rain or “melted snow” for a selection of towns in each state and territory of
the United States. The information is “compiled from the monthly reports of nearly two hundred and fifty

32

By 1876 the number of division and bureau reports increased to six – gardener,
statistician, botanist, chemist, microscopic investigation, and the entomologist who also
reported on the museum in his position as curator. The report of the commissioner,
Frederick Watts, opened the Annual Report. These make up about half of the 432-page
volume with the report of the statistician alone being 184 pages of narrative and tables.
The remaining pages are “Miscellaneous Papers” that include reports on the agriculture
of Italy and Spain. The former is an extract from correspondence dispatched to the
Secretary of State by the “Hon. C.C. Andrews, the minister of the United States at
Stockholm” who concludes his observations of crops, farming techniques, wages,
landownership, livestock, and cheese making in the north with this statement that
suggests a deep knowledge of agricultural practice that extends beyond Italy and the
United States, “I do not deem it my place to draw conclusions or to offer criticism with
respect to the social and economic bearing of the facts and matters stated above. While
they disclose some things contrary to our American notions, they also show two great
merits in Italian agriculture: One is, that the Italians have the most complete system of
irrigation in Europe, if not the world; the other is, that they do not, in Northern Italy at
least, let the soil degenerate.”74
The information about agriculture in Spain is in the form of “a letter from the legation of
the United States at Madrid, under date of March 28, 1877, the minister plenipotentiary
of the United States, Hon. Caleb Cushing, writes to Hon. William M. Evarts, Secretary of
State, concerning the agriculture of that country.”75 Evarts demonstrates a bit more
humility than his colleague reporting on agriculture in Italy. He includes information on

observers in more than thirty states and Territories of the Union, made to the Smithsonian Institute through
this department.” Grosh writes, “The increased and increasing attention of agriculturalists to meteorology,
as connected with the science and art of tilling the soil, is one of the gratifying signs of our times…. This
present volume contains [information] which, it is believed, will quicken and stengthen a desire to use these
tables, and to acquire more information in relation to the climatic peculiarities of our widely spread
country…. Those who are led to acquire information will also become qualified to impart it.” (AR 1865,
571) He concludes with a request for corrections to any false information, “The department respectfully
solicits information of any errors or omissions in this or former reports, that they may be corrected before
any further use of these tables.” (AR 1865, 573)
74
AR 1876, 283
75
AR 1876, 287

33

climate, geography, crops, animals, and farming techniques and tools. He notes, too,
some cultural differences including sources of milk, “I observe that the milk of goats and
sheep, and even asses, as well as of cows, enters considerably into consumption at
Madrid.”76 Cushing concludes by noting that few of the “objects of agricultural industry”
in Spain are seen in the United States.77
Other reports, authored and not, include one on the export of fresh meat to Europe from
the United States; a response to an inquiry from the United States Secretary of the
Treasury asking for information regarding a disease of livestock and whether it could be
carried into the United States on imported hides; a review of mechanical “inventions for
insect destruction;” progress reports on the thirty-nine land-grant colleges; and
information from the annual reports of the boards of agriculture of individual states. One
of several reports on the cultivation and production of jute is included in the Annual
Report of the Department of Agriculture for 1876. Professor S. Waterhouse of
Washington University in St. Louis writes that it was “the Department of Agriculture that
first attracted my attention to this fiber, and the personal observations of a revisit to India
have only confirmed my sense of its national importance.”78 It is worth noting that a
recent dissertation in history includes a discussion of the flow of information about jute
cultivation from the United States to India in the form of publications of the Department
of Agriculture.79
As more divisions and bureaus are added at the Department of Agriculture80 and its
research in-house as well as its capacity for information work expanded, the number of
individual articles on special topics diminishes both by necessity and policy as we will
see in Chapter 4. This can be seen as an assertion with decided political and strategic
components of the Department’s own authority on a growing number of topics related to
76

AR 1876, 287
AR 1876, 288
78
AR 1876, 289
79
Tariq Omar Ali, The Envelope of Global Trade: The Political Economy and Intellectual History of Jute
in the Bengal Delta, 1850s to 1950s. PhD dissertation. (Cambridge: Harvard University, 2012). Ali cites a
report by Waterhouse published as a special report by the Department of Agriculture in 1883, page 14.
80
See chart of how the organization of the Department evolved at the end of this dissertation in Appendix
A.
77

34

agriculture. In the Annual Report for 1888, the last year of my study, more than 650 of
the total 700 pages are formal reports of sections, divisions, and bureaus of the
Department of Agriculture: entomology, animal industry, chemistry, botany, vegetable
pathology, statistics, ornithology, microscopic investigations, pomology, forestry, and the
Seed Division. There is also a report by the director of the newly organized Office of
Experiment Stations established October 1, 1888.81 One of the first actions by the director
of that office was to start a library that would include, “station publications, which it
hopes to make not only a complete collection of all the publications of the stations
organized under national authority, but also of all those issued by the stations previously
established in the United States.”82 The report on the agricultural experiment stations
includes an article by the USDA historian A.C. True on the history of agricultural
experiment stations in the United States. It concludes with a list of experiment stations by
state listing host institution, name of the person responsible (often the president of the
college), and date established. Most listed were affiliated with public institutions but a
few, like the Bussey Institution of Harvard University, were organized by private
universities.
The two articles that conclude the volume for 1888 are a “Report on Truck Farming” by
James K. Reeve of Franklin, Ohio and an article with illustrations, “Ostrich Farming in
America” by T.C. Duncan, M.D., Ph.D.: “‘A car-load of ostriches passed through this
city yesterday’ was the first news to many citizens that the ostrich industry was invading
our country.”83
Though I focused my attention on the Reports of the Commissioners, the heads of Garden
and Grounds and the Statistical Division, I did see ample evidence of correspondence to
the Department of Agriculture from farmers and others interested in agricultural
information and, less frequently, the Department’s response. The information coming
into the Department of Agriculture from citizens, farmers, diplomats, merchants, and a
81

The Hatch Act of 1887 made federal money available to the states to establish experiment stations that
would be affiliated with land-grant colleges.
82
AR 1888, 537
83
AR 1888, 685

35

variety of agricultural and horticultural researchers took several forms. Some simply
asked that seeds or plants be sent to them – some requests were quite specific and others
more open to whatever the Department would distribute to that region of the country.
Other examples of correspondence included reports by farmers and agriculturalists about
crops, information on the performance of specific seeds acquired from the Department,
soil conditions, best practices, or reports on their observations of agricultural practices in
their travels. It is not surprising that I saw more examples of requests and information
about plants and seeds given my focus on the Reports of the Superintendent of the
Garden and Grounds.84
The Statistical Division, like many other Divisions at the Department of Agriculture, had
volunteer correspondents who regularly administered or followed up on surveys from the
Department and communicated the results to the Department. The range of participants in
this type of activity was impressive but not surprising given the long tradition of farmers
and scientists sharing information. And, while it may seem innocent and uncomplicated
what peeks through these letters is a strong and urgent desire to identify and acquire
seeds and plants (and other information) that would lead to healthier crops, larger
harvests, and varieties with a hardiness to be transported long and longer distances that
would bring bigger profit85. I will discuss this at more length and offer examples from the
Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture in the next chapter of this dissertation
that examines the Reports of the Commissioners, 1862-1888.
Production and Distribution of the Annual Reports
The Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture themselves reveal very little about
how they were produced. We know from the 1862 Organic Act that established the
Department of Agriculture that the U.S. Congress required the reports from the
Department as evidence of the work the Department did, how it spent money allocated by
Congress, and where it was successful in meeting its responsibility to “acquire and
84

That expectation of reciprocity in the form of reports on how seeds and plants provided to farmers and
others by the Department of Agriculture performed is evident in the reports of several commissioners
during this period.
85
There is also evidence of requests for seeds and plants by people interested in simply trying out new
seeds and crops.

36

diffuse” agricultural information to the people of the United States. The main focus of
most Commissioners of the Department of Agriculture for the period 1862-1888 was to
persuade the U.S. Congress to designate more funding generally for the Department,
finance larger print runs of the Annual Report, and secure more of those publications for
the Department itself. The Department was the poor stepchild when it came to the
number of copies of its own Annual Report it was able to secure for distribution. Of the
total print run of 120,000 copies in 1862 the Department received 20,000. The total print
run for 1865 increased to 188,000 but the Department’s share remained at 20,000. For the
years 1869-1870 the print run increased to 225,000 with 25,000 for the Department of
Agriculture. From 1879 to 1883 the print runs were up to 300,000 and the Department
received only 30,000. Between 1884 and 1888 the print runs were at 400,000 and except
for the year 1886 when the Department received 25,000 copies of the Annual Report its
allotment remained at 30,000 copies. There seem to be no hard and fast numbers
regarding the use and distribution of the Annual Reports by the Department itself.
However, one sees in the reports and in histories of the Department of Agriculture
evidence it provided them to citizens as requested, circulated them to scientists and
educators in the United States and abroad, and promoted the content with the agricultural
and regular press. The U.S. Congress, by all accounts I have seen, sent the Annual
Reports to constituents when requested and also used them as political capital to gain
favor in their home districts.
The Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture were exceptional in the size of
each volume (that is, the number of pages), the size of the print runs, and cost of printing.
R.M. Kerr notes, “The largest edition, in book form, of any publication issued from the
office [of the Public Printer for the United States] is that of the Agricultural Report,
which for several years past has numbered 300,000 copies. The cost per copy of this
volume, which usually is limited for convenience in handling to from 500 to 650 pages, is
about forty-five to fifty cents.”86 Kerr writes earlier that the cost of producing a federal
report or document after 1862 rarely “reaches $20,000, if the Agricultural Report be

86

R.M. Kerr (1881, 71)

37

excepted.”87 Kerr’s 1881 history of the United States Government printing office has one
of the few references I could find that discusses the labor involved with printing the
Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture, “An average hand-folder will complete
in one day about 3,000 sheets. As an Agricultural Report has in it about 11,400,000
sheets, it would require about 3,800 days’ work of a single folder to put it in shape for
gathering. Formerly there were from 200 to 250 girls employed on this work alone, but
since the folding machines have been put in operation the number has been steadily
decreasing, and now but little work of this character is done by hand. This work is all
paid for by the piece.” 88
The United States Congress determined the size of the print runs for the Department of
Agriculture’s Annual Reports. It was also responsible for the cost of printing the reports
and at times explicitly stated limits for size, cost, as well as stipulating production copy
deadlines to the Department of Agriculture. Most of the Annual Reports for the period of
my study, 1862-1888, include a copy of the Congressional resolution stating the number
of copies to be printed and in later years the amount of money allocated for printing.89
The statement for the Annual Report for 1862 reads:
House of Representatives, March 3, 1863.
Resolved, That there be printed by the Superintendent of Public Printing, under
the direction of the Commissioner of Agriculture, one hundred thousand extra
copies of the report of the Department of Agriculture for 1862, for the use of this
present House, and twenty thousand extra copies for distribution by that
department.90
With the Annual Report for 1877 the section is more formal, complete, and appears under
the title, “Order to Print:”
87

R.M. Kerr (1881, 47)
Kerr (1881, 90)
89
The Annual Reports issued under Commissioner Frederick Watts are an exception and do not include a
quote of the Congressional resolution stipulating either the number of copies to be printed or how they
should be distributed. From what I can gather by looking at the Reports of the Public Printer and those of
the Secretary of the Treasury, the appropriation by Congress for the printing of the annual reports of the
Department of Agriculture were not counted as part of the Department’s budget. As best I can make out
from the Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury for this period, it seems that because it was Congress
making the request for the reports the funds were attached to Congress itself.
90
Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for 1862. (n.p.)
88

38

Congress of the United States,
In the House of Representatives, June 6, 1878.
Resolved by the House of Representatives (the Senate concurring), That there be
printed three hundred thousand copies of the Report of the Commissioner of
Agriculture for 1877; two hundred and twenty-four thousand copies for the use of
the House of Representatives, fifty-six thousand copies for the use of the Senate,
and twenty thousand copies for the use of the Department of Agriculture:
Provided however, That the number of pages of said Report shall not exceed six
hundred.91
By 1888 this section in the Annual Report includes not only the print run and distribution
numbers but also the amount of money allocated for the print job itself. The resolution
also stipulates deadlines for copy – illustrations and text:92
[Public Resolution – No. 48]
Joint resolution to print the Agricultural Report for eighteen hundred and eightyeight.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress Assembled, That there be printed four hundred thousand
copies of the Annual Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the year
eighteen hundred and eighty-eight; seventy thousand copies for use of the
members of the Senate. Three hundred thousand copies for the use of the
members of the House of Representatives, and thirty thousand copies for the use
of the Department of Agriculture, the illustrations of the same to be executed
under the supervision of the Public Printer, in accordance with directions of the
Joint Committee on Printing, said illustrations to be subject to the approval of the
Commissioner of Agriculture; and the copy for the illustrations of said report shall
be placed in the hands of the Public Printer not later than the twentieth day of
December, eighteen hundred and eighty-eight, and the copy of the text not later
than the first day of February, eighteen hundred and eighty-nine.
Sec. 2. That the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, or so much thereof as may
be necessary, is hereby appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not
otherwise appropriated, to defray the cost of printing said report.93
91

Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for 1877. (n.p.)
The Annual Report for 1888 is 708 pages (not counting maps and illustrations/plates). There are 70
plates in this volume and a number are in color; the one map is also colored and has 5 vertical folds and one
horizontal fold. When unfolded and fully open it measures 26 inches wide by 16 inches high, “Distribution
and Severity of Potato Rot in 1885.”
93
Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for 1888. (n.p.) This could be read as response to concern
expressed a few years earlier by the Public Printer of the United States, A.M. Clapp, in his Annual Report
92

39

The prints runs for the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture increased
gradually between 1862 (120,000 copies) and 1888 (400,000).94 The number of copies
printed and their distribution between the House, Senate, and the Department reflects
changes in the size of the United States Congress as the nation reconsolidated after the
Civil War, new states were admitted to the Union and with those additional states and
changes in population the composition of Congress changed via reapportionment based
on the results of the decennial census as required by the Constitution of the United States
and administered by the Department of the Interior from 1849 to 1902.95 According to the
census for 1860, there were 33 states and 178 members of the U.S. House of
Representatives. In 1878, there were 38 states with 293 representatives in the House of
Representatives. In 1888, there were 38 states and 325 members of the House of
Representatives.96 The census for 1860 established the population of the United States at
just under 31.5 million (an increase of 35.6 percent from 1850); the census for 1870 put
the population slightly over 38.5 million; the census for 1880 registered a population just
under 50.2 million.97
As I will discuss more in the next chapter of this dissertation, the commissioners of the
Department of Agriculture for this period generally expressed a belief that the Annual
Reports of the Department contained not just useful information but agricultural
information essential to the economic health of the nation. There was some disagreement
about how best to distribute the reports and some resentment in the Department of
to Congress, December 30, 1876. Clapp concludes his report with information on the printing of the
agricultural reports for 1874 and 1875. He notes the print runs, the number of “cuts,” the labor required for
“folding and pasting,” as well as the money allocated by Congress for both jobs. He writes that the money
appropriated by Congress was “considerably less than the estimate” made by the printer using information
from the House Committee on Printing in large part because the number of pages and number of
illustrations exceded what was anticipated. Annual Report of the Public Printer for 1876. Miscellaneous
Document No. 24, 44th Congress, 2nd Session, United States Senate.
94
See Appendix C of this dissertation: Print Runs for the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture,
1862-1888 for a chart print runs and distribution of the Annual Reports.
95
United States Census Bureau, United States Department of Commerce.
https://www.census.gov/history/www/programs/demographic/decennial_census.html
96
The number of senators for this period seems to diverge from the standard of two from each state due to
vacancies and special elections.
97
United States Census Bureau, United States Department of Commerce.
https://www.census.gov/history/www/through_the_decades/fast_facts/1880_fast_facts.html

40

Agriculture about the large number of copies that went to members of the United States
Congress. Perhaps as interesting is the statement by R.W. Kerr of the Government
Printing Office in his history of the first hundred years of public printing by the federal
government of the United States. Kerr argues that distribution of government publications
by Congress was not effective and he seems to suggest that centralizing distribution at the
Printing Office itself would increase efficiency:
. . . no proper provision has been made for the dissemination of these costly
publications. Congress orders a few thousand copies of these books, and Senators
and Representatives distribute them to their constituents; but the probability is
that the farmer, who would be most interested in the Agricultural Report, receives
a work on Fossil Insects, or an Indian dictionary; while the scientific man, who
could appreciate the real value of the books sent the farmer, is compelled to look
for geological date in a treatise on trichineae in pork. If a system of distribution
could be devised whereby books issued from the Government Printing Office
could be sent to those, and only those, who are searchers in special fields of
science to which the books relate, the real value and importance of Government
publications would be greatly increased.
It is the law on the statute-books, however, which permits any person to subscribe
for any Government publication issued under the authority of law.98
Information for the Public Good: The Circulation of the Annual Reports of the
Department of Agriculture
An informed citizenry and the free flow of information have historically been seen as
cornerstones of American democracy. The rhetoric that circulated in the Congress during
debates that led to the establishment of the United States Department of Agriculture in
1862 exposed what some might see as an exaggerated understanding of the role of
agriculture in the health and stability of the nation. Representative Owen Lovejoy from
Illinois and chair of the United States House of Representatives Committee on
Agriculture was just one of several men in the government to evoke the glory and demise
of Ancient Rome as he argued in support of the new agency: “It is conceded on all hands
that the farming interest is the basis of all other interests and the primary source of
national prosperity. The outlines of the rise and decay of the Roman empire could have
98

R.W. Kerr, History of the Government Printing Office (at Washington, D.C.), with a Brief Record of the
Public Printing for a Century, 1779-1881 (Lancaster, PA: Inquirer Printing and Publishing Co, 1881), 62.

41

been written in the fields which environed the capitol as well as in her libraries amid
historical records.”99 But that regard for and awareness of the critical importance of a
prosperous and growing base of farming and the vision about the role a federal agency
could play in the securing and distribution of agricultural information proved to be an
example of government working for the public good. The information work of the
Department of Agriculture exploited resources and relationships to serve the best
interests of the nation’s agricultural economy.
The Organic Act of Congress that established the Department of Agriculture in 1862
specifically required the Department to make the agricultural information it acquired and
produced available to “the people.” Congress also stipulated that agricultural information
coming into or going out of the Department “through the mails” could be sent “free of
charge…not exceeding in weight thirty-two ounces.”100 While that directive
accommodated small items, cards, and letters it would not cover most publications of the
Department and certainly not the Annual Report. The Annual Reports of the Department
of Agriculture were circulated via the franking privilege, which made it possible for
members of the United States Congress to both send and receive “information … about
the operations of the government and policy matters before Congress.”101 The franking
privilege was embraced, criticized, amended, and revoked over the course of the long 19th
century in particular. By most accounts the Reports of the Department of Agriculture
continued to circulate via the Congressional frank even when criticisms of or restrictions
to it were strong.102

99

Report of Mr. Owen Lovejoy (IL) from the House Committee on Agriculture, February 11, 1862
(Congressional Globe).
100
“An Act to Establish a Department of Agriculture” reprinted in full at the front of the Report of the
Commissioner of Agriculture for 1862, page 3.
101
Glassman, Matthew E., “Franking Privilege: Historical Development and Options for Change”
(Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2015). Essential to Glassman’s report is the
scholarship of Richard R. John on the history of the U.S. postal system in the late 18th and early 19th
centuries as well as two dissertations: Edward G. Daniel, “United States Postal Service and Postal Policy,
1789-1861” (Ph.D. diss, Harvard University, 1941) and Ross Allan McReynolds, “History of the United
States Post Office, 1607-1931.” ( Ph.D. diss, University of Chicago, 1935).
102
See, for example, the U.S. Senate history of franking on its website: “On January 31, 1873, the Senate
voted to abolish the congressional franking privilege after rejecting a House-passed provision that would
have provided special stamps for the free mailing of printed Senate and House documents. Within two
years, however, Congress began to make exceptions to this ban, including free mailing of the

42

Conclusion
The Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888 were, as
this chapter illustrates, much more than simply reports on the official work of a new and
growing federal agency. The range of topics covered in addition to the more formal
reports of the divisions at the Department is staggering in its breadth and scope and
embodies an understanding of agricultural information and economy as complex and
inclusive in ways not often considered. What we see over time is that the Department of
Agriculture is experimenting with and refining what constitutes useful agricultural
information and the Department’s role and responsibility to acquire, produce, and share
this information with the constituency they were mandated to serve. In the next three
chapters I will more closely examine and discuss the three areas of work at the
Department of Agriculture that are the central focus of this dissertation – the Reports of
the Commissioners, the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, and the head of the
Statistical Division.

Congressional Record, seeds, and agricultural reports. . . .”
https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/minute/Senate_Ends_Franked_Mail_Priviledge.htm

43

CHAPTER 4: THE REPORTS OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888
Introduction
These next three chapters look closely at three sections of the Annual Reports of the
Department of Agriculture for the period, 1862-1888 with an eye to identifying and
understanding not just aspects of the agricultural information work at the Department of
Agriculture but how those responsible for critical aspects of that work represented it in
official reports of the United States government. The Department of Agriculture, from the
outset in 1862, positioned its work in terms of a demand for information from farmers
and its unique ability as a federal agency to satisfy that demand with authoritative and
accurate information relevant to agricultural work. How it gained that authority seems to
lay in its successful ability to fulfill the most basic aspects of its mission, to acquire and
disseminate agriculture information through published versions of its Annual Reports to
the United States Congress.
The first Commissioner of Agriculture for the United States, Isaac Newton, argues in his
first Annual Report (1862) that farmers needed to put aside "primitive" ways and develop
more "scientific" approaches. Newton wrote that [an] "essential condition to agricultural
progress . . . is a more thorough education of the farmer in physical science, in political
economy, in case, and general knowledge . . . to make him a thoughtful and intelligent
citizen . . . the agriculturalist has too much at stake to be behind any in education and
influence"103 because farmers as a class formed the great majority of citizens of the
United States at that time and thus would inevitably influence policy. He saw farmers as
functioning locally and argued that the Department would be able to mediate the
information and experience of farmers and communicate it more broadly, "with the
governments and peoples of all lands."104 As an agricultural country, Newton saw the

103
104

AR 1862, 19
AR 1862, 22

44

Department as fulfilling a "duty of the government" to get the best seeds and information
to farmers because, "when agriculture prospers, all other interests prosper."105
This form of rhetoric and its logic that puts agricultural progress as essential to national
health and strength precedes the founding of the Department of Agriculture and is evident
throughout the history of the United States. The Organic Act that established the
Department of Agriculture in 1862 reaffirms this idea and ties it directly to the mission of
the new federal agency, the Department of Agriculture. The idea is woven through all the
Reports of the Department for the years of my study, 1862 through 1888.
The shared feeling evident in the first report of Isaac Newton, Commissioner of
Agriculture in a newly created federal agency in 1862 and in the first report of Jeremiah
Rusk, the first Secretary of Agriculture with a seat in the President’s Cabinet in 1889 was
that a federal agency was more capable and efficient at gathering, producing, and
disseminating agricultural information necessary to serve the needs of farmers and others
invested in the products of American agriculture. Farmers, agricultural journalists, and
agricultural societies were important political forces and viewed as partners as much as
"customers" by the department. Accurate agricultural information circulated in a timely
manner helped ensure progress in agricultural production which, it was argued, would
result in more efficient production and distribution, higher crop yields, and more diverse
and healthy crops. This, in turn, would insure and secure the stability of the national
economy and thus the power and health of the nation globally.
It is interesting to note the way this outlook carried through the terms of the
Commissioners of Agriculture as well as the report of the first Secretary of Agriculture,
Jeremiah Rusk, the first man to serve a full term as Secretary of Agriculture following
Commissioner Colman’s appointment. Rusk ends his first Annual Report to the United
States Congress thusly:

105

AR 1862, 24

45

Great as are our crops in the aggregate, it must be admitted that our broad acres
are not as prolific as they should be, and I am convinced that, with the aid that can
be afforded to agriculture by carrying out to the full the purpose for which this
Department exists, and thanks to the rapid growth of intelligence and the
remarkable efforts at self-help among our farmers, the yield of every tillable acre
in this country can be increased by 50 per cent. More than this will science,
properly directed, enable us to accomplish, for millions of acres at present
unproductive can, by its application, be rendered fertile. The great nations of
Europe strain every effort to make science the hand-maid of war; let it be the
glory of the great American people to make science the hand-maid of
agriculture.106
Each Annual Report begins with the report of the executive in charge of the Department
of Agriculture – the Commissioner – to the Department’s funder, the Congress of the
United States.
As we shall see, the Commissioners’ Annual Reports tended to focus on the
Department’s hopes and aspirations rather than policy and most were noticeably short on
concrete evidence or plans. The real defining characteristic of these reports is how each
commissioner frames the work of the Department of Agriculture, a federal agency, as
central to the progress and health (economic and political) of the nation.
In this chapter I examine the Reports of the Commissioners of the Department of
Agriculture between 1862 and 1888. Each Annual Report begins with one and they serve
as the official reports by the executive in charge of the Department of Agriculture – the
Commissioner – to their funder, the Congress of the United States. As the reader will see
in later chapters on the reports of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds and the
Statistician at the Department, I cluster the reports by the term of each commissioner:
1862-1867

Isaac Newton (Newton died suddenly in June 1867. John Stokes,
the chief clerk of the Department, assumed his duties until the
appointment of the next permanent Commissioner in November
1867.)

1867-1870
106

Horace Capron

AR 1862, 18

46

1871-1876

Frederick Watts

1877-1880

William G. Le Duc

1881-1884

George B. Loring

1885-1889

Norman J. Colman107

The research questions guiding my reading of the Annual Reports of the commissioners
for this chapter are,

•

What do the reports indicate regarding the scope of the Department of
Agriculture’s activities in meeting its mission?

•

How did the commissioners present / represent that information in their Annual
Reports to Congress?

•

What was the cycle of information procurement, propagation, and distribution at
the department? How did it change over the period of time I cover, 1862-1888?

Commissioner Isaac Newton, 1862-1867
The first commissioner of the new Department of Agriculture was by most accounts I
have seen considered unqualified for and ineffective in his post as commissioner.108
Newton was from a prosperous family. He did not attend college and was not successful
in business – farming or retail. Biographical sketches of Newton note that he became
acquainted with President Lincoln via Lincoln’s wife whom he presumably met while
delivering foodstuffs to the White House. He began government service in the U.S.
Patent Office in 1861 as chief of the Agricultural Division and was appointed head of the
new Department of Agriculture on July 1, 1862. Historical accounts in memoirs and the
107

The Department’s status changed during the term of Commissioner Colman. In February 1888 the
Department was elevated to Cabinet-level status. It remained in the Executive Branch but in February 1888
with a seat in the President’s Cabinet as Secretary of Agriculture. Commissioner Colman’s status changed
and his last month of service to the Department was as the first Secretary of the Department of Agriculture.
(Greathouse, 1898; 20-21)
108
In 1969, the USDA published The Story of U.S. Agricultural Estimates, which includes a short
discussion of Newton’s background and some of the criticism leveled at him.108 The publication quotes an
editorial, “Who is Isaac Newton” from The Rural New Yorker in August 30, 1862 which, barely two
months after his appointment to head the Department of Agriculture, openly mocked Newton by suggesting
“he was so illiterate his writings included such words as ‘lettis, shoogar, inons (onions) and sausgee
(sausage).’” (1969, 19)

47

press suggest that many had their doubts about the ability of Isaac Newton to lead the
new Department: “Thus the Department of Agriculture made its start in borrowed
basement rooms – headed by a politically minded, bankrupt farmer, under a president
who considered himself “no sort of a farmer.”109
The Reports of the First Commissioner of Agriculture, Isaac Newton, 1862-1867
The First Annual Report, 1862
I will give more attention to this first Annual Report of Commissioner Newton and the
first by the newly established Department of Agriculture in order to establish and outline
the groundwork from which the work of this new agency began. This longer account also
provides a sense of his rhetorical style and his political disposition. In his first Annual
Report submitted to President Abraham Lincoln on January 1, 1863, Newton outlined
priorities for the new Department:
1. Collecting, arranging, publishing, and disseminating, for the benefit of the
nation, statistical and other useful information in regard to agriculture in its
widest acceptation . . . .
2. Collecting, from . . . our own and foreign lands, such valuable animals,
cereals, seeds, plants, slips, and cuttings as may be obtained by exchange,
purchase, or gift, with information as to their modes of propagation, culture,
preservation, and preparation for market, and distributing the same throughout
the country. Through our postal franking privilege at home, and our foreign
ministers, consuls, merchants, missionaries, travellers, and the officers of our
naval and merchant fleet, the government enjoys unusual facilities for
carrying out this object.
3. Answering the inquiries of farmers and others on all matters relating to
agriculture, at the same time stimulating inquiry, inviting discussion, and
rewarding research by publishing agricultural statistics of the various States
and sections of States in order to guard against the excess or diminution of
given products, thereby saving much time, labor, and capital to farmers. And
as this department has been created and is sustained for their benefit, they are
earnestly invited to correspond with it in order that a proper selection of
subjects may be afforded for publication.
4. Testing, by experiment, the value of different agricultural implements and
their adaptation to the purposes intended, as well as testing the value of
cereals, seeds, and plants, and their adaptation to our soil and climate, before
transmitting them to our farmers.
109

Ibid., 19

48

5. Analysis, by means of a chemical laboratory, of various soils, grains, fruits,
plants, vegetables, and manures, and publishing the results for the guidance
and benefit of agriculturists.
6. Establishing a professorship of botany and entomology.
7. Establishing an agricultural library and museum.110
The body of his report is a rhetorical essay on the critical importance of agriculture to the
health, welfare, and strength of a nation. Newton draws on that argument to make a case
to the U.S. Congress for continued support for the new Department of Agriculture. He
sees its mission as rooted in the information sharing practices common among farmers,
agricultural societies, agricultural newspapers, and others interested in agriculture and
agricultural research. He imagines the Department of Agriculture as an agency of the
federal government that gains its authority by bringing the various interests of
agricultural pursuits together to serve the nation:
I have dwelt thus at length on the history of agriculture, and on the conditions of
agricultural progress in the United States, in order to show that a great national
department of agriculture, enjoying the sympathy and co-operation of the
government, of agricultural societies and publications, and of individual farmers,
will most rapidly and certainly develop and strengthen these conditions, and thus
augment the wealth, the prosperity, the permanency, and the glory of the republic.
I hardly deem it necessary to attempt to convince our intelligent countrymen of
the vast importance of such a department, inasmuch as whatever improves the
condition and the character of the farmer feeds the life-springs of national
character, wealth, and power. What agricultural societies and publications have
done for single counties and States, this department should do for the whole
country, but with a liberality, wisdom, and catholicity commensurate with the
resources of the nation, the importance of agriculture, and the co-operation of
individuals both at home and abroad. 111
110

AR 1862, 20. Newton acknowledges borrowing these seven goals from Judge Jesse Buel, an
agriculturalist, agricultural reformer, farmer, and journalist from Connecticut. He served as president of the
New York Agricultural Society twice. See Carman, Harry J. "Jesse Buel, Early Nineteenth-Century
Agricultural Reformer." Agricultural History, Vol. 17, No. 1 (January 1943). Carman writes on page 3:
“Like Thomas Jefferson, he believed that the welfare of the Nation and the happiness of its people
depended above all else upon agriculture. According to Buel,
There is no business of life which so highly conduces to the prosperity of a nation, and to the
happiness of its entire population, as that of cultivating the soil. Agriculture may be regarded, says
the great Sully, as the breasts from which the state derives support, and nourishment. Agriculture
is truly our nursing mother, which gives food, and growth, and wealth, and moral health and
character, to our country. It may be considered the wheel which moves all the machinery of
society…”
111
AR 1862, 19-20

49

The report’s narrative covers the finances of the Department of Agriculture for the year in
very general terms and requests the appropriation for the next fiscal year more than
double to $130,000 though even that, Newton suggests, is “a low estimate” given the
responsibilities of the Department. He reports that more than 300,000 “packages of seeds
and cereals” were distributed to members of Congress and “other persons throughout the
Union.” The reach of the work of the new department is acknowledged by Newton and
intimately connected to both the procurement and dissemination of information by it.
Newton tips his hat to the important contributions from the new states and territories of
the United States, “A vast amount of labor has been performed in the department since its
organization…. Information from every available source, both at home and abroad, has
been laboriously sought for, and is now being obtained, which, in due time, when
properly classified, will be disseminated, like the seeds, cereals, and plants, gratuitously.
The mighty west, especially, has been foremost in this generous rivalry of agricultural
exchange, both of products and knowledge.” 112 He also asserts a role for the
Department’s information work outside the United States as well as the importance of
procuring agricultural information, especially seeds and plants, from other countries for
experiment in the United States, “this department, becomes a means of communication
with the governments and peoples of all lands. It aims to provide samples of whatever
American seeds, plants, &c., may be best suited to foreign climates and soils. It
strengthens our friendly relations abroad and at the same time uses its official power and
influence to obtain whatever may advance the agricultural interests of our own
country.”113
Newton discusses a few specific crops in his first report. Of particular note are sources of
fiber like cotton, flax, hemp, wool, and silk. The scarcity of cotton and other crops
associated with the American South is a concern of the Department as the Civil War
continues. Newton writes, “This department will take early and active measures to
induce farmers in Kentucky, Missouri, Southern Illinois, Indiana, and Kansas . . . to turn

112
113

AR 1862, 21
AR 1862, 21-22

50

their attention to the culture of this important staple.”114 He reports that the breeding and
cultivation of “the ailanthus silk worm of China” has been successful in the United
States. The silk is especially robust compared to the silk from the insect that feeds on
mulberry trees. The ailanthus silk worm “will live and grow and spin its silk in the open
air in most of the States of the Union, feeding upon the leaves of the ailanthus, hitherto
regarded among us as a worthless, if not a noxious, tree.”115 The final crop mentioned by
Newton is the opium poppy. He argues that the United States should experiment with
cultivation in order to have more control over the end product, which, in its imported
varieties is too often “adulterated.” For Newton, an indigenous supply of opium
cultivated and harvested in the United States would like native grapes for wine
production, “supply a pure article, and certainly such a result would be desirable, when
the object is a medicinal agent so important and invaluable.” 116
Newton closes his first report as he opened it with an appeal for continued support of the
new federal agency based on the centrality of agriculture to the economy and future
health of the nation. He contrasts the slow and deliberate pace of agricultural production
with that of industry and manufacture, “Agricultural pursuits tend to moderate and
tranquillize the false ambition of nations, to heal sectional animosities, and afford a noble
arena for honorable rivalry. The acquisition of comparatively slow, but sure, wealth,
drawn from and reinvested in the soil, develops health of body, independence and
simplicity of life, and love of country; while the rapid accumulation of wealth, not by
production, but by trade and speculation, is unnatural and unhealthful…. [it] substitutes
selfishness for patriotism.”117 Agricultural work, Newton argues, is foundational to the
nation. He uses the example of the Roman Empire and offers both caution and hope that
the United States emerge victorious from the Civil War. It is worth recording here the
final paragraphs of this first Annual Report of the new Department of Agriculture as it
reflects and embodies the way the federal government and particularly the executive

114

AR 1862, 23
AR 1862, 23
116
AR 1862, 23
117
AR 1862, 24
115

51

branch of the president positioned agricultural work in relation to its role in wartime and
peace:
Next after moral and intellectual forces, home and foreign commerce,
manufactures, lines of intercommunication and agriculture, form the great arch of
our national prosperity – agriculture being the keystone as well as the foundation
of all. Agriculture furnishes the food of the nation, the raw materials of
manufactures, and the cargoes of domestic and foreign commerce. It is the cause
and the evidence of true civilization; for when tillage begins barbarism ends, and
the various arts commence…. When this fails, depression, panic, ruin, ensue. The
surplus of agriculture not only allows the famer to pay his debts and accumulate
wealth, but also does the same for the nation. To increase this surplus, therefore,
to develop and bring out the vast resources of our soil, and thus create new
additional capital, should be the great object of the Department of Agriculture and
of legislation. … Food, therefore, and next raiment, is the great central interest,
around which all other interests revolve. ‘Grain,’ says Adam Smith, ‘is the
regulating commodity by which all other commodities are finally measured and
determined;’ and on this account grain-growing nations will ever command the
precious metals and the respect, if not the fear, of mankind.
The United States are, and must always remain, an agricultural nation. For this the
soil, the climate, the institutions of the country, and the age of the world, have
peculiarly fitted them, and it is the duty of the government to take all possible
measure to secure to the agriculturalists of America the fullest benefits of its
ample resources.
…with peace and union restored, based on equity and freedom; with all the
conditions of agricultural and mental progress fulfilled; with iron bands stretching
from the pines of Maine to the Golden Gate; with the hum of factories on ten
thousand streams, and swift-winged commerce flying to distant lands, what pen
can sketch the possibility of this young giant of the west?
Old Rome, with all her elements of decay constantly at work, lasted nearly one
thousand years, and carried her culture, civilization, and arms to a wondrous pitch
of glory. May we not hope and devoutly pray that, taking warning from history
and the signs of the times, our republic may so learn lessons of wisdom that,
eradicating all destructive tendencies, she will fortify herself against decay, and
become what Rome was not – eternal?118

118

AR 1862, 24-25. One wonders how this report was read and received by both Congress and the general
public. To what extent is this rhetorical style typical of government reports at that time?

52

The Reports for the Remaining Years of Newton’s Term as Commissioner, 18631867
Newton’s remaining Annual Reports followed a similar pattern in terms of tone and
content though we do see him begin to focus more directly on the matters at hand, that is,
the work of the Department of Agriculture, without evoking lessons from the history of
the Roman Empire. The reports each include information on seeds, plants, and crops that
the Department is actively working with or interested in pursuing work on with an eye to
contributing to the strength and health of the nation. The value of agricultural statistics
collected, analyzed, and distributed by the Department is also discussed in each report by
Newton. He reports on the distribution of seeds and plants by the Department of
Agriculture and provides very basic information on the finances of the Department, that
is, money allocated by the U.S. Congress, money spent, and any money remaining. As I
will discuss, Newton offers information on the work of the Department and its operations
including new divisions or areas of work but rarely mentions the addition of new
personnel at the Department of Agriculture. He does acknowledge the roles and value of
correspondents responsible for gathering and transmitting information in work for the
Department. These include people in the field responsible for gathering statistical
information as well as agriculturalists and government officials working overseas who
gather foreign seeds and plants and other agricultural information and forward it to the
Department in Washington, D.C. Newton was a strong advocate for weather and climate
information falling under the purview of the Department of Agriculture. Two constants in
his reports are, first, the critical importance of the Department and the relevance and
power of its authority; second, the need for more support both in terms of money
allocated and land for Department buildings and experiments with crops and other plants,
bushes, and trees.
Excerpts from Newton’s reports offer evidence of both his priorities and the political
quality of his rhetoric. In his report for 1863 Newton imagines vast changes in land
ownership and agricultural labor in the American South after a Northern victory in the
Civil War but only if the Southern States are able to “elevate labor to its true dignity, by

53

hiring instead of owning it.” 119 He sees new immigrants to the United States from
Europe playing a significant role in the rebirth of agriculture in the South after the Civil
War but only if free labor is valued, “Men who have been oppressed in the Old World . . .
will not settle in the mild latitudes of the south, where labor is legally degraded . . . .” 120
He advocates strongly for continued efforts to improve the collection of agricultural
statistics and find ways to distribute that information in a timely manner He writes, “the
events of the last two years, and the present condition of the United States, in themselves,
and relatively to other nations, has wrought a thorough conviction that an absolute
necessity existed in our country, so essentially agricultural, upon which other nations are
so largely dependent for food supplies, and with which the interests of trade and
commerce are so closely interwoven, that more reliable information must be obtained as
to the supply, present and prospective, of the various crops which would be required to
meet the demands of home consumption and for foreign export. To get the facts from
which reliable estimates might be made, required my first attention after the organization
of the department . . . .” 121
In his report on the work of the Department of Agriculture for 1864 Newton offers a
picture of the labor necessary to gather the statistics for the Department, “The means used
are circulars, addressed to correspondents in nearly every county in each State. They
contain inquiries relative to the crops, as the season and its character require. The answers
are given in tenths, increase or decrease, compared with a previous year. These
correspondents have from three to five assistants in each county, to whom circulars are
sent, who make their returns to the chief correspondent. This plan has been suggested by
experience, which has most clearly shown that reliable information cannot be obtained by
casual inquiries, or through casual correspondents.” 122 The correspondents for the
Department were unpaid volunteers who gathered information on crops, crop yield, soil
conditions, and other aspects of agricultural production as directed by the Department.
We will see in later chapters of this dissertation more reference to the correspondents, the
119

AR 1863, 4
AR 1863, 4
121
AR 1863, 8
122
AR 1864, 6
120

54

material they used to conduct their surveys, and the methods that informed their work. It
is worth noting that the Department of Agriculture was not the first agency to collected
information in this way nor was it the first to collect agricultural information. The U.S.
Patent Office before it used the same approach to gather agricultural statistics.
In 1865 Newton’s report includes several examples of the Department of Agriculture
reaching out to agricultural information sources overseas, an awareness on the part of the
U.S. Department of the status of state-sponsored agricultural research in Germany in
particular, and an interest in the work with agricultural statistics provided by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture by agriculturalists in Europe.123 Newton reports that he hired
two “gentlemen of skill and intelligence, well known to be devoted to the interests of
scientific and practical agriculture” to explore Europe and Asia for the Department. He
notes the cost will be small and promises Congress that their reports will be included in
the Department’s Annual Reports. 124 He also describes the Department’s role at a world
forum on insects held in Paris and hosted by the French minister of agriculture. Townend
Glover, the Department’s newly appointed entomologist attended and was awarded a
gold medal for his research on insects in America. Newton notes that Glover was absent
from the Department for “nearly four months” but returned with examples of “silk
cocoons and silk producing insects, together with prepared skins of animals and game
birds” that could be introduced into this country. 125
An early example of the extent to which agricultural work at the federal level was
situated in relation to similar activities supported by national governments in other
countries is Newton’s discussion of agricultural experiment stations in Germany. In the
context of discussing the new laboratory for the chemist at the Department of
Agriculture, Newton points to Germany as an example of a government investing in
agricultural experiment stations. The German agricultural experiment stations conducted,
123

This third point is an example of Newton’s unsupported assertions but is worth quoting nonetheless. He
writes, “I may here remark that this system of collecting, compiling, and publishing farm statistics is
attracting the attention and eliciting the commendation of European nations, and that many of their most
practical statisticians acknowledge freely its superiority over prevailing European systems.” (AR 1865, 7)
124
AR 1865, 4
125
AR 1865, 6

55

experiments that would serve the interests of the farmer. Like the experiment stations that
would follow in the United States, these efforts in Germany included “travelling
teachers” to reach out to farmers and share best practices based on the finding of
scientists working at the stations.126
Newton’s report for 1866 concludes with remarks that acknowledge some of the many
contributors to the growing collections at the Department of Agriculture. Newton extends
a thank you “to United States counsels in foreign countries for continued favors of great
value to this department, and to express my appreciation of the courtesy of the Secretary
of State in forwarding promptly the correspondence, official documents, and statistical
data received from foreign sources. Similar acknowledgements are due to intelligent and
public-spirited gentlemen of all portions of the country for their enlightened co-operation
and disinterested services.”127 In his last Annual Report to the president, now Andrew
Johnson, Commissioner Newton offers these thoughts, “In closing, I cannot repress the
conviction that a new era is drawing upon the agriculture of this country, in which
intelligence and progress will cheapen production and enhance the wealth and increase
the happiness of the people.”128
Some of the changes we see over the course of Newton’s term include a stronger focus on
cattle and livestock, an evolving relationship between the surge in immigration to the
United States and agricultural work and opportunities in this country,129 an awareness of
the critical importance of understanding the diseases of plants and animals, insects as
both beneficial and harmful, a determination to make the country more self-sufficient in
terms of agriculture and the products made from agricultural goods like, for example,
fabric and rope, the devastation wrought by the Civil War especially on southern

126

AR 1865, 7. It should be noted that this is before the unification of Germany which did not occur until
1871. The experiment stations were established under federal authority by the Hatch Act of 1887. See Alan
I. Marcus, Agricultural Science and the Quest for Legitimacy: Farmers, Agricultural Colleges, and
Experiment Stations, 1870-1890 Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1985, for more on the experiment
stations in the United States.
127
AR 1866, 16
128
AR 1866, 16
129
Newton cites immigration numbers from reports on immigration at port of New York by the New York
Commissioners of Immigration for 1863 – 146,519 and 1862 – 76,306. AR 1863, 4.

56

agriculture, the promise of southern agriculture produced with free labor after the war, an
awareness of the role information from the Department could play to help rebuild
agriculture in the south by introducing new crops and methods. The final report under
Newton (1867) was written and submitted by the Chief Clerk John Stokes who was
appointed Acting Commissioner after Newton’s death in office.130 Stokes points to
tensions between rural and urban interests in the U.S. Congress, the detrimental effect of
railroad monopolies on the movement of agricultural goods, and a growing political selfconsciousness on the part of farmers in the United States.131
Newton was able to meet many of his initial goals. Under his authority, the Department
of Agriculture grew to include divisions of research in entomology, chemistry, statistics;
his first hire was William Saunders to serve as Superintendent of the Garden and
Grounds. Saunders’ responsibilities included the acquisition of seeds and plants.132
During Newton’s tenure the Department of Agriculture gained both a library and a
museum; the Department collected agricultural information at home and abroad and
disseminated the results of its investigations and experiments widely; and, it was
responsive to farmers and others in the United States and abroad interested in acquiring
or sharing agricultural information. In these reports of the first Commissioner of the
Department of Agriculture we see a newly formed federal agency charged with gathering
and distributing a diverse and broad range of agricultural information struggle to assert its
authority to the U.S. Congress as well as to the people and press of a nation in the midst
of a Civil War. A Civil War that itself was taking a dramatic toll on the resources of the
130

Newton suffered acute sunstroke while examining the Department of Agriculture experimental farm and
never fully recovered. He died in June 1867.
131
The last reference to the growing political consciousness among farmers in the United States is most
likely a reference to the National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry (or the Grange), which was
founded in the United States in 1867 as a secret society. The Grange advocated for farmers in the face of
growing monopolies in services and industries on which farmers depended, for example, railroad
transportation. The Granger Laws as they are known sought to regulate those monopolies and the prices
they chaged farmers. The Grange was also an advocate for rural free mail delivery – a vital communication
lifeline for farmers and agriculturalists in the United States. The Superintendent of the Garden and
Grounds at the Department of Agriculture, William Saunders, was instrumental in organizing the Grange.
Another founder of the Grange, Adam Grosh, would join the Department in 1867 as its first Librarian. One
of the earliest histories of the Grange is by an historian who was later the second archivist of the United
States, Solon J. Buck (appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt), The Granger Movement: A Study Of
Agricultural Organization And Its Political, Economic, And Social Manifestations, 1870-1880, n.d.
132
The reports of William Saunders in his role as Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds are the subject
of the next chapter of this dissertation.

57

nation especially its agricultural resources, agricultural labor force, and agricultural
production. The Annual Reports are the political and popular vehicle the Department
used to assert and to demonstrate its authority via the communication of agricultural
information deemed vital to the health and progress of the nation.
The Reports of the Second Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture,
Commissioner Horace Capron, 1867-1870
Horace Capron came to his position of Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture
with experience as a farmer, working in cotton mills, and as a general for the Union
Army during the Civil War.133 On November 29, 1867 President Andrew Johnson
appointed Horace Capron as the second man to head the Department of Agriculture after
Commissioner Newton’s death.134 In 1869, President Ulysses S. Grant reaffirmed
Capron as Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture. Capron left the Department
in 1871 to serve as a consult to the government of Japan on agricultural issues and
development.135
The First Report of Commissioner Horace Capron, 1867
Capron’s first report dated May 5, 1868 was submitted to President Andrew Johnson just
short of six months after Stokes’ report for 1867. Capron sets out his agenda
immediately and it included a commitment to publish and distribute the Department of
Agriculture annual report in a timely manner, “It is my intention hereafter to secure
greater promptness in the publication of the report— a reform beyond my power to
initiate in the issue of this volume, for which no preparation was made upon my

133

Some of the details about Horace Capron’s early life are disputed by his biographers. Was he a
successful farmer? What other work experience did he have? What qualified him for the position of
commissioner? The Special Collections Division at the National Agricultural Library (NAL) holds an
autobiographical memoir by Horace Capron the record for which includes short biographical information
for him.
134
As noted earlier, upon Newton’s death Stokes served as Acting Commissioner of the Department of
Agriculture for a few months before Capron took office.
135
The second part of Capron’s autobiography discusses his work in Japan, Memoirs of Horace Capron,
Volume 2, Expedition to Japan, 1871-1875, Special Collections Division at the National Agricultural
Library.

58

accession to the office, owing to the death of the former Commissioner.”136 He points to
progress in agricultural production as the result of increase in the amount of land for
farming and the introduction of “the practical application of mechanical science in farm
machinery.”137 Capron notes the rate of growth in the value of farmland and the number
of farmers between the census of 1850 and that of 1860 with the former nearly doubling
and the later still the largest profession in the country. Capron uses the Department’s own
crop estimates to support his claim that agricultural production during the Civil War not
only met demand but also a showed “fair progression, under adverse circumstances” in
staple crops including corn, wheat, rye, oats, barley, buckwheat, tobacco, hay, and wool.
He boasts of progress in agricultural production in the United States during the Civil
War, “It has become the wonder of the world, that, during the period of a destructive civil
war, the demands of consumption and waste should be fully met, and in many respects a
steady advancement continued, even amid circumstances of discouragement, and with a
manifest deficiency of labor. That this improvement is progressive is shown by careful
estimates of the production of 1867, which present an aggregate increase of 10 per cent,
over the valuation of the yield of 1866 and by the suggestive fact that the cotton
production of the United States has again resumed its operation at the head of the cottongrowing countries of the globe.”138
Capron also makes his case for the use of machinery in farming, arguing that new
technologies will increase output, allow the sowing and harvesting of new types of crops
(in particular, the sugar beet), and generally increase efficiency of agricultural operations.
This is the first Annual Report of a commissioner of the Department in the volumes I
136

AR 1867, 1. In each of the annual reports and in the division reports for the period of my study we see
concern expressed about the time it took to get the reports published and distributed. Part of the problem
was production at the printer but sometimes we see issues of funding for printing, as well. Another variable
was the firm belief on the part of the commissioners and division heads that information needed to be
available to the stakeholders of agriculture as quickly as possible for it to be useful. This concern did result
in the decision to issue monthly reports from the Statistical Division as well as requests from the statistician
that correspondents submit their reports to the Department of Agriculture via telegraph.
137
The introduction of labor-saving machinery in agricultural work in the United States evolved in the 18th
and 19th centuries. The 18th century relied on livestock for added power and hand tools. By the end of that
century Whitney introduces the cotton gin and plows are made with cast iron. McCormick patented his
reaper in 1834 and steel begins to replace cast iron as the material for plows and blades. Steam tractors are
introduced in the 1860s. We also see improvement in threshers, seeders, and binding technology during the
same period.
138
AR 1867, 2

59

have consulted that includes illustrations. Three plates – double cylinder engine (for
steam ploughing), Fowler’s balance steam plough, and Fowler’s balance cultivator – are
included in Capron’s report to support his section on the advantages of steam ploughing.
In addition, Capron points to the way other major producers of agricultural products are
enjoying good results from new farm machinery, “the Viceroy of Egypt is said to have in
operation 200 sets of steam-ploughing machinery of the largest class, by means of which
the recent remarkable increase in Egyptian cotton production has been attained and the
quality of the fibre improved.” He also cites a report on steam ploughs by the Royal
Agricultural Society (Britain) which concludes that yield, market return, and quality of
the product were all increased as a result of using steam ploughs. The Royal Agricultural
Society study, he writes, offers ample evidence for the United States (which at the time
only had two steam ploughs in use) to introduce more steam ploughs into agricultural
work, “The foregoing conclusions from the report of the commissioners are sufficient to
invite greater attention to this interesting subject than it has hitherto claimed in this
country.”139
While Capron’s political rhetoric does not match Newton’s, he does repeat and reaffirm
the idea that if the nation is to remain strong, it must strive toward self-sufficiency when
it comes to agricultural products, “It should be the aim of a wise, industrial economy to
encourage the gradual extension of the various interests of agriculture until everything
consumed in the country, to the growth of which our various soils and climate are
adapted, shall be produced on our own lands. The large accession to the number of free
laborers in our country, and the rapidly-increasing intelligence and skill of our laboring
population, together with the unprecedented immigration of the embodiment of hardy
industry from other lands, are highly calculated, if properly regarded and directed, to give
an accumulated efficiency to agricultural pursuits, and to render the present an auspicious
period not only for the introduction of machinery into departments of business into which
it could not formerly be extended, but also for employing unskilled labor in an increased
variety of the pursuits of husbandry.”140

139
140

AR 1867, 5-6
AR 1867, 7

60

The information on crops in Capron’s first report was limited to silk, sugar beets, two
new sources of fiber (Angora goats and ramie), and grape culture on the banks of
Missouri River in Hermann, Missouri. Capron draws again on census figures for 1850
and 1860 as well as crop estimates for 1867 to argue that agriculture in the American
South was on the rebound:
The complaints of [Southern] planters during the past three years that the days of
cotton production were over, were the natural effect of discouragement and
despondency; yet how baseless and unreliable they proved as a prediction may be
seen by comparing with the figures for 1860, those for 1850 on one side, and
those for 1867 on the other, by which it appears that the recuperation from 1865 is
far more rapid than the increase from 1850.
As the shipments to Great Britain were 135,832,480 pounds in 1865, and
528,162,096 pounds in 1867, the increase has been 140 per centum per annum
against 12 per centum per annum from 1850 to 1860. The trade for the first
quarter of 1868 has been still more encouraging, this country having shipped
more than two-thirds of the total British receipts, against one-half for the same
period of 1866 and 1867, increasing in one year from 999,403 hundred-weights to
1,681,830 hundred-weights.141
Capron reports he ended the work of the experimental farm and turned the land over to
the Department of Agriculture for new buildings. The land for the experimental farm was
no longer sufficient for the needs of the Department in terms of crop experiments and the
Department was in dire need of a building that could serve the work of the growing
agency. He notes that the main building for the Department, which began construction in
August 1867, should be ready to be occupied in September 1868. He also reports
changes to “the mode and manner of the seed distribution” but offers no more
information about the changes. He does offer the following numbers for seed and plant
distribution, “The seed distribution of the year . . . amounted to 1,426,637 papers. Of this
number 352,000 were distributed through members of Congress; 88,482 through
agricultural and horticultural organizations; 164,953 to statistical correspondents;
299,975 to individuals; and 521, 227 to the southern States, under special appropriation.

141

AR 1867, 13

61

He reports that the Propagating Garden and the Experimental Farm distributed 42,123
plants between January 1 and May 6, 1867.”142
Capron concludes his first Annual Report with information on the work and finances of
the Department of Agriculture. He notes, again, his commitment to increase the
efficiency of how work gets done at the Department and restates his concern about the
timeliness of publications. For Commissioner Capron, it seems clear that the Annual
Reports gain their authority by the relevance and accuracy of their content and the
timeliness of their production and distribution, “It is my desire to make this annual
publication not only essentially valuable, but also more truly a report of official
operations.”143
Immediately following Capron’s official report as commissioner is a special report,
requested by the U.S. Congress, on the condition of the Department of Agriculture. This
report, dated January 13, 1868 and addressed to the Hon. Schuyler Colfax, Speaker of the
House of Representatives, more closely resembles the Annual Reports of Newton as well
as those of commissioners to follow.144 Capron is surprisingly frank and forthcoming
about the changes he thinks necessary at the Department of Agriculture. One example is
his discussion of the seed distribution program. He writes that he will need to fire a
number of workers in the program to begin to deal with its overall inefficiency:
It is frequently a difficult matter, as it is an ungracious task, to institute any
reform; for there seldom can be reform, which has for its object the advancement
of the public interest, which does not, in some way, act oppressively upon private
individuals. The Commissioner could not but feel the force of this in bringing
about the particular changes determined upon, inasmuch as there was involved in
them the deprivation of employment to quite a number of both sexes heretofore,
142

AR 1867, 14. There is no more information in the annual reports on the units of measurement for seeds.
AR 1867, 14. It is interesting to see in Capron’s report for 1869 another call by him to focus and
streamline the annual reports on the work of the Department this time by reducing the number of articles by
people not at the Department itself. He writes that refocusing the content on information work done at and
by the Department exploiting all its resources will make the annual reports more authenitic and will elevate
the Department’s authority, “enhance its value and enlarge its usefulness.” (AR 1869, 14)
144
Oddly, no information about the relationship between these two reports is offered other than the request
by Congress for a special report on how Capron found the operations of the Department less than two
months after taking the post of Commissioner.
143

62

and for some considerable time, employed in the two branches of the department,
known as the seed-room and experimental farm. The seed establishment had,
practically, grown into a sort of fungus, of little value in itself, while it absorbed
largely of the nutriment required to sustain the vital functions of the department.
The experimental farm was to be classed under the same head, and liable to the
same objections. These needed to be removed in order to give vitality to the
system, The Commissioner felt compelled to stop these drains upon the resources
of the department, which were without any corresponding benefit to the
country.145
Capron defends his actions in terms of the mission of the Department of Agriculture as
mandated by the Organic Act of 1862 that established it:
By the terms of the act establishing the Department of Agriculture, its duty in this
matter is “to procure, propagate, and distribute among the people, new and
valuable seeds and plants." Those seeds distributed under the law must be “new
and valuable.” By the term “new” it is not to be understood merely that they are
fresh grown, but that they are of a kind that has not been in use in the district or
neighborhood to which they are sent; and by "valuable" it is to be understood that
they possess some important quality above those of similar variety in ordinary
use—as great productiveness, superior nutrition, more early or seasonable
ripening, or some peculiar property which renders them worthy of being a gift
from the nation to a neighborhood, including all the leading and most valuable
cereal productions, such as wheat, corn, rye, oats, barley, &c.
And, moreover, it is very desirable and important that the reciprocal obligations of
the recipient of such seeds from the department be properly and practically
understood: that they are not given to him simply as an individual, but that they
are forwarded to him as a member of the community in which he resides, who is
confidently selected by the department to co-operate with it by bestowing careful
and intelligent cultivation upon the seed intrusted [sic] to him, distributing a
portion of its surplus yield to other members of the community, and, where there
are peculiarly interesting and valuable results, communicating the information to
the department.146
Only under these conditions, Capron writes, will the seed program achieve a meaningful
level of efficiency that benefits agricultural production in the nation.

145

Special Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture, in the Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture
for 1867, 17-18.
146
Ibid., 18.

63

Capron proposes to abolish the experimental farm and establish in its place an arboretum
attached to the propagating garden to display important shrubs, trees and plants and thus
inspire visitors to do the same in their homes and towns. He calls for more careful
accounting and attention in the work of all the divisions of the Department including the
Garden, Statistics, Chemistry, and the Museum and argues that success hinges, too, on
larger and more competent staff. In what is one of first and one of the few explicit
references to labor at the Department of Agriculture, Capron urges Congress to amend
the Organic Act with new legislation that allows for the following staff positions, “one
statistician, one entomologist, one chemist, one assistant chemist, one superintendent of
experimental garden, one assistant superintendent of experimental garden, one botanist,
one superintendent of seed room, one assistant superintendent of seed room, one
librarian, one disbursing and auditing officer, three clerks of the fourth class, four clerks
of the third class, six clerks of the second class, seven clerks of the first class, five
copyists and attendants on museum, one chief messenger, two assistant messengers, two
workmen and six laborers.”147
The extent to which Capron was able to meet these goals is hard to determine from the
Annual Reports of the Commissioner and the two division reports I examine for this
study. Historians working at the Department of Agriculture in the 20th century list the
total number of employees as nine in 1862 and ninety in 1869.148
The Reports for the Remaining Years of Capron’s Term as Commissioner, 18681870
Capron served three more years as commissioner and though no new formal research
bureaus or divisions were added at the Department of Agriculture, information systems
and information work stand out in his reports especially in the exchange of agricultural
information with institutions of other countries as well as domestic institutions. His report
for 1869 offers a snapshot of the network for the exchange of agricultural information –
print, plants, and seeds:
147

Ibid., 23.
See Appendix A for an overview of the organization and structure of the Department of Agriculture,
1862-1889.
148

64

The system of international exchanges recently adopted by the Department has
been continued during the past year with gratifying success, and arrangements
have been completed, in addition to those announced in my last report, with the
governments of Brazil, Bavaria, Russia, Switzerland, and Honduras, the
Horticultural Union Society of Berlin, Prussia; the Royal Society of Brussels,
Belgium; the Royal Gardens of Madrid, Spain; the Horticultural Society of
Bremen, Germany; the governor-general of Vilayet, Turkey; the Royal
Meteorological Society, London; the Scottish Meteorological Society, Edinburgh;
and the Agricultural Society of Sydney, New South Wales.
Relations of exchange are now existing with nearly three hundred learned
agricultural and industrial societies, chiefly European, but some of them in Asia,
Africa, and South America. In nearly every case in which the proposition for
exchange has been made, the response has been prompt and favorable. In many
cases the societies, in addition to their own publications, have presented to the
Department valuable works published by private parties. Several governments
have also presented their publications upon agriculture and kindred subjects.
During the year one hundred and three varieties of American tree seeds have been
sent to the Botanical Garden, Melbourne, Australia; similar assortments to the
royal Minister of Agriculture, Austria; to the Botanical Garden near London,
England; and to the Botanical Garden, Madrid, Spain. To the Agricultural Society
of Good Hope thirty-two packages of cereals have been sent; fifty pounds of
American cotton seed to the Chinese government; one hundred and thirty
packages of vegetable seeds to the Japanese government; and one hundred and
thirty-four papers of American tobacco seed and eighty-six packages of cereals to
the republic of Liberia, Africa. Donations of a similar character, for experimental
purposes, have been received from the principal countries of Europe, from
colonies of Great Britain, from Central and South America, from the Chinese and
the Japanese government, and from the West Indies.149
During Capron’s tenure as commissioner one gets the impression from his reports that he
prioritized the development of collections – books and specimens including plants, seeds,
and insects. The library of the Department of Agriculture, which began under
Commissioner Newton, was actively acquiring material and Capron reports it was “in
receipt of all the prominent agricultural journals, both foreign and domestic, which of
themselves will soon constitute a reference library of value.”150 The collection of
specimens that made up the museum, Capron reports in 1868, was stabilized in new
quarters after having suffered serious losses due to dampness and mold. Capron
expressed his hope that the new space would invite “agricultural and horticultural
149
150

AR 1869, 12-13
AR 1869, 13

65

societies of the different States” to contribute samples “so that each may be fully
represented at the capital of our national government.” The museum was meant to be
available to researchers, agriculturalists, and the general public and had “already
collected about fifteen hundred samples of foreign cereals and vegetable seeds…and the
same quantity of native grains and seeds.” Capron was careful to establish the scientific
value of the collection, “It should be understood that this is not intended to be a mere
collection of beautiful, unique, or curious specimens, but a cabinet of reference, where
the merits of each group may be shown, together with their uses, habits, and adaptability
to various sections of the country.”151
The arboretum on the grounds of the Department of Agriculture served a similar purpose,
that is, to display the widest variety of plants, trees, and shrubs with special emphasis on
those successfully growing in the United States but also a testing ground for “rare plants
of practical uses” such as the cinchona tree – a collection the Department was engaged in
building.152 In his reports for 1868 and 1870 Capron urges the U.S. Congress to fund
research at the Department on the cinchona tree. He expresses his concern about the loss
of “cinchona forests in the Andes” which he attributes to the “negligence of governments
of Peru, Ecuador, and more Northern Andes states.” He suggests that the United States
needs to intervene but offers no plan other than urging Congress to support the
Department of Agriculture’s research on the cultivation of cinchona by allocating funds
to establish a “cinchona plantation” at the Department.153 In 1870 Capron reports that
England and France have established cinchona plantations. Quinine, Capron writes, is too
important a product to allow cinchona trees to be cultivated by “private enterprise”
arguing instead for “national plantations.”154
Another area of development was the collection of insects, both beneficial and harmful,
in the Department’s Entomology Division. That work is, Capron reports, especially
urgent as evidenced by the increased number of inquiries provoked by “ravages of the
151

AR 1868, 10-11
AR 1868, 12. The bark of the cinchona tree is a source of quinine used to treat malaria.
153
AR 1868, 7
154
AR 1870, 8
152

66

cotton army-worm at the south, and the potato-bug and locust at the west.” People were
writing to the Department for information on how to deal with insects that harm crops
and reporting that insects were moving from native plants to cultivated crops. Farmers
wrote to the Department for information about how to manage these insects; information
on “their habits and the means for their destruction.” Capron reports the letters come
daily and that many include insects “with details of the damage done” as well as
techniques farmers tried to control. Each specimen is “figured by Professor Glover” (the
entomologist) and added to the growing collection of “about one hundred and eighty
plates, containing twenty to fifty figures each.”155 A collection taking form in the
Chemistry Division provides evidence of the expansive nature of agricultural research at
the Department that included “an economic mineralogical cabinet, which will serve not
only to illustrate the relation of soils to the parent rock, but will also form the nucleus of
an industrial collection, illustrating the lithological riches of the country which are
available for architectural and other art purposes.”156
In this era of surveys and expeditions funded by and conducted for the U.S. government,
Commissioner Capron laments that his Department is not in receipt of that type of
funding and discusses the fact that due to lack of funds the newly formed Division of
Botany at the Department of Agriculture must rely on donations of specimens from
expeditions organized by other agencies and organizations including the Smithsonian. He
notes, too, that scientists working at the Department of Agriculture, as well as others
affiliated with it, contribute material from their personal explorations to help build its
collections.157
The seed distribution program at the Department is an interesting example of how the
work of the Department of Agriculture in this period is built on the reciprocal exchange
of information. In his report for 1868, Capron has this to say about the seed distribution
work: “From every portion of the globe seeds and plants, and information as to their
culture, have been successfully obtained, and the results promulgated through the annual
155

AR 1868, 10
AR 1868, 9
157
AR 1869, 16
156

67

and monthly reports . . . . The arrangements for an extended exchange with foreign
countries of our valuable cereal and forest tree seeds…is viewed as one of paramount
importance, and destined to add greatly to our national wealth.”158 He continues by
making a case for some changes in the seed distribution program at the Department of
Agriculture arguing that it needs to be “judicious” and suggests that need is “scarcely
understood or appreciated.” When seed quality deteriorates crop yield is affected. A seed
program administered by the Department of Agriculture and invested in by the U.S.
Congress could stay on top of these and other issues and ensure adequate distribution of
new seeds.159 We see in Capron’s report on the number and types of seeds distributed for
1868 evidence of the quantities, origins, and distribution of the Department’s seeds.
Capron writes the “total number of packages and papers distributed, 592,398, which
includes 32,127 sacks of winter wheat imported by the present Commissioner, as follows:
To members of Congress, 223,672; to agricultural and horticultural societies, 98,861; to
statistical correspondents, 86,391; to individuals on applications, 183,474.”160
The types of seeds distributed by the Department of Agriculture in these first years reflect
its interest in identifying plants that would contribute to a degree of self-sufficiency in
terms of the products of agriculture of the United States and allow this country to have
less reliance on imports. But by 1869 Capron is concerned about the effectiveness of the
seed distribution program and particularly with the quality of seeds distributed and the
ability to distribute seeds to places where they might actually produce crops.161 His report
for 1870 states the number sent out and to whom, “The number of packages issued . . .
358,391, of which 133,043 were sent to members of Congress, 71,865 to agricultural
societies, 71,400 to the corps of statistical correspondents, 7,960 to meteorological
observers. The distribution includes seeds of cereals, grasses, hemp, jute, ramie, opiumpoppy, sugar-beet, tobacco, sorghum, forest and shade trees, and many of the rarer
species of plants oleaginous, edible, medicinal, and fibrous.”162
158

AR 1868, 13
AR 1868, 13
160
AR 1868, 14
161
AR 1869, 17-18
162
AR 1870, 15. See Appendix B for a chart of seed distribution at the Department of Agriculture for
selected years between 1865 and 1910.
159

68

Finally, the work of the Statistical Division figures prominently in Capron’s reports as
commissioner of the Department. In fact, his report for 1868 offers insight and details
about how work is organized in that Division, “The operations of the statistical division
include the collection of the facts of agriculture in its widest range, from all the States
and Territories of this country, and the gleaning of similar data, for the purposes of
comparison and instruction, from European records of experimental science, transactions
of societies, and official bulletins and publications. It involves the tabulation and
systematic arrangement of this matter, and the publishing of condensations or deductions
from it in a monthly report. The compilation, composition, revision, and publication of
the annual volume is also intrusted [sic] to this division.”163 In his report for 1870,
Capron writes that the Statistical Division has agents (correspondents) in 1300 counties
of the United States who are actively contributing information to the Department of
Agriculture to analyze and publish for distribution.164
Though he never mentions his predecessor, we see in Capron’s discussion of the mission
of the Department of Agriculture and its responsibilities in each of his reports evidence
that he shares Commissioner Newton’s estimation of the importance of agriculture and
farm work to the future prosperity of the nation. In 1868 Capron begins his report, “The
interests confided to this department are those of an industrial class more numerous than
any other, and upon whose labors, under the guidance and with the blessing of a Power
that rules the year, depend the well-being and the very existence of the human family.”165
He continues by extolling the resources available in this country – soil, climate, labor,
land – to achieve that prosperity, “The sphere of its operations is a territory unsurpassed
for fertility of soil, and a climate favorable to the health and comfort of the husbandman
and the fruitfulness of his toil. Its marvelous breadth of area invites the toiling millions of
the world, offering to each family a farm and a home, with the added boon of citizenship,

163

AR 1868, 7
AR 1870, 9. It is interesting to compare the numbers of agents at the Department of Agriculture with
those working for the U.S. Census. The latter, according to its website section called “Fast Facts” lists 4417
“enumerators” for 1860; 6530 for 1870; 31,382 for 1880; 46,408 for 1890.
https://www.census.gov/history/www/through_the_decades/fast_facts/
165
AR 1868, 1
164

69

and asking in payment only a guarantee of improvement, and a share in the production of
the bread of the nation.”166
Capron urges the U.S. Congress, in his final report as Commissioner at the Department of
Agriculture, for more support but he frames his appeal in terms that urge Congress to
allocate funds at a level that would allow the Department to pay wages that would attract
the best workers. He is direct in his appeal, “The field of labor is so broad, the objects of
attainment so manifold, in aid of progressive agriculture and enhancement of its
productive resources, that the limited means at the disposal of the Department appear
inadequate to the great work at hand…. Its work demands a higher order of talent than
the routine service of most public business; it requires a knowledge of the national
economy, social science, natural history, applied chemistry, animal and vegetable
physiology, and practical agriculture; and presents so broad a range of facts in each field
of investigation as to demand the most active effort and the persistent industry. For such
labor the most meager compensation only is offered, and it is found difficult to obtain an
increase of suitable service, and impossible to remunerate properly that already employed
which is found to be most efficient and reliable, while that which is practically useless for
the purpose is offered in unlimited measure. A just and wise revision of clerical salaries
would greatly increase the efficiency of the Department.”167 We will see later in this
chapter that this type of appeal is included at the end of many of the Annual Reports of
each commissioner for the Department of Agriculture. The extent to which they were
addressed is nearly impossible to determine from the information in the Annual Reports
of the Department. This is another example of a question that could be fairly easy to
address if there was an administrative record for the Department of Agriculture during
this period.
The Reports of the Third Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture,
Commissioner Frederick Watts, 1871-1876

166
167

AR 1868, 1
AR 1870, 9

70

Frederick Watts was appointed Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture by
President Ulysses S. Grant in 1871 at the age of 70. Watts was born in Carlisle,
Pennsylvania in 1801 and died there in 1889. He came to the Department with a diverse
professional background. Watts studied law, served as judge, farmed, was a founder and
served as the first president of the Pennsylvania Agricultural Society, served as president
of the Cumberland Valley Railroad Company in 1841, served on the Board of Trustees
for Dickinson College twice – 1828-1833 and 1841-1844, “organized the Carlisle (PA)
Gas and Water Company” in 1854, and served as the first chair of the Board of Trustees
for the newly established Pennsylvania State University in 1855.168 Watts was
instrumental in the establishment of the University in his role at the Pennsylvania
Agricultural Society and has been credited with being the driving force behind its
establishment. He used his position at the Pennsylvania Agricultural Society to organize
and advocate for a “college that would promote the application of scientific knowledge
and methods to agriculture.”169
The First Report of Commissioner Frederick Watts -- 1871
Frederick Watts brought to his work as Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture a
long history of professional work in areas of agricultural production, advocacy, policy,
and education. That experience is evident in his first Annual Report as Commissioner. He
outlines priorities for the Department and provides insight into the operations of the
Department. As with the reports by earlier commissioners at the Department of
Agriculture, Watts begins his report for 1871 with his thoughts about the state of
agriculture and its many stakeholders. He notes that the work of agricultural societies and
the agricultural press were raising the political consciousness of farmers in the United
States, “through the instrumentality of agricultural journals and the establishment of
agricultural societies and colleges, farmers have been brought to discover that there is
work for them to do outside the precincts of the farm. They seem to have been startled
into a determined purpose to take their place in the race of the world’s progress, and to
168

Greathouse (1898, 13). Pennsylvania State University website:
https://www.trustees.psu.edu/timeline/index.html, Dickinson College Archives website:
http://archives.dickinson.edu/people/frederick-watts-1801-1889.
169
Pennsylvania State University website: https://www.trustees.psu.edu/timeline/index.html

71

assert for themselves a position which will enable them to keep pace with all others
whose goal is success in life.” Watts sees in the mission of the Department of Agriculture
as stated in the Organic Act that established the Department an important and distinct role
for the Department “to encourage and aid in this new spirit of improvement.” He sees the
responsibility conferred on the Department by the U.S. Congress as important, powerful,
but also “almost undefined” given “the vast expanse of this field.”170 He is emphatic
about the critical role the Department of Agriculture and the federal government,
generally, play with regard to farmers, farming, and the interests of agriculture, “This is,
perhaps, no occupation in life which so greatly needs the fostering care of the
Government as that of farming. There is no principle of political economy, no question of
public policy, no consideration of statistical facts, no new development of scientific
knowledge, which does not come home to be measured in its influence upon the results of
the farm. This Department, as I view it, has been established to care for those interests . . .
.”171 Commissioner Watts is careful to acknowledge that even given his vast experience
and his passionate commitment to agricultural improvement he must allow for more time
in the job to extend his suggestions for improvement.
Not surprisingly, given his role in the founding of Pennsylvania State University, Watts
offers his thoughts on agricultural education. He is confident the land-grant colleges will
become places farmers feel confident sending their “boys” to be trained in the scientific
knowledge necessary for progress in agriculture, “I claim that the agriculturists of the
country shall have a place where their youth may be imbued with the light of science, and
thus fitted for agricultural life.”172 Watts argues for collaboration between the new
agricultural colleges and the Department of Agriculture in order to “produce the most
profitable information.” That collaboration is, according to Watts, a key component of
success in agricultural information work and education. The latter must also include a
requirement for “compulsory labor of at least twelve hours a week” by students. Watts
sees the Department serving as “the nucleus around which may be collected the
knowledge of inventions, statistics and rare facts, new and improved seeds and plants, to
170

AR 1871, 1
AR 1871, 2
172
AR 1871, 2
171

72

be disseminated, distributed, and experimented upon by the instrumentality of
agricultural colleges.” Assuming that collaboration’s success, Watts sees a positive effect
on the country as a whole, “felt throughout every vein and artery of our common
country.”173
Watts next turns his attention in his first Annual Report as Commissioner at the
Department of Agriculture to the conditions of the states of the American South noting
that agricultural practice in those states had not reached the level of productivity and
progress as agriculture in the North. Limiting crops to cotton and tobacco for many years
resulted in the depletion of the soil to a dangerous extent. Watts writes that he will look
for ways for the Department of Agriculture to help improve agricultural work and
production in the South, “to find out whether their implements, and especially their seeds,
may not be greatly improved; and how, in the distribution of seeds and plants, we may
reach those to whom they may profitably be sent.” He will, he writes, introduce grasses,
other fodder crops like clover, and fiber crops like flax to the southern States.174 A
significant portion of the report for 1871 is devoted to the new commissioner’s
impressions of and hopes for the Seed Distribution program at the Department of
Agriculture and the Department’s program for the international exchange of seeds. Watts
discusses the seed distribution program in his introductory remarks noting that farmers, in
their correspondence with the Department, as well as the head of its seed program both
“impress my mind with the immense benefit” the seed distribution program has on
agriculture in the country. But Watts, like other commissioners at the Department,
expresses his concern about the quality of the seeds as well as how and to whom they are
distributed, “It would be far better to put a half or whole bushel of seed into the hands of
one conscientious and careful person that to divide the same quantity among ten or
twenty.”175 His report on the status of the program for the exchange of seeds with
173

AR 1871, 3
AR 1871, 4-5. Watts mentions flax in the context of his report on the work of the Division of
Horticulture at the Department of Agriculture which was conducting experiments with it and found it could
be adapted to areas found in some of the Southern United States.
175
AR 1871, 4.. In his report on the work of the Seed Division, Watts includes a chart showing that more
than a third of the total seeds distributed were allotted to Congress (the House and the Senate). Of that total,
members of Congress received more than 88% of the total tobacco seed, more than 93% of the total opium
poppy seed, and almost half the total wheat seeds distributed. (AR 1871, 10)
174

73

institutions and individuals outside the United States is more optimistic. Watts reports
that the exchanges were resulting in the introduction of new and valuable seeds that were
added to the Department’s collection and were otherwise hard to come by at a reasonable
cost through “ordinary channels or trade.”176 In exchange, seeds from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture were sent to the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, Edinburgh,
and Glasnevin; the Royal Dublin Society, the Horticultural Society of Bremen as well as
the Royal Minister of Agriculture at Berlin; botanic gardens in Melbourne, Portugal, and
St. Petersburg; the University of Christiana in Norway; the Kingdom of the Netherlands;
the Swiss government via the counsel general for the United States; and the ministers for
agriculture in Austria and Hungary. Commissioner Watts reports that the Department
learned that many of the seeds it sent to foreign nations “in which the ruder systems of
agriculture prevail” were successfully cultivated. That success provoked inquiries from
those governments that expressed interest in gaining additional assistance with
information on best practices for farming and new types of farm machinery especially
examples that would afford relief for and more efficiency in farm labor.177
On the other side of the exchange, the Department of Agriculture received seeds and
plants from Kew, Melbourne, Austria and Hungary. Watts reports that the Department
was able to acquire seeds and plants from South America, Europe, Asia, and Hawaii
thanks to the efforts of “our ministers and counsels.” He notes the Department of
Agriculture established, in 1871, “correspondence . . . with the ministers of agriculture of
the South American governments . . . for the purpose of effecting exchanges of the
agricultural and other useful products of those countries which are known to be prolific of
numerous medicinal and other economic plants.” The South American correspondents,
Watts reports, were in Brazil, Ecuador, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Mexico, Guatemala, and
Colombia. Exchanges also continued with China and Japan and a new relationship
established with “the colonial governments of Jamaica . . . the colonial secretary having

176
177

AR 1871, 8.
AR 1871, 9

74

promised a donation of over three thousand plants of the cinchonas, embracing all the
varieties.”178
Watts reports that the Library at the Department acquired 1064 volumes bringing the total
to 6012 volumes. Many of the new acquisitions came to the Library via the Secretary of
the Interior and most of those were “public documents.” The collection continues to
grow, too, thanks to exchanges with “agricultural and scientific associations of the world”
whose publications, Watts notes, are hard to come by in the United States. He reports the
collection of reports by state agricultural societies is nearly complete and twenty years
deep, and that it came at no cost to the Department of Agriculture. He reports, too, the
Library is developing a catalog of the material it holds to make the collection more
accessible.179
At the end of his introductory remarks to the full report Watts argues for a different
approach to getting the information in the Annual Reports distributed. He expresses
concern that the Annual Report, in particular, is too often delayed making the information
far less useful to farmers and other stakeholders in agriculture. He writes, “I regard . . .
the mode of distribution of our annual report as very objectionable. Indeed, in my
judgment, it should not be published at all, but should be entirely superseded by the
monthly reports which it is now the practice of the Department to issue.” If the U.S.
Congress prefers not to make that change, Watts urges it to change the way the annual
reports of the Department of Agriculture are made available to the public, “I suggest that
a much smaller number…be delivered for gratuitous distribution, and that the greater part
of the edition be deposited with the Public printer, to be sent to all persons who would
order the books and pay their first cost and postage for delivery . . . . The daily
applications for this book . . . convince me that thousands would gladly pay so small a
sum to obtain that which they so much desire to have.”180 Watts ends his introductory
remarks to his first Annual Report with the recognition that he still had much to learn and
178

AR 1871, 9. Watts writes in his section on the Statistical Division that it does a good job of “the editing
and issue of all the publications of the Department.” (AR 1871, 9)
179
AR 1871, 8
180
AR 1871, 4-5

75

admits to not having been at the Department of Agriculture long enough to have a full
sense of its operations and potential but he does recognize its power. He also notes that
he has “not yet been able to devise the ways and means by which these powers may be
most profitably exercised for the public good.”181
The Reports for the Remaining Years of Watts’ Term as Commissioner, 18721876
The condition of the farmer, the nation, and the role and responsibility of the Department
to both is a recurring theme in the Annual Reports of Commissioner Watts. His reports
for each year begin with some reference to the idea of the farmer as “isolated” or in need
of information to more efficiently and effectively conduct himself but Watts also frames
that need as one only the Department of Agriculture can adequately address.182 The
Department is, he argues, in the unique position of providing information to help the
farmer do a better job which in turn increases the health and well-being of the nation and
all its people. Watts sees the role of the Department as rooted in its charge by Congress
when established, that is, to acquire and diffuse agricultural information in its many
forms. In 1872 Watts is careful to acknowledge he is new to the job but still forceful
about what he sees as the relevance of the work of the Department, “A single year’s
experience at the head of this Department convinces me of its importance as an executive
branch of the Government. There is none other whose relations to the whole people of the
country are so intimate and so constant. The several divisions of the Department are in
their operations and uses so naturally connected with the diversified pursuits of practical
life, that they cannot fail to greatly aid and give a right direction to the farmer, the
gardener, the merchant, and the miner, in all those points of interest which concentrated
knowledge is enabled to impart to those whose means of information are limited to the
narrow sphere of their individual operation.”183 Watts continues, “we must not fail to
watch, learn, and carefully examine whatever may promise to add to the sum of that
181

AR 1871, 5
In his report for 1874 Watts writes about the farmer more directly, “The isolated situation of the farmers
affords them few opportunities of keeping step with the rapid march of the world’s progress, and any aid
which can be given them by this Department is as strongly marked as it is appreciated.” He concludes his
opening paragraph, “The Counsel, advice, and information of the Department are cheerfully given to all
persons who apply for them on any subject which pertains to the business of agriculture.” (AR 1874, 5)
183
AR 1873, 3
182

76

human happiness which springs from the carefully cultivated earth.” He concludes by
asserting, “It behooves this Government to be foremost in teaching those lessons of
progressive, practical, and scientific agriculture . . . .”184
In 1873 the Commissioner also discusses the role of the Department of Agriculture, “The
progress of events connected with the administration of this Department during the past
year has served to exemplify, not only its practical usefulness, but its appreciation by the
people, and especially those who are interested in the pursuits of agriculture. The planters
and farmers of the country seem to recognize this Department as a sentinel upon the
watch-tower of agricultural interests; to mark whatever new ideas and principles may be
developed in the minds of men upon the subject; and to discover and procure such new
and useful seeds and plants as may enable them to keep pace with agricultural progress
throughout the world.”185 He notes that the Department is especially well positioned to
respond to the needs of a growing population in the “Western States.” He points to
support from Congress as fundamental to the Department’s ability to work effectively to
support agricultural improvement, “It is through this influence that the successful
experiences or useful discoveries of any part of the world are communicated to our own
people, whereby they are enabled immediately to profit.”186 But, Watts cautions,
something must be done to address the problems that beset the publication and hence
distribution of the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture. If the reports are not
printed and distributed immediately they lose not only their timeliness but the
Government (and the Department), Watts argues, becomes “further removed from the
attention of the people” it serves.187
In his remaining Annual Reports, Commissioner Watts continues to draw attention to the
potential for the agricultural education at the land-grant colleges as well as the
opportunities presented by collaboration between them and the Department of
Agriculture. The narrative for his report for 1872 addresses the issues directly and in it he
184

AR 1873, 3
AR 1873, 5
186
AR 1873, 6
187
AR 1873, 6
185

77

makes a point to highlight what he sees as an important role for the Department in those
relationships, “It is gratifying to know that these institutions [land-grants] appreciate the
effort the Department makes to co-operate with them in the promotion of a knowledge of
scientific agriculture, and promise to communicate promptly all facts which may be
developed by experiment or otherwise, and which, through it instrumentality, may be
published for the information of the whole people. The monthly publications which
emanate from the Department, and which are widely circulated among the agricultural
journals and farmers of the country, keep them advised with regard to all valuable facts,
or even plausible theories, which tend to enlighten the public mind on agricultural
subjects . . . .”188 And at the beginning of his report for 1872 he extends the scope of the
collaboration to include organizations and individuals, “There is no other duty which
devolves upon me so acceptable, so agreeable, and withal so profitable, as the
correspondence which I have sought with agricultural colleges, societies, and individuals
respecting improvements in the modes of cultivation and experiments in its practical
operations.”189 The remaining Annual Reports under his commissionership each include
special reports on the agricultural colleges as well as illustrations of the buildings at the
colleges.190
The number of correspondents affiliated with the Statistical Division of the Department
of Agriculture during Watts’ term as commissioner continues to grow and his reports
reveal some details about how the work of the division was conducted. In his report for
1872 he writes that the Division “is engaged, through the instrumentality of perhaps six
thousand agents, collecting current agricultural statistics, and utilizing all the statistics of
governments, associations, and corporations, foreign and domestic, so far as they relate to
rural economy and tend to the advancement of American agricultural interests; and this
information is published periodically, whereby the farmer is duly informed as to the
amount of products, the merchant as to their probable value, and the mechanic as to the

188

AR 1872, 4
AR 1873, 6
190
The illustrations include: AR 1871, Columbus Ohio; AR 1872, North Georgia Agricultural College, the
Illinois Industrial University, and the Female College at Wisconsin; 1874, California, Arkansas, Hampton
(VA) colleges; 1875, Michigan and Minnesota; 1876, Alabama, Missouri, Texas, and West Virginia.
189

78

cost of living.”191 Watts reports in 1873 that the Statistical Division has correspondents
(each with a “board of assistants, selected from the most intelligent and public-spirited
farmers”) in 1600 counties “which include nearly all of much importance in
production.”192
Watts’ report in 1874 on the work of the Statistical Division is worth quoting at length for
the insight it offers into how he perceived its value and authority:
The Statistical Division of this Department is the only point in the country where
is concentrated reliable information as to the condition, prospects, and results of
the cereal, cotton, and other crops, by the instrumentality of four correspondents
in each county of every State; this information is gathered at stated periods of
each month, carefully studied, estimated, tabulated, and published for the benefit,
as well of the farmer and planter, as of the merchant and manufacturer who deal
with their products; whereby all legitimate parties are protected from the rapacity
of the speculator, who deals most profitably upon fabricated reports. When we
consider the sources of this information, composed of thousands of minds of
various shades of sanguine and dispirited temperament, and of extensive and
limited knowledge, and when we add to this the varying seasons of heat and cold,
wet and draught, the degree of accuracy which characterizes the estimates of final
results is truly wonderful. Such is the effect produced by this information upon
the markets of the country that it is most carefully guarded up to the moment of its
publication to the world at large.193
By 1875 Watts is highlighting the work of the Statistical Division by demonstrating the
value of the information it makes available to agricultural stakeholders. He urges
Congress to invest more resources in its work, “I know of no branch of the public service
in which so much is accomplished with so small an expenditure. It is literally true that
nine-tenths of the labor performed is gratuitous, that of our correspondents being entirely
uncompensated, except by the reports of the Department and seeds sent them for
experiment.”194 In his final report as commissioner, 1876, Watts expresses deep concern
about the ability of the Statistical Division to continue to function effectively without an
increase in appropriation given increased demand for its work, “Our Statistical Division,
191

AR 1872, 5
AR 1873, 11
193
AR 1874, 7
194
AR 1875, 10
192

79

which I look upon as the most important to the interests of the country, has been almost
destroyed for want of an appropriation to supply it. The whole sum appropriated to this
division is only $10,000, which is not quite sufficient to pay for the clerical work, leaving
nothing for collecting agricultural statistics and compiling and writing matter for
monthly, annual, and special reports. In consequence of which, and the want of a
sufficient appropriation for printing, the monthly reports cannot be published longer than
November, and the articles which make up the annual report cannot be procured at all,
unless it be the pleasure of Congress to make a further appropriation.”195
The status of the Library at the Department of Agriculture figures prominently in the
Annual Reports by Commissioner Watts. He offers information on the size of the
collection, how the collection is being built as well as its collecting priorities, and the
space it has at the Department. In his report for 1872 Watts writes, “The Library of the
Department is peculiarly an agricultural one, in which are collected the published
discussion and studied wisdom of learned men on agriculture. This is turned to a most
profitable account by all those whose duties in the Department require their investigation
into agricultural subjects.”196 Watts reports in 1873 that the Library collection has
reached approximately 6000 volumes and that the “boards of trades of the chief cities of
the Union have presented complete sets of their reports” for inclusion in the Library
collection. The Library collection, he writes, is used by clerks and “indispensable for
reference in conducting [the Department’s] large correspondence.”197 Items in the
Library’s collection were acquired by donation, purchase, and exchange with institutions
both foreign and domestic. The exchange program, according to Commissioner Watts in
his report for 1874, “seems desirable to all parties” and brings to the Department of
Agriculture “the reports of the leading agricultural, pomological, and meteorological
societies of the world.” The Department exchanged its publications including the Annual
Report with both domestic institutions and foreign.198 Though Watts reports that the year
1875 was a particularly good one in terms of adding material to the Department’s Library
195

AR 1876, 9
AR 1872, 5-6
197
AR 1873, 11
198
AR 1874, 12
196

80

collection via exchange agreements with “foreign countries and societies,” he offers no
numbers.199 In 1876 material acquired at the International Centennial Exposition in
Philadelphia was added to the Library at the Department of Agriculture and new
exchange agreements made.200
Wood and timber were in great demand in the United States in the mid 19th century as it
expanded its territory, built new cities and towns, and developed transportation and
communications infrastructure to support that expansion. Commissioner Watts was
especially concerned about the need to ensure the preservation of the nation’s forests and
forest land. That concern did not develop into policy but one sees in the Annual Reports
of Watts a growing awareness and move in that direction. In his report for 1872 he offers
nothing more than a proposal that the U.S. Congress attend to the preservation of existing
forests and ensure trees are planted on the prairies and all public lands. He implores the
Congress to take action noting, “The importance of this subject demands immediate
attention.”201 In his report for 1873 he suggests the Botanical Division at the Department
of Agriculture include forest trees of the United States in its collecting priorities. Watts
adds that such a collection would be important to exhibit as part of the Centennial
Exposition marking the 100th anniversary of the founding of United States coming up in
Philadelphia in 1876. Watts argues the task of preserving forests and the resources from
them is one best done by the government and urges the U.S. Congress to add it to the
mission of the Department of Agriculture and not allow it to be done “by any private
individual.”202
In his first report in 1872, Watts expresses reservations about the efficiency of the seed
distribution program of the Department. Throughout his term as Commissioner he
continues to include strong criticism in his reports of the seed program and particularly
how seeds were allocated for distribution – especially the amount of seed claimed by
members of Congress. Watts was careful to include in most of his reports a chart showing
199

AR 1875, 12
AR 1876, 7
201
AR 1872, 7
202
AR 1873, 10
200

81

the breakdown for the distribution of seeds in terms of quantity, type of seed, and to
whom the seeds were distributed. The bulk of the seeds distributed were common
vegetable and flower seeds. Crop seeds like wheat, tobacco, rye and others were
distributed in smaller quantities but a much higher percentage of those seeds went to
Congress rather than agricultural societies, individuals requesting seeds from the
Department, or correspondents of the Department. Those seeds were valuable as
economic crops as opposed to vegetable seeds used mostly for local consumption and
flower seeds which were mostly ornamental. In 1871, one third of the total seeds
distributed by the Department’s program went to members of both houses of Congress.203
By 1873, the total share to Congress had dropped to 24.8%. The distribution by type
offers some insight into which seeds were considered more valuable as political capital.
That year Watts reports Congress received 24.8% of the total seed distributed but the
percentages of particular types of seed is important to see: 22% of the total vegetable
seeds and the total wheat seeds; 43.7% of oats; and 83.3% of the tobacco seeds.204 Watts
reports in 1874 that members of the U.S. Congress received 30% of the total seeds
distributed by the Department’s program but, more interestingly, Congress claimed 87%
of tobacco seeds and 98.4% of rye seeds that year. Watts writes the Department of
Agriculture kept extensive records to document distribution, “In the distribution of seeds,
a careful account is kept of everything issued by the Seed Division, with full address of
parties to who sent, and names of varieties as far as practicable . . . .”205 The distribution
total and percentages are skewed for 1875 because of a special allocation by the U.S.
Congress for the Department to purchase and distribute seeds to states in the nation
ravaged by locust.206 By 1876 the amount of seed from the program filtered through
Congress had reached 41.9% of the total seed distributed by the Department’s program.
The largest percentages of seeds that went to Congress were 36.7% of the vegetable seeds
and 91% of tobacco that year.207

203

AR 1871, 10
AR 1873, 7-8
205
AR 1874, 13
206
AR 1875, 15
207
AR 1876, 13
204

82

The Department of Agriculture in the Annual Reports during Watts’ tenure as
commissioner is painted by Watts as a dynamic hub of information coming into it and
going out of most of its divisions.208 A great amount of the information is tied to an army
of unpaid agents or correspondents for the Department. They work as volunteers but they
do receive from the Department of Agriculture copies of the Annual Reports as well as a
portion of the seeds and plants distributed by the Department. In 1875 the Department
had 5000209 correspondents working with its Statistical Division but in 1876 the number
reported by Watts in his Annual Report was down to 3000.210 Watts reports in 1875 the
Department received inquiries from “all parts of the country.”211 Information of all types
was acquired by the Department of Agriculture or donated to it. Correspondence and
inquiries from farmers sharing and requesting information about seeds, plants, best
practices, harmful insects, new diseases of plants and livestock are mentioned throughout
the Annual Reports for Commissioner Watts’ term at the Department of Agriculture. In
the report for 1875 Watts quotes from correspondence sent to the Department to
acknowledge receiving seeds to help replace those lost in the plague of locusts, “The seed
is most acceptable, for it relieves me from a state of hopelessness; but it cannot do me
half as much good as it does to know that we have a Government that cares for her
distressed people.”212
The Reports of the Fourth Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture,
Commissioner William Gates Le Duc, 1877-1880

208

In his report for 1876, Watts notes the following examples of inquiries and other correspondence: In the
Chemical Division: “Inquiries are constantly made from all parts of the country on chemical subjects, most
of them pertaining to agriculture, but many of them asking for analyses of minerals and other substances
which have no connection with it. The former are carefully attended to, while the Department uniformly
declines to investigate any subject which is not of interest to the agriculturalist” (AR 1876, 11); Botanical
Division received “a considerable correspondence . . . from all parts of the country.” Watts reports that
duplicate plants were distributed to colleges and that the “division has been making preparation to exhibit
specimens of all the forest-trees of the country” at the National Centennial Exhibition (AR 1876, 11); and
at the Entomological Division, the “Grasshopper infestation and destruction of crops has prompted large
number of inquiries to the Division.” (AR 1876, 11)
209

AR 1875, 10
AR 1876, 15
211
AR 1875, 7
212
AR 1875, 8
210

83

William G. Le Duc was born in 1823 in Ohio where he grew up and went to school. After
he graduated from Ohio’s Kenyon College in 1848 he studied law and shortly after
passing the bar moved to Minnesota (Territory) in 1850. The biographical note for his
papers held at the Minnesota Historical Society reports that he “worked in railroad and
bridge development” in St Paul. He moved to Hastings, Minnesota seven years later, in
1857, where he “was involved in numerous development enterprises, including the
manufacturing of flour from Minnesota spring wheat.”213 After serving in the Union
army during the Civil War he returned to farming in Minnesota. By most accounts I have
seen, Le Duc struggled with his finances. The Baltimore Sun reported in August 1913
that Le Duc was named in the will of the wife of an old friend and that she, Mrs. Julia
Lorillard Butterfield of New York City, left him $100,000. The newspaper noted, “Le
Duc, 90 years old, of Hastings, Minn., ascends from poverty to a position of comfort.”214
President Rutherford B. Hayes appointed Le Duc to head the Department of Agriculture
in 1877.215
Commissioner Le Duc, like his predecessors, was critical of the seed distribution program
at the Department of Agriculture as ineffective and indiscriminate. He argued that the
Department of Agriculture should be distributing only “rare and uncommon” seeds and
that the Department did not have the authority to freely distribute seeds that could be

213

William Gates Le Duc: An Inventory of His Papers at the Minnesota Historical Society. Manuscripts
Collection, http://www2.mnhs.org/library/findaids/01177.xml
214
“Wealth comes to him at 90: Gen. William Le Duc is left $100,000 in woman’s will,” The Baltimore
(MD) Sun newspaper. August 16, 1913, page 1.
215
The finding aid for the collection of Le Duc’s papers held at the Minnesota Historical Society offers
more insight into his work and life. It suggests that some of the Department of Agriculture’s administrative
records for Le Duc’s term as commissioner may have left the Department with him. The finding aid lists a
significant amount of material relevant to those interested in his years as commissioner at the Department
of Agriculture. They are listed in the inventory of his Papers along with quite a significant amount of
personal, financial, and family records – 61 cubic feet. Among what appear to be records from his term as
commissioner at the Department of Agriculture are four “Agriculture scrapbooks” covering the period of
his commissionership, an undated “volume” titled, “Statistical correspondents,” two “Visiting books”
(Washington, D.C.) for the years 1879-1880 and 1880-1881, and many “Diaries.” William Gates Le Duc:
An Inventory of His Papers at the Minnesota Historical Society. Manuscripts Collection. Catalog ID
number 001731688. URL for the finding aid, http://www2.mnhs.org/library/findaids/01177.xml The
scrapbooks listed in the finding aid seem to be another example of one popular way people documented
their lives in the late 19th Century United States. Ellen Gruber Garvey notes in her 2013 study of 19th
Century scrapbooks, Writing with Scissors: American Scrapbooks from the Civil War to the Harlem
Renaissance, the relationship between scrapbook-keeping and increased access to news via newspapers.
Scrapbooks were used, she argues, to create personal narratives that both documented and re-tell events.

84

purchased from “seedsmen.” Yet, according to one of the in-house historians for the
Department of Agriculture in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Charles H.
Greathouse, and evident in Le Duc’s Annual Reports, the Department of Agriculture
under Le Duc did distribute “common seeds” with a special allocation to distribute seeds
to regions of the country that suffered particularly devastating agricultural losses due to
locust infestation. Le Duc’s department sent “2,333,474 [seed] packages, of which
943,530 went to the district ravaged by grasshoppers.”216 Those states and territories were
Nebraska, Minnesota, Kansas, Iowa, Montana, and the Dakotas. Concerned that the work
of the Department of Agriculture was not sufficiently supported by the U.S. Congress, Le
Duc took the opportunity of his Annual Report to demonstrate that point to them. A
consistent feature of Commissioner Le Duc’s Annual Reports is that he included with his
financial reports information about how appropriations to the Department of Agriculture
compared to other agencies of the federal government. According to Greathouse, he was
also a strong advocate for more land for experimentation and argued for experimental
farms in each State. Le Duc also seemed to recognize the importance of the Department
of Agriculture’s Annual Reports with his insistence there be an index to the Annual
Reports.217
The First Report of Commissioner William Gates Le Duc – 1877
Le Duc’s first Annual Report is date November 15, 1877 and is addressed to the
President of the United States. Its length is consistent with the reports of his predecessors
at 18 pages. Drawing on the statistical reports and estimates produced by the Department,
Le Duc begins his report for 1877 stating that he “anticipate[s] an unusually favorable
harvest” based on information from “correspondents to the department”. While this is
good news he cautions that the country must focus on achieving self sufficiency in terms
of agricultural products. He writes, “we may not hope to take that rank among the
producers of the world to which we are entitled until we have exhausted all efforts to
produce within our own borders, and as a result of our own industry, everything now
imported from other nations, which can be obtained from the careful cultivation of our

216
217

This information is also in Le Duc’s Annual Report for 1877, 17-18.
Greathouse (1898), 15-18.

85

own productive soil, which, extending through so many climes, with its wonderful
diversity, offers unparalleled opportunities for the agricultural industries of a selfsustaining, prosperous, and happy nation.”218 Le Duc grounds his claim in evidence from
that year’s Statistical Report of the Department on imported goods which lists staples
“that can and ought to be produced in the United States.” These include coffee, eggs,
paper-materials, tea, rice, wool, sugar, molasses, and a variety of fruits and nuts totaling,
$236,295,981. He writes that sugar is the highest to “absorb capital; retard industry, and
depress the commercial prosperity of the country.” As we will see in his later Annual
Reports, Le Duc expresses concern that “we are paying to foreign producers nearly a
hundred millions of dollars annually.”219 He notes that because the United States is not
producing its own sugar it is still supporting slave labor in Cuba from whom the U.S.
imports sugar and tobacco in large amounts with no reciprocity. He seems sensitive to the
moral issues of slavery but his central focus is to help move the United States toward a
self-sufficient economy. He imagines future farm production in the United States in this
way: “The great West will purchase the domestic sugars of the Gulf States or California,
and pay in flour, whisky, corn, pork, stock, and mechanical implements. Pennsylvania
will buy, and pay in coal, iron, and petroleum. The New England States will pay in
clothing, shoes, hats, jewelry, cutlery, and other products of their skilled mechanical
labor; and the distribution of the 200,000 tons of sugar over this broad land, every year,
will give active employment to an army of common carriers and middlemen.”220
At the end of his 1877 report on the work of the Department of Agriculture, Le Duc
describes the agricultural challenges faced by farmers in the United States, particularly
the exhaustion of arable soil for farming. In particular, he points to the Mississippi
Delta’s vulnerability to flooding and, in his report, states with great emphasis,
“Individuals, corporations, counties, and States have exhausted themselves in fruitless
efforts to protect these lands from overflow, and to restrain the Mississippi within its
proper boundaries and navigable channel.” He continues by arguing that responsibility
for a remedy rests not at the local level because of the critical importance of agricultural
218

AR 1877, 5
AR 1877, 6
220
AR 1877, 7
219

86

production to the nation, “It is a national work, for a national purpose, and, as it seems to
me, a national duty at this time to take in hand and push to a speedy conclusion the reestablishment of the broken levees, and the making of such provision for their
maintenance as shall permanently secure the valuable industries that will immediately
reoccupy the lands now subject to overflow, and for this reason alone abandoned.”221 It is
interesting to see that as conscious as Le Duc was about labor for sugar crops, he shows
no signs that he is aware of the reports of his predecessors on the prohibitive cost of labor
for tea cultivation, harvesting, and production.222
In contrast to earlier commissioners’ reporting style, Le Duc’s approach was systematic
and straightforward. He summarizes and offers comments on the reports submitted to him
by the heads of the divisions at the Department. He begins by reviewing and highlighting
the important work of the Superintendent of Gardens and Grounds, which Le Duc refers
to as, The Division of Horticulture and Arboriculture. He writes that it “is one of the most
important of the component branches of the department, and contributes materially to the
benefits which the public derive from its workings. The laying out of the grounds, the
establishment of an extended arboretum, and the cultivation of exotic plants have
progressed as the means and the land within the control of the department have allowed.
The propagation of plants for distribution is exclusively confined to those species and
varieties which are of economic value, those of merely ornamental interest being
increased only to the extent necessary for the decoration of the grounds.223 Le Duc also
discusses the work of the Department of Agriculture on “exotic plants” as an especially
important area of plant research because of the economic value of these plants, each of
which he describes as essential to the self-sufficiency in agricultural production To this
end, Le Duc outlined as a goal for the Department:

221

AR 1877, 7-8
AR 1877, 9
223
AR 1877, 9. The Division of Horticulture and Arboriculture is a name that I had not previously seen in
the annual reports of the Department of Agriculture nor in any organizational information about the
structure of the Department. It is one of a number of examples of the many variations in names and naming
of the divisions at the Department of Agriculture in the annual reports and in historical accounts of the
agency.
222

87

The collection of economic exotic plants also awaits completion. As it now
stands, it is the most complete of its kind in the country, containing many plants
that cannot be duplicated here. It exhibits the various food, fiber, varnish, gum,
and medicine yielding plants of note, and furnishes material for physiological,
pharmaceutical, historical, and other educational purposes, to those who desire
such assistance.
Collections for agricultural institutions are furnished when desired, so far as
duplicates can be made available, and of such species as are considered worthy of
introductory trial. With a view to their commercial value in this country, extensive
numbers are propagated and distributed in localities where it is presumed they
will succeed.224
The collection of indigenous and foreign trees by the arboretum on the grounds of the
Department of Agriculture under Commissioner Le Duc is another example of the
research conducted at the Department.
One sees in Le Duc’s report narrative some of the descriptive and organizing
inconsistencies of the Annual Report for 1877 as a whole. The table of contents lists
reports of the commissioner, Superintendent of the Gardens and Grounds, the Chemist,
the Entomologist and Curator of the Museum, and the Statistician. Yet, Le Duc reports in
his narrative on the work of the Botanical Division (established at the Department in
1868). No explanation is offered for why there is no official report from the head of the
Division, George Vasey who served as the second Chief Botanist from 1872 to 1893.225 It
is especially curious given the importance Le Duc attaches to the work of the Division.
He reports that the Botanical Division’s work to build an herbarium is progressing and its
further development is a priority. Most of the specimens come to the herbarium via
government “scientific surveys” though he notes that the Department of Agriculture did
buy “a collection of some 600 species of the plants of Southern California and
Arizona.”226 He also reports that the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876 was
an opportunity for the Department to acquire specimens from other exhibitors who, in
turn, were quite interested in taking home examples of “native forest woods” exhibited in
224

AR 1877, 9.
According to a short biography by the USDA, Vasey trained as a medical doctor, was a member of John
Wesley Powell’s Colorado expedition in 1868, and he was a founding member of the Illinois Natural
History Survey. http://www.usna.usda.gov/Education/Vasey.pdf
226
AR 1877, 11
225

88

the display by the United States. He lists foreign institutions that received forest wood
specimens. These included the Royal Botanic Garden at Kew (England); the Imperial
Botanic Garden at St. Petersburg (Russia); the National Museum of Rio de Janeiro in
Brazil; the Colonial Museum in Melbourne, Australia; the “Tokio Museum, Tokio
Japan;” the Adelaide Museum in South Australia; and the Portuguese and Spanish
governments. Samples also went to institutions in the United States including Harvard
University; St Louis Academy of Sciences; Yale Scientific School; Cornell University;
Illinois Industrial University; the Park Commission of Baltimore; Wesleyan University in
Bloomington, Illinois; a professor of botany at Yale University, a normal school in
Pennsylvania, as well as “several packages to individuals.”227
Le Duc reports that the Entomological Division at the Department of Agriculture found
“no new insects especially injurious to vegetation” during the year. The insect collection
on display at the Department grew with the “addition of two or three small collections,
principally from the West.” The Division received inquiries from “foreign government
and private individuals in foreign lands” about several insects especially destructive to
grapes and potato crops. He also reports that work began on “cataloguing the specimens”
from the Centennial Exhibition. There had previously not been a catalogue but Le Duc
notes that with the increase in the size of the collection on display in the museum, “a
catalogue becomes a necessity.”228
The work of the Department’s Chemical Division included analysis of bat guano from the
southern United States, the chemical composition of American and Sicilian sumac, and,
the ever-important search for a reliable source for domestic sugar production, the sugar
content of beets.
Le Duc stated that the “demand for information” including the crop estimates from the
Department’s Statistical Division, by “members of Congress, boards of trade, agriculture,
and rural and technical writers has been met as fully as possible with this lack of

227
228

AR 1877, 1
AR 1877, 11-12

89

facilities.”229 But, as we see in Le Duc’s summary, the work of the Statistical Division
was on track:
1st. The record and tabulation of foreign and domestic statistics of agriculture,
derived from national and State departments and the various grades of rural
societies and experimental schools.
2d. The collection of statistics of distribution of the products of agriculture, the
current price of such products in primary markets, and the cost of transportation
and exchange.
3d. Statistical analysis of such information and deductions illustrative of the
causes or change in production, its economic tendencies, and comparative profits.
4th. An original crop-reporting system, including a corps of correspondents or
reporters in the principal counties.230
The Department of Agriculture received special funding to distribute seeds to areas of the
country where crops were devastated by locusts and grasshoppers. The plague of insects
was especially concentrated in the Plain States and did millions of dollars of damage to
crops between 1873 and 1877. The insects were finally wiped out by a snowstorm in the
spring of 1877.231 Le Duc’s report on that effort offers some insight into how the
Department understood (or perhaps, represented) the value of its work, some background
on the scourge, and the challenges still ahead for farmers and scientists alike and is worth
quoting at length:
The distribution of a miscellaneous assortment of seeds to the farmers on the
frontier, whose crops were destroyed by the locust or grasshopper, was of the
greatest benefit to those poor and destitute people, who were thus enabled to
remain on their farms, and to secure enough of the fruits of the earth to eke out a
living until the terrible scourge had passed away, or another season had arrived
with better hopes of successful culture. In the planting of trees, and the
consequent increase of insectivorous birds, as well as in the ingenious devices
which have been adopted by the farmers of Minnesota and Kansas the past year,
229

AR 1877, 15
AR 1877, 14
231
“In the summer of 1877, the grasshoppers left just as quickly as they had arrived. An April snowstorm
damaged many of their eggs, which encouraged farmers to redouble their efforts to destroy the
grasshoppers. The surviving grasshopper eggs hatched, but by August, the grasshoppers had flown away.
Many attributed the end of the grasshopper plague to divine intervention, since Governor Pillsbury had
proclaimed April 26 a day of prayer, after receiving many requests to do so.” Grasshopper Plagues, 1873–
1877. Created by R.L. Cartwright for MNOPEDIA (http://www.mnopedia.org/event/grasshopper-plagues1873-1877) a web-based project of the Minnesota Historical Society. Last modified: April 29, 2015
230

90

the most efficient means will be found of keeping under control a pest which has
been more terrible than “an army with banners" since history has had a record.
Perhaps the earliest account of any appearance of the grasshopper west of the
coasts of Europe or Africa is that given in the History of Jamaica, by Sir Hans
Sloane, in which a life-size drawing is given of the locust or grasshopper that fell
on the deck of a vessel many leagues from land. The insect here described was of
a species now known as the Barbary locust, and was larger than that which has
ruined so many of the farmers of the West during the past five years, and the
ravages of which, we may expect, will be repeated from time to time until the
knowledge and ingenuity of our people shall master the secret of their birth and
habits, and control the breeding-grounds, or destroy the predaceous hordes before
they can have time to work fatal mischief to the crops.232
As we have seen, the distribution of seeds was a major activity of the Department of
Agriculture stemming directly from its mission found in the Organic Act that established
the Department in 1862. Le Duc, for his part, continued the seed distribution work but, as
we see in this his first report, expresses concern about the quality and types of seeds
distributed by the Department. He is also critical of the haphazard nature of distribution.
He argues for a more strategic approach for seed distribution, one that stops sending out
common vegetable and flower seeds, and matches seeds to regions where they can be
grown. He is concerned that seeds are sent to any applicant without proof they have the
knowledge and resources to use them effectively. The results, he writes, range from
misuse of government resources to outright “fraud” and he suggests the Department
needs to develop policies that get “new and valuable and improved varieties of seeds” to
farmers capable of running and recording experiments and sending the results back to the
Department. He wants to see the distribution of seeds from the Department of Agriculture
go to “agricultural associations and colleges and permanent correspondents and agents of
the department, and to such individuals as were known to be agriculturalists.”233 It is not
clear from the Annual Reports that Le Duc was successful in changing the seed
distribution strategy at the Department. In fact, Greathouse suggests there were very few
changes to the seed distribution program under Le Duc’s term as commissioner and the

232
233

AR 1877, 16
AR 1877, 18

91

seed distribution charts in the remaining Annual Reports by Le Duc show no obvious
changes.234
Finally, Le Duc draws the attention of the U.S. Congress to what he sees as serious and
critical inequities in terms of money appropriated for the Department of Agriculture. He
appeals to Congress with the following:
It is shown by a recent statement made from the records of the Treasury
Department that the total expenditures of the Department of Agriculture from
1839 to 1877, inclusive, amount to $3,366,114.37. From this amount should be
deducted $100,000 appropriated in 1867 for the purpose of enabling the
Commissioner of Agriculture to erect a department building, and the further sum
of $50,000 appropriated for the printing of the Annual Reports of the department
for the years 1872 and 1873, and erroneously charged to the current annual
expenses of the department for those years. Deducting these two items from the
above amount, and it leaves the sum of $3,210,114.37 as the aggregate amount
appropriated during the existence of the government for the promotion of
agriculture. The utter insignificance of this sum becomes apparent when
compared with the amounts appropriated for the maintenance of other
departments of the general government…. When it is remembered that the last
census established the fact that one-half the population of the United States is
either directly engaged in agricultural pursuits, or is wholly dependent upon them
for support, this sum becomes still more insignificant as an appropriation for
fostering and promoting so vast an interest.235
To support his argument, he includes a chart with the following funding information for
1877: Treasury was almost $15 million, War Department $7.3 million, Postal Service
$5.9 million (Post Office Department was $568 thousand), Indian Affairs $5.1 million,
Department of State $1.2 million, Justice Department $386 thousand, and Department of
Agriculture $175 thousand.236 The expenditures of the Department for the fiscal year
1877 show salaries at approximately 33% of the total budget, the collections of statistics
at nearly 5%, the purchase and distribution of seeds at nearly 32%, Experimental Garden
2.45%, Museum and Herbarium just under 1%, the Library and Laboratory each just shy
of .5%, printing and binding 4.4%, postage just shy of 2%.237
234

Greathouse (1898), 16
AR 1877, 20-21
236
AR1877, 21
237
AR 1877, 20
235

92

Le Duc concludes his first report with a plea to the U.S. Congress to fund work on a
“general and complete index to the thirty-seven volumes of the Annual Reports of
Agriculture” from its time at the Patent Office (1838 and 1841-1861) continuing as a
department from 1862 to 1876.238
The Reports for the Remaining Years of Le Duc’s Term as Commissioner, 18781880
The beginning of Le Duc’s 1878 report as Commissioner of the Department of
Agriculture reflects his pride in the success and progress of agricultural production in the
United States noting how the “bountiful yield of nearly all of the diversified objects of
our agriculture” is in stark “contrast of condition of our people with a portion of the
inhabitants of the great Chinese Empire, where hundreds of thousands have perished
miserably because of the failure . . . of the rice crop.”239 That same pride and optimism is
found in his report for 1880, “During the four years of your administration now drawing
to a close our farmers have rejoiced in the realization of higher rewards for agricultural
labor than during any other continuous four years in our history. They have been years of
exceptionally good crops of all the different staples grown either for home consumption
or export; and as the European nations to whom we look for a market have during the
same period failed, from disastrous seasons, to harvest the usual quantity of farm
products, a steady demand at good prices has existed for our entire surplus of wheat,
corn, cotton, meats, and dairy products.”240

238

AR 1877, 22
AR 1878, 5. It worth noting that Le Duc’s report for 1878, his second, is longer than others both in its
formal narrative which is 39 pages but also because he includes more than 30 pages of tables of
information on the import, export, consumption, tariffs, and cost of several crops he argues need to be
cultivated and produced domestically. These include tea, coffee, and various sources of and potential
sources of sugar. He orients his reader to the section and notes the source of some of the information is
from outside the Department. (AR 1878, 41-76) Also attached to his report is an appendix which offers
detailed information on the productive outcome of crop seeds distributed by the Department. These include
wheat, corn, garden and flower seeds, oats, rye, barley, potatoes, buckwheat, cotton, amber sorghum, sugar
beets, fruits, forest tree seeds and shrubs, tobacco, and tea. Finally, Le Duc prepared a 5-page section
called, “Prefatory to Reports of Heads and Divisions.” The section serves as a supplement and discusses
information from the divisions that because of the cycle of funding from Congress and the print schedule
for the annual reports reflects work done between the time of the official division reports and publication.
Topics include sugar research and tannin sources and tanning. (AR 1878, 91-95)
240
AR 1880, 5
239

93

Le Duc points to the intricate networks woven to make up the economy of agriculture in
the United States, “These unprecedented crops . . . have afforded constant and profitable
occupation not only to the farmers but to the manufacturing and commercial classes, as
well as to the great transportation companies whose trains and fleets have had
uninterrupted and remunerative employment.”241 He suggests that the “unusually
prosperous condition” of agriculture in this country is evidence the United States is “preeminently the agricultural country of the world.” He suggests that this information should
be obvious to all who look at the reports of the Department and wonders why its work is
not more vigorously supported, “The casual readers and the most indifferent student of
statistics cannot but be struck with the large proportion that agricultural products . . . bear
to the total exports of the United States; and every man of intelligence in pondering the
fact must stand amazed that the agricultural interests of the country have not received
more attention in State and national legislation.”242 Though not a new area of emphasis
for the commissioners of the Department, Le Duc does a good job of utilizing the
statistical work of the Department to make his case.
Identifying alternate and economical sources of sugar was a recurring theme and clear
priority for Le Duc during his term as commissioner. These included sugar beets,
sorghum, and maize. He opens the report for 1879 with a proclamation about sugar
research and predicts the work of the Department of Agriculture in this area will result in
the successful cultivation and production of sugar “one of the most important, expensive,
and indisputable requisites of modern life” from various sources other than cane in this
country and “it can be produced in quantities sufficient to meet any demand” and can be
grown profitably by both large and small farming operations, “Reporting progress as the
result of the efforts of this department in this direction, it is not too much to say that the
success attending the manufacture of cane-sugar from sorghum and maize will mark the
year 1879 as an important epoch in the agricultural progress of our people.” He is
especially buoyed by “a specimen of well granulated sugar made from sorghum, and
exhibited at the Minnesota State Fair.” He also notes that as far as he is aware the very

241
242

AR 1880, 5
AR 1880, 6

94

“first stalks of sorghum ever grown in this country . . . were planted by the Curator of the
Botanical Gardens. This seed was obtained from Paris, as was also the seed which the
Agricultural Department first distributed in the year 1856.” These early experiments with
sorghum yielded limited results until the Division of Chemistry at the Department began
experiments in 1877. Le Duc reports, “This inquiry has been patiently and carefully
followed from the season of 1877 to 1879, and the results have been eminently
satisfactory…. It is sufficient to say in this place that the value of the work done during
the past year by this division can not be overestimated.”243
In 1878 Le Duc reports that the Department of Agriculture added pearl millet and
teasinte, as well as new types of sugar cane to its investigation for alternative sources of
sugar. He writes in his Annual Report that he was not yet successful in acquiring a
“considerable quantity” of “a new variety” of sugar cane seed from “Tampico” but
reports receipt of “some of the best varieties” from Japan sent by “our correspondent”
there. Cane sugar seeds were also received from the Sandwich Islands and Brazil thanks
to “Dr. T.G. Richardson of the State University of Louisiana.”244 The teasinte seeds were
acquired from a company in Paris, France. Le Duc also reports that he “was compelled to
seek the aid of farmers in the vicinity of the city [the District of Columbia]” to find land
to run sugar experiments because the Department had insufficient land to run them.245
The section of Le Duc’s 1879 report on the work of the various divisions at the
Department provides a number of examples of the global reach of the Department in
terms of information acquisition and sharing. The Entomology Division, he reports, sent
representatives from the Department going out into the field and, too, employed local
243

AR 1879, 5-7
AR 1878, 7. A quick search for Dr. Richardson finds some of his correspondence in the History of New
Orleans collection at the LSU Special Collections. He was a medical doctor in New Orleans.
245
AR 1880, 8. Teasine or teosinte is “a wild grass in the Poaceae family that includes the species Zea
mays (in addition to other wild grass species: Z. diploperennis, Z. perennis, and Z. luxurians.). Z.
mays encompasses several subspecies: ssp. huehuetenangensis, ssp. mexicana, ssp. parviglumis and
others. Zea mays ssp. parviglumis is most likely the ancestor of maize (Zea mays ssp. mays). Teosinte and
maize are different subspecies of the species Zea mays, but maize, as a result of domestication, has been
selected by humans over thousands of years to have more kernels, bigger cobs, more rows of kernels, and
exposed kernels that are more edible.” From website for the Paleontological Research Institution in Ithaca
(NY), http://maize.teacherfriendlyguide.org/index.php/what-is-maize/what-is-teosinte
244

95

people in its investigation of the plague of locusts that affected a broad section of the
country, “Whenever, during the year, word has been received of any insect irruption of
particular interest, an assistant has been sent to the spot to make observations, or a local
observer has been employed, to insure a thorough investigation of causes and a more
intelligent suggestion of remedies.”246 Le Duc’s discussion of progress in silk culture
offers insight into how the work of the Entomology Division was conducted and its
scope, “During the latter part of last winter, twenty ounces of imported silkworm eggs,
the majority from Japan, and the rest purchased from reliable French dealers, were
distributed among some fifty persons desirous of commencing silk culture. The reports so
far received seem to demonstrate, beyond a doubt, the possibility of the successful culture
of silk in almost every part of the country. Unskilled persons have, with the help and
advice of the department, in nearly every instance brought a large proportion of the
worms successfully to the spinning point.”247
Le Duc also takes the opportunity to alert the President and the U.S. Congress to the
challenges that an increased workload pose to staff at the Department of Agriculture and
how that affects the ability of the Department to fulfill its mission, “The correspondence
of this division has increased greatly during the past six months, and it is entirely beyond
the power of the clerical force of the division to give that prompt attention to inquiries
upon the subject of insects injurious to agriculture that come from all parts of the
country.”248
The Statistical Division, Le Duc reports in 1879, also experienced “a very large and
rapidly increasing correspondence, both foreign and domestic.” The number of
correspondents has reached more than 4000 who “have been selected with an eye to their
intelligence, experience, and general fitness for the duties which devolve upon them.
Most of their communications consist of replies to queries propounded by the
department.” It is worth quoting at length his description of what happens next:

246

AR 1879, 15
AR 1879, 14
248
AR 1879, 14
247

96

These are first verified by the statistician by comparison with the most reliable
data attainable from other sources, then classified and arranged in the tabulated
form which the numerous accompanying tables present. Those relating to the
growing crops are first compiled for issue in the Monthly Bulletin of the
department. This is prepared by this division and widely disseminated through the
mails and through the daily and weekly press, which are furnished with early
copies. These crop reports, and, indeed, all the statistics of this department have
become necessary not only to the producing agriculturists, but also to the
middlemen and consumers, and under the untiring and careful supervision of the
statistician and his painstaking assistants, are becoming noted for that accuracy
which should characterize all statistical work. The labor involved is not only
arduous, but of an intricate character. It requires discretion, judgment, and
experience. It cannot be intelligently performed by novices, nor will it do to
intrust [sic] it to those of careless or negligent habits, because slight errors in the
calculations might prove injurious to some of the most important interests in the
country. A liberal increase in the force of this division is very desirable. Each
addition to the list of correspondents adds to the labor of this division and also
augments the value of the crop reports in accuracy and reliability.249
Le Duc reports in 1879 that the Department will begin to calculate the value of labor in
addition to its regular categories of statistical analysis and estimates because labor is, he
argues, a critical factor in evaluating agricultural production, “As the value of farm lands
is largely dependent on the price of labor for their productive cultivation, the average
wages of labor becomes an important factor in successful agriculture as well as in the
present and prospective money value of farms. It is clear that the taxes on an
unproductive farm would soon consume its value. As production is impossible without
labor, the cost of the latter becomes a vital point with the agriculturist.”250 Le Duc offers
this interpretation of the “tables” of the Statistical Division at the Department of
Agriculture and discusses the value of the information on farm labor they contain:
His tables afford much general information useful to the thoughtful farmer in the
handling and marketing of his crops. The average-price table, showing the
difference in value between the market nearest his farm and in New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Boston, acquaints him with the average cost of
transportation, insurance, and commission from the point of production to that of
consumption. The wages table is very instructive. It shows that ordinary farmlabor commands most in New England, where education is universal, and the
laborers are consequently intelligent. This advance may be considered a premium
249
250

AR 1879, 16
AR 1879, 16

97

on intelligence. In the South and West, while farm-labor is lower, being generally
uneducated, that of the intelligent mechanic is considerably higher than it is in
New England. This again may be considered a premium on educated labor where
that commodity is scarce. A careful examination of the wage-tables and of the
price-list of breadstuff and provisions in the different sections of the country will
enable laborers to determine where toil is best rewarded, after deducting the cost
of subsistence.251
Le Duc’s reports on the work of the Botanical Division for 1879 and 1880 offer insight of
how its work is conducted and why it is important in his discussion of botanical
specimens received by the Department via foreign exchange. In 1879 Le Duc writes,
are arranged, verified, and classified by the botanist of this division; duplicates are
distributed to State agricultural colleges and other institutions of learning . . . .
This botanical collection has also a special scientific value. It is the custom of all
enlightened countries to collect at government centers specimens of the
productions of the country . . . . These museums and herbariums bring together a
vast mass of material which men of science investigate and classify, and add to
the stock of human knowledge.
It is hardly necessary to say that it is the duty of the government to advance the
interests of education and science; and assuredly there is no other department of
the government where botanical science can be more appropriately fostered and
cared for than the Department of Agriculture. Here is the place where information
respecting every vegetable production of our vast country should be obtainable.
Among the thousands of visitors to the national capital are those who are
interested in education and science, who will gladly avail themselves of the
opportunity here offered to examine productions of the entire country and foreign
states.”252
With a tip of his hat to the possibilities of cooperation between the land-grant colleges
and the Department of Agriculture, Le Duc writes that he sees a role for the Department
in agricultural education in colleges by the provision of specimens – domestic and
foreign.253
The Library at the Department of Agriculture gets only a brief mention in Le Duc’s
report for 1880. He urges the U.S. Congress to allocate more funds to support the
development of the Library and the acquisition of “books and periodical literature
251

AR 1879, 18
AR 1879, 19
253
AR 1879, 20
252

98

necessary to the scientists of various divisions, to say nothing of the many valuable works
which, properly found on our shelves, would be interesting to the general reader.” The
collection of “7,000-8,000 volumes,” he writes, needs to be more carefully catalogued
and it should be expanded to “contain many more, and it should especially embrace every
book that has ever been published on agriculture.”254
The distribution of seeds by the Department is a constant concern of Le Duc’s. In his
report for 1879, Le Duc gives his readers a short description of the work involved with
seed distribution: “Through the four thousand regular correspondents and through
information obtained from other citizens of the different counties, as well as from the
prize lists and reports of county and State fairs, lists of the best farmers, numbering at the
present time from ten to twenty in each county, regardless of political faith or anything
else but their standing as farmers, have been obtained and entered in our books, and to
some of these individuals, as well as to the agricultural societies in those counties, new
and valuable seeds adapted to the localities are sent for experimental purposes.”255
In his final report for 1880, he again expresses concern about the equity and effectiveness
of how seeds are allocated for distribution. He offers his readers in Congress a summary
of distribution that shows a bit less than half of the total seeds for distribution in 1879
going to members of Congress – the Senate and the House – 759,679 of the total
1,581,253 packages. Agricultural societies received 17,444, statistical correspondents of
the Department received 139,729, granges got 355,452, “special farmers” 127,644, and
“miscellaneous applicants” 181,305.256
Le Duc’s term as Commissioner was also marked by challenges with diseases of cattle
and other animals for which the Department of Agriculture received a special
appropriation of $10,000 in 1878. He reports on the economic effect this has on exports
of swine in 1879, “Millions of dollars are involved in this trade, but it is not alone the
heavy losses annually sustained by our farmers that should claim our attention in a
consideration of the subject. The fact of the existence of a terribly destructive disease
254

AR 1880, 33
AR 1880, 21
256
AR 1880, 19
255

99

among the swine of this country has already reached many European markets, and our
salt and smoked meats have been prohibited entry and sale at ports where the business
has heretofore been remunerative.”257
Le Duc ends his Annual Report for 1879 with a list for the U.S. Congress on the
“immediate necessities of the department.” He points to several areas that need to be
addressed in order for the work of the Department of Agriculture to continue to succeed
and grow:
1. A lab properly outfitted with equipment and people.
2. 1000 acres for an experimental farm; 5 experimental stations in different regions
of the country, “one in California, one in the interior of the continent . . . , one in
Texas, one in Florida, and one in New York above the latitude of Albany.”
3. More money for the grounds and gardens . . . at least $15,000 total
4. More money for the museum . . . at least $5000
5. Renewed support at $10,000 for research on animal disease
6. Renewed support for research on harmful insects . . . at least $10,000
7. $6,000 more for forestry work258
The research work of the Department of Agriculture was not the only area that needed
more attention and funding from the U.S. Congress according to Le Duc. In his report for
1880, he offers evidence of the inadequate working conditions for some people at the
Department. He writes specifically about the working conditions in the folding room at
the Department. He reports on the cramped basement space and notes these poor
conditions are not limited to the folding room, “As in the seed division the air here is
exceedingly foul and unwholesome.” He argues for a new building as the only way to
adequately address the issues noting, “No system of ventilation can sufficiently remove
the impurities of the atmosphere in so confined a space contiguous to boilers and
machinery.”259
The Reports of the Fifth Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture,
Commissioner George B. Loring, 1881-1884
257

AR 1879, 24
AR 1879, 28-29
259
AR 1880, 20-21
258

100

Dr. George B. Loring served as the fifth Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture.
He was appointed in 1881 by President James A. Garfield. Loring grew up in
Massachusetts and attended Harvard College (1838) and Harvard Medical School (1842).
Loring was trained as a physician and was appointed postmaster for Salem,
Massachusetts from 1853-1857; he served in the Massachusetts House of Representatives
from 1866-1868, the Massachusetts Senate from 1873-1877, and the United States House
of Representatives from 1877-1881. Loring left the United States Congress to focus on
“scientific farming and politics,” according to Greathouse. The biographical note for
Loring’s papers held at the Peabody Essex Museum’s Phillips Library list him as the
founder and president of the New England Agricultural Society in 1864 and he served as
the Society’s president until 1890 just one year before his death in 1891.260 Loring was an
active member of the Society representing its members at national meetings and
conventions where he crossed paths with earlier commissioners of the Department.261
The First Reports of Commissioner George B. Loring, 1881 and 1882
The Department’s Annual Reports for 1881 and 1882 were published in one volume,
which included a report from the commissioner for 1881 and another for 1882. However,
the volume contained only one set of reports of the divisions or bureaus of the
Department. These included the Entomologist, Gardens and Grounds, the Botanist, the
Chemist, and the Statistician. The Reports of the Commissioner of the Department appear
at the front of the volume for 1881 (dated November 25, 1881) and at the end of the
volume for 1882 (dated November 20, 1882). The commissioner’s report for 1881 and
his report for 1882 are listed in the Table of Contents for the volume as “Report of the

260

Greathouse, 16. Biographical information is from Info from the biographical notes for his papers held at
the Peabody Essex Museum’s Phillips Library Digital Collections, George Baily Loring (1817-1891)
[Bailey or Baily?] Papers http://phillipslibrarycollections.pem.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15928coll1/id/2882
261
See for example, The Miscellaneous Documents of the Senate of the United States for the Second
Session of the Forty-Second Congress (1872) report on and proceedings of the National Agricultural
Convention called by Commissioner Watts in 1872 and held in Washington, DC to discuss the relationship
between the agricultural colleges, state agencies and societies, and the Department of Agriculture. The
National Convention brought together, at the invitation of Commissioner Watts, representatives of the
agricultural colleges, State agricultural societies and boards of agriculture, and State horticultural societies.
https://books.google.com/books?id=SKgFAAAAQAAJ

101

Commissioner Page 5, 677.”262 Loring’s introductory paragraphs to his first report as
Commissioner of the Department contain the first evidence I see in the reports of
commissioners of planning at the Department. Loring writes, “When I entered upon my
duties . . . I found the work for the season, both regular and special, elaborately laid out
by my predecessor. Provision had been made for investigating the agricultural condition
of the Pacific coast; for continuing the work on the artesian well in Colorado; for
proceeding with the experiment in the cultivation of the tea plant; for concluding the
investigation into the manufacture of sugar from sorghum; for observations on the
existence of pleuro-pneumonia and other contagious diseases of animals both in this
country and in those English ports to which American cattle are exported; for continued
examinations in to the necessities and opportunities of American forestry; for tests of
textile fibers, both animal and vegetable; for a scientific investigation of the habits of
insects injurious to vegetation and of the best methods of destroying them; and for the
usual work of the various divisions of the department.”263 And, later in his introduction,
Loring is careful to note he “endeavored to conduct all experiments . . . in the spirit of an
investigator and not in the spirit of an advocate.”264
One gets the impression from his reports that Commissioner Loring was an active
administrator at the Department of Agriculture. He reports in several places that he sent
workers from the Department on what sound like fact-finding trips. These included
Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds William Saunders whom he sent to South
Carolina to gain a firsthand account of experiments with the cultivation of tea plants.265
Loring reports that he arranged for “a thoroughly scientific and practical commission,
appointed with great care and provided with instructions obtained from Major Powell . . .
.”266 to explore, with special funding from the U.S. Congress, the feasibility of an artesian
well in Colorado.267 Loring also reports that he also sent a “veterinary surgeon” to
England to consult with them about cattle diseases and “exact condition of American
262

AR 1881-1882, 3
AR 1881, 5
264
AR 1881, 5
265
AR 1881, 6
266
AR 1881, 6
267
AR 1881, 16-17
263

102

cattle landed in” British markets.268 We learn from Loring’s report for 1881 that he, too,
travelled outside of Washington, D.C. to gather information on the condition of
agriculture in the country. He writes that he “considers it my duty to visit various
important agricultural sections of the country where I could not only witness the
exhibited results of the farmers' industry, but could also obtain an opinion of the general
condition of agriculture and the popular expectations of the department. I have been
especially desirous of ascertaining the sources whence the department obtained its
statistics and crop returns, and the estimate put upon these reports by those interested in
them. He visited several states to see firsthand how the Department’s seed distribution
was working. He reports, “For these observations, I have visited New England, Illinois,
Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Virginia, South Carolina, Maryland, and Georgia.”269 Loring’s
reports indicate that he considered these trips a success, “I have found the agricultural
mind of the country active in its desire to obtain the best knowledge, and to examine and
test all the best methods; and I have been especially impressed with the vast opportunities
which this department possesses for aiding the development of our vast resources, and for
accumulating and distributing information up on the great cluster of industries upon the
successful prosecution of which the prosperity and power of our country depends.”270
Loring reports that he also used his office to bring agriculturalists together in what he
called “delegate conventions, composed of representatives of the State societies and the
colleges founded on the land-grant of Congress, to meet in Washington in January next,
and have assigned to each convention one of the following topics . . . : Agricultural
education; animal husbandry; Horticulture; Cereals and Grasses.”271 Loring also called
together “cotton planters” and notes in his report that he attended an exhibit on southern
agriculture and was quite impressed . . . enough so that he requested that exhibiters send
their material to the Department “for proper arrangement and public observation.”272
In 1882, according to Greathouse, Loring was able to persuade Congress to increase its
appropriation to $80,000 for statistical work at the Department of Agriculture. Loring
268

AR 1881, 6
AR 1881, 6.
270
AR 1881, 6-7
271
AR 1881, 7
272
AR 1881, 8
269

103

writes in his report for 1882, “The design is by establishing a permanent system of
efficient and prompt collection of current statistics to be able to present instantly and
accurately the current changes in crop areas and conditions and in the production of
breadstuffs, meats, industrial products, and the results of agricultural labor.” However, if
we look at the paragraph just before it we learn even more about the impact of the
increased funding from Congress, “A plan for completing and perfecting the system of
crop-reporting, for which appropriation was made at the last session of Congress, has
been put into operation, with initiatory results which promise success. It includes the
appointment of State statistical agents, each at the head of a corps of reliable and
judicious correspondents, who make simultaneous return, on the first of each month, both
to the agent and the department. The agent is further charged with any special
investigation that may from time to time be required, and with the collection of results of
local experiment, and any valuable facts illustrating the progress of agriculture.”273 The
additional allocation allowed the Department to expand and refine its statistical work.
In his report for 1882, we see evidence of increased awareness by the Department of
Agriculture of international agricultural statistics. Loring clearly wants the Statistical
Division of the Department to identify, collect, and distribute agricultural information
about U.S. exports and foreign interest in agricultural goods of the United States. This is
another example of the scope and geographical reach of the work of the Department
expanding during Loring’s term. He writes in his Annual Report, “In view of the
influence of foreign demand on prices, and of the great volume of exportation of certain
products, notably of grain and “provisions,” it has been deemed advisable, necessary
even, that an effort should be made to give early information to American farmers of the
prospective requirements of the foreign trade.”274 Loring reports that to meet this need,
“an agency has been establish in Europe…with headquarters at London, at the office of
the consul-general.” The agent assigned to that office reported, according to Loring, that
he received “the co-operation of officers of the State Department and our diplomatic
service. Much is expected of this agency in the future in accurate reports of crop

273
274

AR 1882, 689
AR 1882, 667

104

prospects, valuable statistical exchanges, and miscellaneous information of value to this
department and the agriculture of the country.”275
Loring concludes his introduction noting the Department fulfilled a request from the U.S.
Congress to collect, and publish monthly, statistical information on freight rates: “The
changes of rates on principal agricultural products and farmers’ supplies have been given
for all the through east and west trunk lines, the Pacific roads, and great north and south
railway systems, and lake, river, and coast lines of steamers. Not only the through rates,
but an immense array of local rates for groups of minor points in all parts of the country,
have been accurately presented. Special rates for certain products sent to various points,
including live stock, cotton, rice, &c., have been promptly published for the information
of farmers who wish to seek the best markets and forward their products with an
intelligent view of the cost of shipment.”276 This addition to the mandate by Congress for
the Department of Agriculture is an example of an ability to both identify and adjust to
changing needs in terms of what counts as relevant information for agricultural
production.
The Reports for the Remaining Years of Loring’s Term as Commissioner, 18831884
Loring opens his report for 1883 with the assertion that he plans to continue to cultivate
strong relationships between the Department of Agriculture in Washington, D.C. and
agricultural “associations and institutions” around the country. He also states explicitly
that he will bring the knowledge and experience those organizations have to bear on the
work of the Department of Agriculture by both soliciting information from them and
accepting information they send to the Department. Loring praises the level of
engagement from these stakeholders, “To every call of the Department for information
and advice, the colleges and societies have responded promptly and liberally.”277 He
reports that representatives of many of those organizations travelled to Washington, D.C.
at the request of the Department to discuss the condition of agriculture and agricultural
275

AR 1882, 667
AR 1882, 667
277
AR 1883, 3
276

105

production, and to exchange information. He reports they “presented a large amount of
valuable information upon the practical questions of agriculture, and the various methods
of imparting agricultural instruction, and of improving the social condition of the
American farmers, —a carefully prepared and elaborate report of which has been issued
by the Department.”278 Loring’s introductory remarks to this Annual Report for 1883 also
refer to the continued need to collect from “competent agents, who have furnished from
actual observation and from extensive correspondence a vast amount of interesting and
useful facts, from which it is believed important conclusions may ultimately be
drawn.”279
Loring offers only a few sentences for his introductory remarks in his last report, 1884.
He notes that the amount of work at the Department of Agriculture has grown and that
most of that increase is in the work of the Statistical Division. He reports on the newly
established (in 1883) representative of the Department in London responsible for
collecting agricultural statistics of European nations and mentions the “ten thousand
correspondents . . . in this country, who are constantly furnishing the materials for the
statistical estimates of the Bureau.”280 Loring expands on this later in the section of his
report about the work of the Statistical Division:
The rapidity of agricultural progress and the local irregularities of its movement
tend to increase its difficulty and diminish its accuracy; on the other hand, a
growing public appreciation of its importance is a means of higher efficiency, as
well as its surest guarantee.
The field work of this branch of the department service is obviously a matter of
observation, comparison, and estimate, and not an actual count of a census. The
swift changes of the alternating seasons must be summed up with instant clarity;
their effects on ultimate production must be discounted with practicable closeness
before the crops are matured. An accurate report of a harvest as soon as it is
gathered is stale news for the public or interested buyers. It is the aim of the
Statistician to keep abreast of the expectations of the day in instantaneous crop
reporting. There are nearly ten thousand selected observers in the ranks of the
reporters to the Department and to the State agents, who are selected with
278

AR 1883, 3
AR 1883, 3
280
AR 1884, 5
279

106

reference to their judgment and means of local observation. They are officers of
agricultural societies, or men of mark in agricultural experience and general
intelligence. Their accuracy and reliability are manifestly enlarged with increasing
experience. This is attested by their returns, which exhibit greater unity and
reasonableness of statement from year to year. Formerly the averages of returns of
yield per acre were uniformly too high; now they approach a figure that is nearer
the test of actual measurement. The prevalent custom of averaging the actual
results of the harvest, as in the case of thrashers' records, is one means of aiding
the public judgment of what an average really is. There are many evidences of a
better understanding among farmers of the value and necessity of agricultural
statistics to themselves, to the consuming masses, to political economy and the
science of government.281
The reports for 1883 and 1884 show a consistency of attention to crop estimates as seen
in the reports of earlier commissioners at the Department of Agriculture. Loring’s report
on the work of the Botanical Division for 1883 offers this insight into one way its
collections grew, “During the year past numerous and important additions have been
made both to the herbarium and botanical library. A number of zealous botanical
collectors have been engaged in exploring the vegetation of the new and undeveloped
portions of our country, with the result of increasing our knowledge of the flora of those
regions and bringing to light many new and interesting species.”282 Loring, in 1884, notes
the Botanical Division worked to expand the collection in the Department of
Agriculture’s herbarium by “contributions, exchanges, and purchases.” He reports, “One
large box of botanical specimens has been received from the Museum of Natural History
of Paris, France. One box containing over 800 specimens has been forwarded to the same
institution. Also, one box of 800 specimens has been sent to the Royal Herbarium of St.
Petersburg, Russia, and other packages to prominent specialists in Europe and this
country.”283 The agricultural colleges “and other institutions of learning” are sent
duplicate specimens by the Department. Loring lists the “Perkins Institution for the
Blind” in Boston as a recipient of “one box” of specimens and, too, “one box to P. H.
Dudley, esq., New York City.”284

281

AR 1884, 9
AR 1883, 5.
283
AR 1884, 11
284
AR 1884, 11
282

107

Toward the end of his reports for 1883 and 1884, Loring, lists information on special
publications of the Department of Agriculture for the year, a chart on the distribution of
seeds by the Department, and appropriations to and disbursements of funds by the
Department by Congress. His reports on the special publications show that the Statistical
Division, for each year, has highest print runs with more than 170,000 volumes printed in
1883285 and 108,000 volumes for the Statistical Division special reports in 1884.286 287
The seed distribution reports show that members of the U.S. Congress received the great
majority of the total seeds distributed for both years. The top three budget lines for each
year were “salaries” (1883: 102,580; 1884: $127,640), “collecting statistics” (1883:
$80,000; 1884: $80,000), and “purchase and distribution of seeds” (1883: $80,000; 1884:
$75,000).288
The Reports of the Sixth Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture,
Commissioner Norman J. Colman, 1885-1888
The last commissioner of agriculture for the United States was born in New York State
but moved with his parents to Kentucky. Colman studied law at the University of
Louisville in 1849. He moved to St Louis, Missouri where he was elected to local
political office, started an agricultural newspaper, joined the State Legislature, and
finally, after the Civil War, served as Lieutenant Governor of Missouri. An historian of
magazines in the United States, Frank L. Mott, wrote, “Colman’s Rural World was
founded at St Louis under the name of the Valley Farmer in 1848, to be edited for half a
century by Norman J. Colman . . . .”289
Colman was appointed Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture in 1885 by
President Grover Cleveland and served as the head of the Department until 1889. He left
the Department after serving as the first Secretary of Agriculture for only a few weeks.
His position was not confirmed by the U.S. Senate and in March 1889 he left the post
285

AR 1883, 12-13
AR 1884, 16-17
287
In 1883, the Statistical Division issued 14 special reports; in 1884, the Division issued 9 special reports.
288
The Department financial reports are on page 16 for the 1883 report and page 18 for the 1884 report; the
reports on seed distribution are on page 15 for 1883 and page 18 for 1884.
289
Mott, Frank L. 1930. A History of American Magazines. Vol. 1. The Belknap Press. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard Univ. Press, p. 444.
286

108

only a few days after Cleveland’s term as president ended. Beginning in 1885 and
continuing through his term as commissioner of the Department, Colman convened, by
invitation, the various stakeholders of agricultural research and education in Washington,
D.C. Alan I. Marcus writes, “Colman spearheaded a joint effort with the state land-grant
colleges and experiment stations to promote cooperation between the USDA and the
colleges and to secure federal funding for the state experiment stations. In the view of
Colman . . . , collaboration among the growing scientific research programs of the
colleges, experiment stations, and the USDA promised a rapid expansion in the nation’s
agricultural research.”290
The First Report of Commissioner Norman J. Colman – 1885
As we have seen with all of the commissioners, each used his first report to the U.S.
Congress to demonstrate his knowledge of the condition of agriculture in the United
States and, some also offered a hint of their priorities for the Department of Agriculture.
Colman was no exception. His introductory remarks offer this assessment, “This
Department has in its charge the interests of an industrial class far more numerous than
any other in the country. With a territory of such breadth, a climate so varied, a soil so
generous; with a continuous stream of agricultural immigration pouring into our borders;
with the constantly increasing advantages derivable from improved skill and ingenious
labor-saving appliances, there is necessarily a corresponding enlargement of production.
This renders necessary a wise distribution of crop areas, the introduction of new products,
and an increased supply of those products which at present are notably insufficient to
meet the growing demands of home consumption. One of the most important of these is
sugar—an article of prime necessity. The development of an industry which combines
agriculture and manufacture is slow and difficult; yet the progress made in the
Department's experiments during the past season, as gauged by actual results, looking to
the increased production of sugar within our own borders, is more positive and
satisfactory than hitherto, and promises ultimately the highest success.”291

290

Marcus, Alan I., ed. 2015. Science as Service: Establishing and Reformulating American Land-Grant
Universities, 1865-1930. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, p. 116.
291
AR 1885, 5

109

Colman, like his predecessors, acknowledges the broad reach of agriculture in the United
States and reiterates a commitment to develop domestic crops and production that result
in greater self-sufficiency for the nation. He introduces a theme that is threaded through
his entire service at the Department, cooperation and collaboration between agricultural
research and educational institutions. For Colman, that kind of cooperation was necessary
for progress in agriculture. He saw the role of the Department of Agriculture as critical to
success. The Department would leverage its authority as a federal agency to secure
funding from the U.S. Congress for education and research in agriculture at the local
level which the Department would then be the beneficiary of in terms of results and
dissemination to a larger audience. His appeal to Congress is direct and emphatic, “No
suitable provision, however, having been made by the National Government for any
extended practical experiments in this direction, it is respectfully submitted that the
Department should have full authority and ample means to avail itself of the peculiar
advantages offered by these endowed institutions, in order to test, in a manner and on a
scale sufficient to determine all questionable points, the adaptability of new and rare
seeds to the various sections of our country. Surely the opportunity to use these fullyequipped experimental farms for the benefit of their respective localities and of the
country at large should not be lost.”292 In his report for 1885 Colman writes of his effort
to bring these constituencies together and, specifically, that he invited representatives of
the land-grant colleges and the state agricultural research stations to Washington, D.C. in
July of that year to discuss his plan and he reports, “The result of that meeting was most
gratifying. All sections of the country were represented, and throughout its deliberations
there was a manifest desire to co-operate with the Department in its efforts to develop
systems which should better unify results of experiments and reports upon them.”293
Colman adds that he had already taken steps to make that work possible at the
Department of Agriculture, “I have endeavored, with my very limited means and force, to
organize a branch in this Department to take charge of the returns from these colleges and

292
293

AR 1885, 7
AR 1885, 6

110

stations, and to collate and distribute the information obtained for the benefit of all
interested parties.”294
Colman then turns, in his Annual Report, to the work of the various divisions at the
Department. Included in the work of the Chemistry Division was an effort to bring
together representatives of the professional society of chemists to explore areas for
cooperation with the Department of Agriculture including efforts to standardize research
methods, “Perhaps the most important work of a miscellaneous nature was that done in
connection with the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists, whose labors have led
to the adoption of uniform methods of analysis for commercial fertilizers throughout the
United States.” He also drew their attention to critical research to help identify food
products that were adulterated, “By invitation of the Department the last meeting of the
association was held in Washington, and action was taken relating to the enlargement of
the scope of the work of the organization so as to bring it more in harmony with the
investigations of the Department relating to the adulterations of food.”295
In his summary of the report of the Department of Agriculture’s Entomologist, Colman
reports that the Entomology Division issued several special publications including reports
on injurious insects currently affecting regions of the country like locusts and the elmleaf beetle. He also reports the Department has expanded its work with a special
appropriation from the U.S. Congress to include economic ornithology with special
emphasis on the “interrelation of birds and agriculture, an investigation of the food,
habits and migration of birds in relation to both insects and plants.”296 Also of note is
Colman’s short section in his summary of the work of the Entomology Division his
decision to send an agent of the Department to Aurora, Illinois to establish a research
station charged with investigating bees and agriculture. He argues the Department acted
in response to a critical need, “In response to an evident want a station has been
established, in charge of a competent agent, at Aurora, Ill., for purposes of experiment in
regard to apiculture. The objects are: To secure the introduction and domestication of
294

AR 1885, 7
AR 1885, 11-12
296
AR 1885, 13
295

111

such races of bees as are reported to possess desirable traits and characteristics ; to prove
by experiments their value to the agriculturist of the United States, and their adaptation to
our climate and honey-producing flora; to make experiments in the crossing and mingling
of races, and endeavor to secure the type or types best adapted to the uses of our beekeepers; to make experiments in the methods of artificial fertilization; to test the various
methods of preparing bees for winter; to study the true causes of diseases yet imperfectly
understood, and the best methods of preventing or curing them, and to obtain facts as to
the injury to fruit by bees.”297
Colman’s summaries of the reports of the work of the other Divisions at the Department
of Agriculture are focused and concise. He highlights the work of each in terms of how
its work increased practical knowledge about agriculture. Of particular interest to this
study is his report on the Statistical Division. He offers this picture of its work, users, and
products:
The branch of the Department service under the direction of the Statistician has
met the public demand for co-ordinated fact and systematic statement, during the
past year, in response to requests from heads of Departments, Senators and
Members of the House, officials of foreign governments, boards of trade and
chambers of commerce, agricultural and industrial societies, authors, editors, and
others. The necessity for comprehensiveness and completeness in statistics, as
well as accuracy is more appreciated as popular intelligence advances and culture
broadens.
The printed reports of the statistics of agriculture during the year include 708
pages of monthly issues, and 147 of the Annual Report, a total of 855 pages. The
aim has been in these reports to give practical and useful information, plainly and
concisely, avoiding as much as possible fragmentary and inconclusive
statement.298
He also offers this information about work the Statistical Division is doing in the U.S.
and in Europe:

297
298

AR 1885, 13
AR 1885, 14

112

The crop-reporting system, which has been in operation twenty years, and has
been adopted by several States and by some European governments, consists of
boards of observation and report in over eighteen hundred counties of the United
States, comprising nearly all of the developed territory of the United States. A
parallel or duplicate work, for the purpose of verification and for special local
investigation, is carried on through State agents. The foreign work, under the
direction of an agent in London, who is connected officially with the Department
of State, has been improving in efficiency and breadth during the past year. This
was undertaken at the urgent request of representatives of western agriculture, to
obtain advance information concerning European products with which ours come
in direct competition. The need was emphasized by the incompleteness and
fragmentary character of unofficial information relating to foreign crop
prospects.299
This report suggests that Colman had an eye on enlarging the scope and work of the
Department of Agriculture by adding new divisions and thus expanding and
institutionalizing agricultural research to new areas. In his summary of the Report on
Garden and Grounds for 1885 he urges the U.S. Congress to provide support for a new
“superintendent or agent” whose work would focus on pomology.300 He concludes his
report for 1885 with this plea to Congress, “In conclusion, I beg to represent that the
Department of Agriculture, growing in importance and usefulness as our agricultural
population increases, and its wants and necessities multiply, should obviously be a
progressive institution, in order to keep pace with the increasing demands made upon it.
It is for the legislative branch to determine how far its importance shall be recognized,
and with what powers it shall be clothed to enable it to partially meet the obligation
which a country always owes to its agriculture.”301
The Reports for the Remaining Years of Colman’s Term as Commissioner, 18861888
Colman’s Annual Reports for 1886 through 1888 follow a pattern similar to his first
report in 1885. He is quick to call the attention of Congress to the progress in agriculture
in the United States – progress facilitated by the work of the Department of Agriculture
and defined by the nation’s ability to sustain itself and produce for export. In 1886, he
299

AR 1885, 14-15
AR 1885, 17. In 1886 the Department added a Division of Pomology.
301
AR 1885, 31
300

113

draws on agricultural statistics to show that progress noting increases in wheat, corn, and
cotton production. He writes, “For every pound of meat and gallon of milk in 1856 there
are three in 1886, and more than four times as many pounds of wool. It is no idle boast
that this country produces more than half the cotton of the world and three-fourths of the
maize.”302 Colman notes the diversity of crops, strong yields and their resulting
“unexampled cheapness.” The United States is, he argues, “the best-fed nation on the
globe.” Americans, he reports, consume more meat than Europeans; excess fruits “tax the
power of home consumption” and the excess goes to feed animals; and reports a regular
surplus that the US uses to supply “the deficiencies of other countries, still shipping about
two-thirds of our cotton, one-fourth of our wheat, and one-fifth of our pork products to
foreign countries, and ever ready to enter any door of profitable consumption that opens
to receive the surplus of our manufactured products of agriculture.”303
The reports of the Statistical Division figure prominently in Colman’s reports for 18861888. They are often framed in terms of the continued critical need for federal support for
state agricultural experiment stations as essential partners in the work of the Department
of Agriculture. In 1886, he reports, there were nine stations – four in the East/Northeast,
two in the Midwest, and two in the South: “These are all distinctly independent
institutions, with their own organizations, and supported by State appropriations or
special tax. Some, however, are located at State agricultural colleges, and officered by the
college professors. These stations differ greatly in their organization, facilities, and
work.304 His discussion of experiment stations in his report for 1887 is framed in terms
of the distribution of and experiment with seeds from the Department of Agriculture. He
argues for Department oversight and a system of information exchange that includes
seeds from the Department to the Stations with results shared with the Department in a
timely manner.305 In his report for 1888, Colman discusses agricultural experiments
stations, agricultural colleges, and the role of the Department of Agriculture with direct
reference to the passage of the Hatch Act of 1887 which, like the Morrill Act of 1862,
302

AR 1886, 7
AR 1886, 7
304
AR 1886, 11
305
AR 1887, 35-36
303

114

earmarked federal funds to establish agricultural research institutions at the State and
local levels. The Hatch Act made $15,000 available to state agricultural colleges – the
land-grant colleges – to establish agricultural experiment stations.306 Colman writes, “The
present is an auspicious time for this undertaking. In the history of no nation before have
there been such a thirst for knowledge on the part of the great masses of the people, such
high and just appreciation of its value, and such wide-reaching, successful, and popular
schemes for self-education; never before has the great agricultural public been so willing
and indeed so anxious to receive with respect and use with intelligence the information
which science offers; never before has science had so much to give. The prospects then
for this, the largest scientific enterprise in behalf of agriculture that any government has
undertaken, are full of promise, notwithstanding some manifest dangers which lie in the
way of its progress.” And he is careful to caution, “The greatest danger, that of political
interference and manipulation, needs to be carefully guarded against.”307 Colman sees a
role for the Department of Agriculture in that effort, “The Department of Agriculture can
aid the experiment stations in their relations to each other, in their use of the results of
experimental research, and in their connection with the agricultural public. To be first
among the stations the Department should be the servant of them all. It should exercise
not dictatorship, but leadership. Its influence should be powerful in bringing the stations
together in co-ordinating their work; in making the fruits of other research and
experience, past and present, at home and abroad, available to them, in prosecuting lines
of pioneer research which will in a measure relieve the stations of a difficult but
necessary task, and enable them to apply their energies more fully and successfully to the
study of the questions which bear directly upon the practice of agriculture; in collating,
condensing, and distributing their results, and in helping to carry the practical outcome to
the farmer in a form in which he will appreciate and use it.”308 Colman was a steady and
strong advocate for agricultural experiment stations and, as we see in his reports to

306

The Morrill Act of 1862 awarded federal land to the States to sell and use the proceeds to establish the
land-grant colleges.
307
AR 1888, 9
308
AR 1888, 10. Colman sees the work of the agricultural experiment stations as especially important for
the “working people” of the U.S. and Europe for whom food costs more than half of what they earn. He
notes, too, a general lack of understanding by these “working people” about food production. (AR 1888,
13)

115

Congress, he used his position as Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture to
organize support for their establishment and federal funding.
We also learn in Colman’s reports for 1886-1888 of steady growth in the Statistical
Division’s army of correspondents. In 1886, he reports they “represent 2,300 counties,
four in each county;”309 in the conclusion to his report for 1888, Colman thanks “the
officers, employés, and ten thousand correspondents of the Department.”310 He expands
the work of the Department of Agriculture in other ways including recommending to
Congress that the Department be responsible for establishing and running a “system of
signaling by cannon, from central stations, to announce the approach of storm, flood, or
frost. It seems to be the general belief among planters and farmers that such central
stations could be established at the post-office or other place under Federal control . . .
.”311 In 1887, Colman reports he hired illustrators at the Department, “skilled
draughtsmen and an engraver” noting the informational value of illustrations, “A single
illustration, covering but a small part of a page, will often bring a subject clearly before
the mind of man, where many pages of text and of figures would fall far short of making
the vital point easily comprehended. The illustrations prepared by the Department appear
in its various reports, and, so far they are of incalculable value.”312
Overall, one gets the impression from Colman’s reports as Commissioner of the
Department of Agriculture of an agency head actively, strategically, and, unlike most of
his predecessors, effectively positioning the Department to gain further recognition and
support.
Conclusion
The research questions guiding my reading of the Annual Reports of the commissioners
for this chapter were,

309

AR 1886, 22
AR 1888, 50.
311
AR 1886, 41
312
AR 1887, 41
310

116

•

What and how did the Department of Agriculture fulfill its mission to procure,
propagate, and distribute agricultural information?

•

How did the commissioners present / represent that information in their Annual
Reports to Congress?

•

What was the cycle of information procurement, propagation, and distribution at
the department? How did it change over the period of time I cover, 1862-1888?

The Annual Reports of the Commissioners of the Department of Agriculture reveal
consistencies of mission but also the personal priorities of the men who headed the
agency. The consistencies include close attention to the Congressional mandate for the
new agency in the Organic Act that established the Department in 1862; an understanding
of agricultural production as foundational to the health and prosperity of the nation;
systems of information work that engage and rely on a diverse community of informants
and contributors, domestic and foreign; an early realization that for the Department to
succeed in providing practical information to farmers and the other stakeholders of the
agricultural economy, the Department needed to develop systems that not only brought
information into the Department that was relevant and timely but, too, they had to
develop effective vehicles for communicating and disseminating information on its work
in a manner that insured the usefulness and relevance of it to farmers and others.
The Department of Agriculture’s work expanded as their understanding of what counted
as relevant areas of research in agricultural production became apparent. Those changes
were often emerged from the information sent to the Department in the form of letters of
inquiry and letters requesting help and information from farmers battling destructive
insects, poor soil, seeds that would not germinate or seeds with low yields, cattle and
other livestock suffering from disease, and any number of other issues that confronted
farmers. Changes were also triggered by world markets that, for example, closed their
doors to U.S. exports fearing the spread of diseases from live cattle, meats, and hides.
The desire for self-sufficiency in terms of agricultural production and manufacture was
another driving force that influenced the work of the Department of Agriculture under the
Commissionership. Many of these issues and much of the work of the Department was

117

not new. It drew on ways that farmers and the agricultural community broadly defined
had long gathered and shared information. What we see in the reports of the
Commissioners in this period is a strong sense that only a federal agency devoted to
collection, research, and dissemination of agricultural information could effectively serve
the interests of individual farmers and, as importantly, those of the nation. We see in
these Annual Reports, too, the struggle of each commissioner to secure a greater
understanding of and appreciation for the important role of the work of the Department
by Congress, the agricultural press, agricultural stakeholders, and the public. The Organic
Act of 1862 established the Department and suggested its role but the authority it
presumed for agricultural research by a federal agency was a constant struggle. The
reports of the Commissioners of the Department of Agriculture make that painfully clear.
I will discuss these points and address the questions I brought to bear on my reading of
the Commissioners’ Reports more closely in the final chapter of this dissertation.

118

CHAPTER 5: THE REPORTS OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE GARDEN
AND GROUNDS, 1862-1888
Introduction
William Saunders was one of the first appointees at the Department of Agriculture and
had the longest tenure of any of the superintendents in the 19th century – 1862-1889. His
term covers the entire span of the period of my study of the Department. According to an
obituary for him that appeared in American Gardening, Saunders was born in Scotland
but spent his youth at the College of Madras (India) studying divinity. Saunders’ interest
in horticulture was, according to the same obituary, ignited by watching the gardener at
the college and when Saunders returned to London he further developed his skills
working at Kew Gardens and later in Germantown, Pennsylvania. Saunders designed a
number of estates including that of Johns Hopkins. He served as the commissioner of
parks for the city of Washington, D.C. and he designed Gettysburg and the Lincoln
Monument in Springfield Illinois as well as the Rosehill Cemetery in Chicago. His
colleagues at the Department of Agriculture credited him with bringing “some of the
most choice varieties of fruit” to the United States during his tenure at the Department of
Agriculture.313 Saunders’ work in horticulture before his appointment in 1862 at the
newly established Department of Agriculture resulted in an extensive network of
colleagues and contacts that spanned the globe.
In addition to his research and various administrative duties at the Department, Saunders
was active in promoting horticulture and farming and was one of several employees at the
Department of Agriculture responsible for the founding of a fraternal organization with a
mission to promote the interests of farmers, the Order of the Patrons of Husbandry or
National Grange in 1867 in Washington, D.C.314 The obituary for him that ran in the New
313

American Gardening, September 15, 1900 obituary page 616 (the year Saunders died). For Saunders’
education see Harding (1947), p. 27.
314 The Grange is a fraternal organization with significant traits and rituals one associates with a secret
society. It was founded in 1867 to promote the interests of farmers. Its programs included efforts to
facilitate cooperation among farmers in the purchase of farm equipment and supplies, grain storage
facilities, and the formation financial institutions as alternatives to established banks. It is interesting to see
how the current organization characterizes its founding. From the Grange website: Our Roots. The
Founders. On December 4, 1867 in a small Washington, D.C., building that housed the office of William

119

York Times offered this assessment of his career and life, “Each tree and flower was
planted under his personal observation and was watched with solicitude and criticism, the
results going to the country he was serving in the reports embodying the judgment of a
man devoted to his work and unwilling to accept any proof except that of actual
experimentation…. The life of this valued public servant was unselfish. He gave to the
Government and people his best days and his ripest knowledge and experience. He
received back the blessings of those who appreciated his work. Beyond a modest salary
he realized no material reward. He who had contributed to the enrichment of thousands
never learned to cultivate private fortune.”315
Of particular importance to my study is that during Saunders’s tenure as Superintendent
of the Propagating Garden, the Department of Agriculture secured seeds and plants from
various parts of the world. As I will show, that process exploited formal and informal
networks including the diplomats, plant explorers, and the U.S. Navy. Specimens were
both specifically requested by the Department and offered unsolicited. While there is
little evidence in the Annual Reports that this work was systematic it is clear that it was
strategic emphasizing the need for proper conditions for successful cultivation (climate,
soil, weather) and with an eye to the economic impact of a new crop in terms of yield and
heartiness. Saunders’ reports describe how that material was processed using the
laboratories, gardens, farms, and greenhouses at the Department of Agriculture to
determine best practices in farming, identify quality seeds and plants, and develop
effective farming techniques for different parts of the country and new territories. During
his tenure the Department introduced new fruit and vegetable plant species and varieties
of significant economic importance to American agriculture including the seedless navel

Saunders, Superintendent of Propagating Gardens in the Department of Agriculture, the Order of Patrons of
Husbandry, more commonly known as the Grange, was born. Here, sitting around a plain wooden table, a
group of seven earnest men, planned what was destined to become a vital force in preserving and
expanding American democracy. They were all men of vision-they had faith in God, in their fellow man
and the future. The Seven Founders of the Order of the Patrons of Husbandry were: Oliver H. Kelley,
William Saunders, Aaron B. Grosh, William M. Ireland, John R. Thompson, Francis McDowell, John
Trimble, assisted by Caroline Hall, who was later named an honorary 8th founder of the Grange.
<http://www.nationalgrange.org/about-us/history/>
315 The New York Times. September 14, 1900. (accessed online)

120

orange from Brazil in 1873.316 Saunders envisioned the Department of Agriculture as a
center for research and testing of seeds and plants coming into the country via formal and
informal channels and in his reports encouraged people to send samples to the
Department for testing, “The efforts of the Department would be greatly
strengthened...and its area of usefulness vastly expanded, if all who were possessed of
new or rare seeds and plants would co-operate by transmitting samples for investigation.
Many persons throughout the country occasionally receive plants and seeds from distant
correspondents, and, not having facilities for their proper cultivation, they are
consequently lost. It would be highly advantageous for the Department to encourage the
reception of such favors, have them carefully noted, their merits properly investigated by
competent cultivators, the result made known to the donors, and such disposition made of
them as would be considered most advantageous.”317
While there are gaps in his formal reports for the years 1862-1888 his work is often
referenced by others in their reports. It is also worth noting that for many of the years for
which there is no formal report Saunders was serving as a representative of the
Department of Agriculture to the various international exhibitions including the
International Exhibition of Arts, Manufactures, and products of the Soil and Mine or
Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876.318 Periodically, we see a section of the
Annual Reports that reports on seed testing at the Department. I examine those as well.
Systems of information work
The agricultural information work of the Department was discussed and shared in the
Annual Reports. Seeds and plants themselves constitute types of information and the
research resulting from their testing as well as the dissemination of those results and
recommendations by the Department are elements of systems of information work.319 The
316

This is another area where accounts of how work happened at the Department of Agriculture was,
perhaps, more complex than one sees in the annual reports. Saunders did not travel to Brazil but facilitated
the introduction of the orange which was first introduced in the U.S by an American woman who was
traveling in Brazil.
317
AR 1862, 542.
318
The exchange of agricultural information (including plants and seeds) at international exhibitions is
more evidence of the geographic scope and reach of the Department of Agriculture’s work.
319
For more on the informational aspect of seeds and plants see Kloppenburg and Parry.

121

acquisition, propagation, and distribution of seeds and plants were critical aspects of
agricultural information work mandated by the U.S. Congress for the Department of
Agriculture. The new agency inherited collections and systems of work from the U.S.
Patent Office. We see in the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture how it
struggled to bring order to and systematize that information work began at the U.S. Patent
Office. We see in the Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds evidence
of that information work from its contributors and its users. This is especially evident in
the correspondence from farmers and others and the more formal responses to the
circulars (surveys) sent out by the Department. The Annual Reports include examples of
what was active and steady correspondence from farmers, gardeners, and
horticulturalists. Many requested seeds and plants. Others offered information about their
successes or failures with various crops or reported on the general conditions of
agriculture. We also see evidence of an expansive network of information exchange
among a diverse set of players. The venues included journals, conferences, and
correspondence; the types of information included scientific reports, crop yields, informal
observations, as well as plants and seeds. Saunders’ reports show the ways in which this
new agency, charged with establishing the federal government as an authoritative and
effective resource in agricultural research and practice, drew on the legacy of informal
information / knowledge practices by directly soliciting a wide range of information from
farmers and horticulturalists, and exploiting informal and personal relationships with
other “scientists” situated in institutions that included botanical garden, agricultural
societies, and other state agencies here and abroad or independent researchers working on
their own.
The Annual Reports and the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds – 18621888
The new Department of Agriculture was called upon to acquire, propagate and distribute
not only new seeds and plants, but also information about agriculture. Land and facilities
for growing plants and seeds, for experimentation and testing, and for processing for
distribution were each critical aspects of infrastructure necessary for success at the new
Department of Agriculture. The grounds of the Department of Agriculture on what is now

122

the National Mall were the first laboratories for experiments with seeds and plants. Plant
and seed propagation and research was space-intensive work that required land and
laboratory facilities.
The following analysis organizes and examines the Reports of the Superintendent of the
Garden and Grounds, William Saunders, in clusters defined by the term of office of each
commissioner of the Department from 1862 through1888. I am especially interested in
identifying references to agricultural information work, evidence of the perceived
importance of that work, and evaluation of the effectiveness of it. I look for patterns and
progressions within the term of each commissioner and conclude this chapter with a
discussion of what we learn about the information work and systems of the division from
the Reports of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds between 1862 and 1888.
Terms of the Commissioners of Agriculture
1862-1867

Isaac Newton (Newton died suddenly in June 1867. The chief clerk
of the Department, John Stokes, assumed his duties until the
appointment of the next permanent Commissioner in November
1867.)

1867-1870

Horace Capron

1871-1876

Frederick Watts

1877-1880

William G. Le Duc

1881-1884

George B. Loring

1885-1889

Norman J. Colman320

The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1862-1867 – Isaac
Newton, Commissioner
These first years of work were framed in large part by the Civil War. Though the new
Department had money and space and a clear charge, the focus of the federal government
320

The Department’s status changed during the term of Commissioner Colman. In February 1888 the
Department was elevated to Cabinet-level status. It remained in the Executive Branch but in February 1888
with a seat in the President’s Cabinet as Secretary of Agriculture. Commissioner Colman’s status changed
and his last month of service to the Department was as the first Secretary of the Department of Agriculture.
(Greathouse, 1898; 20-21)

123

was on the war and the city of Washington, D.C. reflected that priority in both its manner
and its physical make up. For example, what we now see as the National Mall was a
muddy pen that held livestock for the war effort. That sense of chaos carried into the
transfer of responsibility and materials to the new agency. Seeds and plants were a large
portion of the material transferred to the new Department and one of Saunders’ first
projects was to secure land and laboratory space for the work of his division at the
Department of Agriculture. The narratives of his first reports are a mix of frustration and
focus. It is clear that he came to the Department with extensive experience, a clear vision
of what he wanted to accomplish, and an understanding of the resources he would need to
succeed. In fact, the very first publication of the new agency was a treatise on agricultural
research and the state by Saunders.321 His sense of purpose and responsibility is clear in
that publication. Included in the materials transferred from the agricultural laboratory at
the Patent Office were plants and seeds, which Saunders found useless because essential
data about the provenance and the types of seeds and plants had not been recorded by
those working with them at the Patent Office, “no books or papers of records have been
placed in my hands, consequently I have no means of determining the sources from
which many of the plants have been obtained . . . . We are thus, also, left in ignorance of
the objects for which many of the plants have been cultivated.” Saunders uses the
example of the collection of native grapes plants to illustrate his frustration, “A large
portion have only numbers attached, and all efforts to discover the reference to these
numbers have been futile, consequently they are of no value either for distribution or
propagation.”322
In his first report, it is clear that Saunders’ chief goal was to bring order to the chaos he
inherited. He discusses the “objects and aims of the Experimental Garden” and reiterates
his priorities for his work that first appeared in the 1862 publication, Catalogue of the

321

William Saunders, Catalogue of the Plants, Bulbs, Tubers, etc., for the Distribution of the U.S.
Propagating Garden with a Report of the Objects and Aims of the Garden (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1862).
322
William Saunders, “Report of the Superintendent of the Garden Attached to the Department of
Agriculture,” in the Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for 1862 (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1863), 540-545. (Pages 540 and 541 respectively for the material quoted.)

124

Plants, Bulbs, Tubers, etc., for the Distribution of the U.S. Propagating Garden with a
Report of the Objects and Aims of the Garden:
1. To procure and encourage the transmission of seeds, cuttings, bulbs, and plants
from all sources, both foreign and domestic, for the purpose of testing their merits
and adaptation in general, or for particular localities of this country.
2. To procure, by hybridizing and special culture, products of a superior character to
any now existing.
3. To ascertain, by experiment, the influences of varied culture on products, and the
modifications effected by . . . pruning and other manipulations....
4. To investigate . . . the various maladies and diseases of plants, and the insects that
destroy them.
5. To provide ample means for thoroughly testing samples of all seeds and other
contributions that may be received.
6. To cultivate specimens of the various hedge plants, and exhibit their availability
for that purpose.
7. To cultivate a collection of the best fruit trees and plants...so as to compare their
respective merits.
8. To plant a collection of choice shrubs, adapted for decorating gardens and
landscape scenery.
9. To erect glass structures for the twofold purpose of affording the necessary
facilities for cultivating exotic fruits and plants and to furnish examples of the
best and most economical modes of constructing, heating, and managing such
buildings.323
In order to succeed, Saunders argued for better facilities that would allow for controlled
experiments and sufficient and proper storage for its seeds and plants. His training in
horticulture is especially evident in the list but the Annual Reports reveal that he was able
to translate that experience to agricultural practice in the United States, its
commercialization, and increased scale as I will discuss later in this chapter.

323

Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds attached to the Department of Agriculture (for
the year 1862), p. 541-542. It is worth noting that Saunders is credited with authoring the first publication
to come out of the new Department. Catalogue of the Plants, Bulbs, Tubers, etc., for the Distribution of the
U.S. Propagating Garden with a Report of the Objects and Aims of the Garden was a small pamphlet in
which he introduced these nine points and elaborated on their meaning and purpose in relationship to the
work of the agency. It was produced at the request of Commissioner Newton in a memo dated, October 10,
1862: “You will please furnish to this department, at your earliest convenience, a list of the plants that are
ready for distribution, together with any suggestions that may occur to you tending to increase the
efficiency of the garden under your care.” (Page 3)

125

What we see in Saunders’ reports under Commissioner Newton (1862-1867) is a decided
focus on identifying ways to increase efficiency in propagation, cultivation and
diversification of economic plants grown in the United States.324 Saunders envisioned
the Department and particularly his section of the agency as a center of and clearinghouse
for seeds and plants coming into the country through a variety of sources: “The efforts of
the Department would be greatly strengthened . . . if all who were possessed of new or
rare seeds and plants would co-operate by transmitting samples for investigation. Many
persons throughout the country occasionally receive plants and seeds from distant
correspondents, and, not having facilities for their proper cultivation, they are
consequently lost. It would be highly advantageous for the Department to encourage the
reception of such favors, have them carefully noted, their merits properly investigated by
competent cultivators, the result made known to the donors, and such disposition made of
them as would be considered advantageous.”325
In 1863, William Saunders issued his report not as the Superintendent of the Garden and
Grounds but under the title, Superintendent of the Experimental Garden. By that time, he
reported, the garden was six acres of land and though it was meant to serve as a
laboratory for experimentation via “cultivation of specimens . . . in order to test their
comparative merits,” Saunders, however, declared it “altogether inadequate.” Saunders’
vision for the role for the Department is evident in the second paragraph of the Report for
1863. He observes the many varieties of “agricultural and garden seeds” in a commercial
seed catalog and advises, “No one desires, neither is it necessary to cultivate all of these;
it is…of much more importance to know which are the best and most suitable for the
purpose required . . . . Possessed of such information the buyer could make his purchases
understandingly . . . .”326 The reports for 1863 and 1864 have little to offer in terms of

324

Economic, as it relates to plants or crops in agriculture, can be best understood in terms of economic
botany. The Field Museum describes that work on their website: “Economic botanists explore the interface
between people and plants to describe the cultural uses of plants, explain the origin of specific useful plants
and develop strategies for the sustainable use of plant resources.” Economic plant products is a phrase with
origins in the 19th century that helped distinguish cultivation for pleasure and personal use from crops that
had a broader impact on human lives – wherther for food, building materials, or raw materials for
manufacture. http://www.fieldmuseum.org/science/research/area/focus-economic-botany
325
AR 1862, 542
326
Report of the Superintendent of the Experimental Garden (AR 1863, 547)

126

advice about particular varieties of plants and seeds. Saunders focused his narrative on
techniques of propagation and cultivation including grafting, pruning, and root
management. His Annual Reports for this period suggest that most of experiments took
place in the controlled environment of the glass structures including a new “orchard
house.”327 It is evident that he was still frustrated with the lack of support for adequate
facilities and how that limited the effectiveness and value of his work. Without sufficient
space at the Department of Agriculture he could not run experiments on a scale that
would allow for meaningful comparisons, he began to look at how plants could be
adapted to new environments. He reported growing dwarf fruit trees in “wooden troughs
in the open air” in 1863 and suggested this might provide sufficient protection to allow
varieties to grow in otherwise unfriendly climates. Later he reported on the advantages
of careful pruning and the bending of branches in order to increase the production of fruit
trees.328 But, his techniques were all labor intensive and seemingly not applicable to the
changes underway in agricultural production. His discussion of soil research and
fertilizers, too, seems to focus on techniques that are very labor-intensive: “good
management of . . . soils demand that they should be surface-stirred after every heavy
rain.” However, there is also evidence that his recommendations presupposed crops
planted in wide rows to accommodate machinery that could perform the required
stirring.329 Only two crops are mentioned as cultivated for research in the Annual Report
for this year: 100 varieties of native grapes, “all of which are believed to be properly
named,” and 48 varieties of strawberries.330
In his introduction to the 1864 report Saunders responds to critics who suggest the garden
has limited contributions to make and cautions that time and patience are necessary when
it comes to agricultural experimentation. He seems to anticipate the agricultural
experiment stations and extension activities of the Department later in the 19th century
and argues for the establishment of “experimental grounds in various localities, under the
auspices of State and local agricultural and horticultural societies” to complement the
327

Saunders suggests this type of cultivation might work well in cities (AR 1863, 551).
AR 1863, 551 and 553-554
329
AR 1863, 556-557
330
AR 1863, 548-549
328

127

work of the Department of Agriculture in Washington, D.C. He continues, “such gardens
would be valuable appendages to agricultural colleges, presenting attractive and
interesting studies, and collection facts of great local as well as general values.”331 He
offers reports on pears, strawberries, gooseberries, and grapes and refers to a project to
build a glass house for tropical fruit. The first evidence of a successful crop grown at the
Garden is in Saunders’ report for 1864. Two short paragraphs document the details of an
experiment growing gooseberries, which, he reported, “fruited in great perfection for
several years.” Readers were given the varietal names of the successful gooseberries and
told that the roots were left alone, the plants sheltered from wind but not sun, pruned back
in the fall, and fertilized with manure before their dormancy in winter.332
Until 1865, the reports for work in the garden suggest that only fruits and berries were
grown, with grapes, strawberries, and stone fruit predominated. The report for 1865
marks a turning point for Saunders. He notes insufficient support and inadequate facilities
but he is more assertive about what the garden can and should do to contribute to
agricultural knowledge and practice in the United States. He evokes the idea of a
“national garden” and argues that to be complete it would need to have at least one of
every variety of “hardy fruits” so that it could be a “living museum . . . of great value for
reference.” The garden’s value, according to Saunders, would be proven only if it was a
complete and comprehensive collection of specimens, “a national garden . . . should
preserve specimens of all, in order to assist in the identification of sorts, and also exhibit
the progress made in their improvement.”333 Also evident in the report for 1865 are more
explicit references to principles of scientific method and the need for others to attend to
what was learned from experiments using that method “When a fundamental principle is
once determined and understood, operative details are suggested, and from them the best
practical mode of application is readily deduced.”334

331

AR 1864, 605
AR 1864, 607
333
AR 1865, 13
334
AR 1865, 18
332

128

The first and only formal report for the Experimental Farm followed the Report of the
Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds in the Annual Report of the Department of
Agriculture for 1865. George Reid reports that he was “appointed to take charge of in
September.” There is no reference as to who supervised it prior to 1865 though it is clear
that it was used as an experimental farm.335 Yet, it seems to signal a significant shift of
focus or addition to the work of the Department. The crops associated with the farm
were more specifically economic336 and agricultural – grains, sorghum, potatoes, grasses,
corn, beans, clover, and even goats – as were the activities which included seed saving,
experimentation with methods of seed broadcasting, and crop yields. Reid described
each crop and the many varieties for the report but noted, too, that he lacked information
given how recently he had acquired this new responsibility.337 What we do learn is a bit
about the process of work for testing seeds and plants that includes seed saving “for
further experiment.” Reid lists the sources for many of the seeds and plants tested at the
Experimental Farm in 1865 and the large number of varieties – 95 of winter wheat seeds,
for example – are included in his report in a way that makes clear the long reach of the
Department in terms of the acquisition of new seeds and plants that might be adaptable as
economic crops in the US and its territories.338 One example is this comment by Reid on
potatoes from Scotland, “Forty-three varieties of potatoes are being tested. Eight of them
335

Greathouse (1898) writes that Commissioner Newton took “possession of the land at Twelfth and B
streets SW, and started the experimental farm. His son, Isaac Newton, Jr., was placed in charge of this
work.” Page 11.
336
From the Library of Congress guide to economic botany: Economic plants are defined as being useful
either directly, as in food, or indirectly, as products we use or that enhance the environment. Plants are
essential to life on earth; they produce the oxygen we breathe through photosynthesis and provide much of
the food we eat. Some species provide medicines and promote healing, others are used for insect control or
to conserve water. Plants with dense root systems prevent soil erosion and those with brightly colored
flowers attract pollinators. Plants have been used to control body functions and fertility, to poison, and to
make clothing, paper, and rubber. http://www.loc.gov/rr/scitech/tracer-bullets/economicbotanytb.html#intro. Also, http://www.mbgnet.net/sets/rforest/plants/econ.htm refers to economic plants as
commodities or cash crops and http://www.ars-grin.gov/~sbmljw/introd.htm ARS describes as “plants of
commercial importance.”
337
“Report of the Superintendent of the Experimental Farm,” AR 1865, 25-32.
338
He reports on wheat (95 varieties), spring wheat (6 types), rye, oats, barley, rice (4), sorghum (4), peas
(70 varieties), beans (13 long stem; 22 named-kidney beans and 5 without names), pole beans (6), timothy
(3 acres; 53 varieties with one from Australia), cabbage (18), savoys (4), lettuce (14), onion (13, 36
varieties from Japan were a disappointment because only half germinated), cucumber, endive and radishes
from Vienna, tomatoes (those from London “are the best” and their seeds were to be saved “for further
experiment”), potatoes (43 with 8 from Scotland), melon (“upwards of 30 kinds of cantaloupes and
watermelons”), pumpkins and squash, tobacco from Turkey and its seeds “carefully saved, and will be
distributed from the department.” (AR 1865., 28-32).

129

are directly from the celebrated growers of seedling potatoes, viz., Messrs. Paterson &
Son, Dundee, Scotland . . . . These all have great reputations in their native country, but
time will develop what they will do here. They look very well and appear to yield good
crops here also. The other varieties are very promising and are likely to turn out well.
When they are gathered, the ground will be measured, and the quantity produced of each
may be ascertained.”339
Earlier Reports of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds simply mention the role
of foreign representatives as sources for seeds and plants. Reid’s report on the work of
the experimental farm at the Department is the first to identify actual sources.340 Other
sources of seeds include rice from Japan; sorghum from China; various grains from
Russia, Prussia, Poland, and England; 50 varieties of potatoes from Germany; nearly 80
varieties of peas mostly from Europe; approximately 30 varieties of onion from Japan;
Portugal, Spain and Italy; cucumbers, endive, radishes from Vienna; tomatoes from
England; potatoes from “celebrated growers” in Scotland; melons from Spain, Argentina,
China and Russia; and tobacco from Turkey. Many of these seeds were for crops new to
the Department.341
One begins to see the results of four years of research in Saunders’ report for 1866.
Enough time has passed that he is able to report on sustained experiments with
strawberries, grapes, raspberries, pears, and China grass. He recommends varieties of
each fruit and tips for proper care from propagation to cultivation and harvest. There is
also evidence in his reports that Saunders visited farms and that he responded to direct
inquiries from citizens – gardeners and farmers – concerned that they cannot grow crops
from seeds obtained from the Department of Agriculture, “The department is in the
frequent receipt of letters, wherein the writers complain of their inability to raise plants
from the seeds distributed by it, as well as those procured from other sources. The cause
of failure is at once attributed to the quality of the seeds, and the source from whence
339

AR 1865., 32. Non-native sources for seeds and plants for 1865 include: Germany, Crimea, England,
Spain, Russian, Japan, China, Australia, Turkey, Poland, and Argentina.
340
AR 1865, 26-27
341
AR 1865, 31

130

they were obtained is denounced for sending out a bad article.” 342 This is the first direct
and substantive reference to this type of correspondence that I saw in the sections of the
Annual Reports I looked at for this project. It is not clear that the letters to which
Saunders refers are from farmers. Saunders is quick to defend the quality of the seeds
distributed by the Department of Agriculture. He points out that each type of seed is
tested at the Department and that the problem must be that the seeds were “improperly
managed” by the planter, gardener, and farmer.343
In his report for 1867 Saunders reiterates his vision for the garden and offers this
assessment, “Although progress in some particulars has been slow, yet development of
these objects is constantly kept in view.” Among the challenges, he lists: insufficient
resources (human and material) and the prioritization of propagation and distribution
work resulted in less time and fewer resources for experimentation, “The great amount of
time and labor necessarily occupied in the propagation and distribution of from 40,000 to
50,000 plants yearly should also be noted in connection with what may be considered the
more legitimate objects of the garden. The distribution is especially an absorbent, on
account of the number of packages required in dividing these plants into lots of from 6 to
20 each, and the work of labeling and mailing . . . .” 344 Saunders notes how this work
draws the attention of the Department of Agriculture at a time when it should be
concentrating on seasonal work in the Garden illustrating a tension between different
aspects of the Department’s mission – propagation (experimentation) and distribution.
The progress to which Saunders refers includes a new glass house for “exotic fruits,” an
orchard house that “continues to give good satisfaction,” the continued success with
cultivation of native grapes “under glass.” He also presents a plan for the grounds of the
Department of Agriculture at Newton’s request – an arboretum. He points to Asa Gray’s
Manual of Botany345 as an authoritative resource for identifying appropriate trees and
plants and states that this sort of collection is a “long-felt want of this country” and
argues for its place in the Department as equivalent to “any other museum of natural
342

AR 1866, 31
AR 1866, 23
344
AR 1867, 24
345
A series of editions of Gray’s Manual were published beginning in 1848. There was a 1867 edition
though Saunders does not give more than author and title.
343

131

history…presenting a school of instruction that will largely tend to advance our progress
in the knowledge of vegetable physiology, and furnish a strong incentive to botanical
studies.” He imagines it as a living and growing collection able to incorporate new
varieties of plants, especially those he read about in the Pacific Railroad Survey Reports,
which “reveal a vast number of plants and trees, few of which have as yet been
introduced to cultivation. It is hoped that efforts may be made towards gaining a more
intimate knowledge of the botany of the western States and Territories, and living plants
secured and placed in the arboretum.”346
This early report by Saunders acknowledges the importance of on-the-ground
observations by farmers and shared these observations through a variety of means
including the agricultural press. Though Saunders does not identify how he came to the
following information it is clear that it had an impact on his thinking about grape culture.
In his report on a field trip to explore grape cultivation and climates in the vineyards in
New York State (Lake Erie and Steuben County), Ohio (Cincinnati), and Missouri
(Hermann), Saunders recalls and reprints correspondence from 10 years earlier, “Mr.
Silas McDowell, of Franklin, Macon county, North Carolina, directed attention to the
‘Belt of no frost, or Thermal belt,’ on the slopes of the southern Alleghanies [sic].
Various communications were published by Mr. McDowell, which attracted notice at the
time. Convinced that these observations were of great value, and directly applicable to
our subject, it may not be out of place to quote from the more recent of these letters.” 347
The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1867-1870 – Horace
Capron, Commissioner
The reports for these years read like progress reports on experiments of plants and seeds
and lack some of the commentary about resources and funding seen in his reports for the
first few years. Information on propagation at the Department includes a range of plants
including tropical fruits, currants, strawberries, raspberries, pears, shrubs, forage plants,
fiber plants like ramie and flax, grasses, eucalyptus, tea, and the ever-present comparison

346
347

Report of the Superintendent of the Experimental Garden, AR 1867, 26-27.
AR 1867, 29

132

of native and foreign grapes. Native (existing states including South Carolina in 1868;
Missouri and Mississippi in 1870 and territories, Utah in 1868), and foreign sources for a
number of crops including grapes from Australia and the United States counsel at
Damascus,348 raspberries from a United States Marshal in Japan,349 Italian rye seed, tea
from Japan, China and Assam [India], grasses from France, and flax from New Zealand.
Saunders reports on progress, too, with the arboretum noting in his report for 1868 that
nearly seventy-five percent of the plants and trees on his initial list had been acquired and
that while still incomplete the collection rivals those “to be found in any country.”350 In
1869, he offers the following classification for plants in the collection, “dye, gum, sugar,
fiber, oil, and medicinal” signaling the economic character of the collection.351 The report
for 1870 opens with a coded illustration of the arboretum plantings and the Department
grounds.352 The latter includes: stables, four glass houses (tropical fruit, semi-tropical
fruit, grapes, and one for “other utilizable plants”), a gate-house, experimental orchards
and test plots, roads and walkways. For the arboretum collection he reports, “valuable
additions are constantly being received, and the collection is already of great variety and
interest.”353
In the report for 1870 Saunders notes that plants for the grounds were hard to come by
from commercial sources so the Department of Agriculture exchanged plants with
“scientific institutions and botanic gardens in foreign countries.”354
The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1871-1876 –
Frederick Watts, Commissioner
The official reports by Saunders for this period are few. He submitted one for 1871 and
one for 1876. We learn from the Reports of the Commissioner and the 1876 report by
Saunders that his focus shifted to prioritize his work as the representative of the
348

AR 1868, 118
AR 1868, 79-80
350
AR 1868, 122
351
AR 1869, 91
352
AR 1870, 17
353
AR 1870, 16
354
AR 1870, 15
349

133

Department of Agriculture (and the Executive Departments of the U.S. government) to
the International Exhibition held in Philadelphia in 1876.355 Saunders reports in 1876 that
the “duties have been somewhat arduous, but I have not permitted them to interfere,
except when altogether unavoidable, with my daily duties in the Department.”356
Aside from an accounting of some of the crops tested under his watch, Saunders, in his
report for 1871, offers an early evaluation of the exchanges of seeds and plants by the
Department of Agriculture with similar institutions in other countries. This “system of
exchanges,” he reports “is now proving of great value in enabling the Department to
secure plants that are rarely to be found for sale in commercial establishments.”357 He
also acknowledges the critical role of “representatives of the [U.S.] Government who are
stationed in foreign countries” and their willingness to acquire seeds and plants requested
by the Department, “With few exceptions these representatives have promptly responded
to inquiries relating to vegetable productions, and have exerted themselves to fulfill the
wishes of the Department, both in the introduction of new plants of value and interest and
in furnishing useful information relative to cultivation and other matters of special
importance.”358 He points to a few specific examples of plants and seeds from foreign
sources that have proven valuable to the Department’s collections and helping that
collection be more complete. These included oranges, cinchona, and eucalyptus. Foreign
sources of seeds and plants include Russia (a source of rhubarb which Saunders discusses
how to grow from seed); the West Indies, Africa, and China (notes that ginger could be a
successful crop in the American South and describes how to make ginger jam); chicory
from Europe now growing in the United States as almost a weed in some places;

355

Also known as the Centennial Exhibition or International Exhibition of Arts, Manufactures and Products
of the Soil and Mine, it was the first World’s Fair held in the United States. Several sources argue that the
Exhibition served as an opportunity for the United States to demonstrate its role as a world power. Exhibits
promoted industry, education, and progress. An Agricultural Hall featured and demonstrated the latest farm
equipment and included “forty-two acres of farm and livestock exhibits.” There was also a Horticultural
Hall. (Encyclopedia of Greater Philadelphia entry, Centennial Exhibition, 1876 by Stephanie Grauman
Wolf, senior fellow at the McNeil Center for Early American Studies, University of Pennsylvania.
Copyright 2013, Rutgers University http://philadelphiaencyclopedia.org/archive/centennial/)
356
AR 1876, 73
357
AR 1871, 102
358
AR 1871, 102

134

Saunders notes that it is used for coffee, salad, and describes how it had been grown on
ships and that it was used as fodder for cattle and hogs.359
The report for 1876 has a decided focus on economic plants noting that information on
these crops is in “frequent demand” but Saunders is quick to bemoan the lack of
understanding on the part of those requesting specimens of regional, geographic, climate
requirements for specific crops. Crop reports for 1876 include coffee, rubber plants
(India), cinchona, eucalyptus, olives (Europe, especially Spain), persimmons (Japan),
vanilla, mate (Paraguay), tea (China).
The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1877-1880 – William
G. Le Duc, Commissioner
Saunders’ reports for the period under Commissioner Le Duc, 1877-1880, continue that
same content and pattern of reporting that highlights certain crops and methods currently
under experimentation at the Department of Agriculture. He also refers with much more
frequency to earlier experiments at the Department and is clearly trying to establish
authority for that work by noting its continuity, history, and progress. Saunders rarely
explains how he selected these examples from the many experiments at the Department
(as evidenced by reports variously called “tests of Department seeds” or “experiments
with Department seeds”). He sometimes frames his choices in terms of public interest in
a seed, plant, or farming method but he is not consistent and, given Saunders’ strong
views about what should be grown where, by whom, and how, it seems fair to suggest
that the choices he makes in terms of reporting are political. That is, directly tied to his
efforts to elevate the work of the Department and particularly the work in his division.
For example, in this section from his 1878 report on progress with the cultivation of
native grapes Saunders is clearly highlighting the results of experiments at the
Department and arguing that progress in grape culture would be greater if information
from the Department was more widely accepted as authoritative:

359

AR 1871, 107-109

135

In some of the earliest reports of the Department of Agriculture the statement was
dwelt upon that the greatest obstacle to complete success in grape culture could be
referred to the deterioration of the plants consequent upon the injury they
sustained from mildew on the leaves. This explanation of failure was not
generally considered as conclusive. Both grape growers and authors of treatises
on grape culture, especially the latter, usually referred failures to some other cause
or causes, which were expressed by the phrase "improper treatment,” and this was
considered a sufficient answer to all inquiries regarding failures.
The main cause of failure has been frequently pointed out, and from time to time
the department has published lists of those varieties best adapted to general
culture, as also those which require special localities, and further experience has
borne conclusive evidence of the value and accuracy of these reports. It was
distinctly shown, and it is now clearly admitted, that the distinguishing feature of
a good grape climate is that where there is an entire absence of mildew on the
foliage or on the fruit of the vines.360
In his opening remarks for the 1877 report, Saunders criticizes the U.S. Congress for
what he sees as insufficient appropriations for “the maintenance of the grounds, and for
the purposes of propagating plants” by reporting necessary reductions in employees in his
division. The direct result was a decrease in the number of plants distributed. He reports
“many thousands had to be abandoned.” Other areas of work that suffered due to lack of
funding included new acquisitions for the arboretum and especially the aquatic plants
planned for the lake. Continued work on the lake, he notes, “will be prosecuted from time
to time, as leisure offers opportunities from more pressing operations.”361 Saunders
reports that testing of Russian apples introduced to the Department “several years ago” is
inadequate. He argues that the adaptability and heartiness of these apples and other crops
can only be determined by planting and testing in various regions of the country. He
concludes, “happily there is no lack of fruit-growers who are willing to make such
experiments, and as soon as results are ascertained and reported, they will be published
for the benefit of all.”362 Saunders lists some of those other crops as well as additional
topics for research by the Department. They include Chinese tea, acclimatization of
plants, eucalyptus for which Saunders offers several pages of information from a paper
read, in 1874, at the Royal Society of Victoria and “published in the official catalogue of
360

AR 1878, 197
AR 1877, 47-48
362
AR 1877, 48
361

136

the Commissioners to the Centennial Exhibition for Victoria, Australia.” Similarly, his
report on oranges is a long excerpt from “a valuable paper by John R. Jackson, of Kew,
which appeared in the ‘Garden’.”363 He includes reports on “Pyrethrums as insectdestroyers,” a variety of chicory, and jute. His report for 1877 includes information on
several sources of oil including sesame for its oil and medicinal qualities; ground-nut and
tarweed and includes a chart borrowed from the noted French chemist, Jean-Baptiste
Boussingault, which provides further evidence of Saunders’ connection to agricultural
research outside the United States.364
The Reports of the Superintendent of Garden and Grounds for 1878 and 1879 have
similar content and focus. In the 1878 report, Saunders launches right into his crop
reports for that year foregoing any introductory remarks. The focus again is on economic
crops with most of his attention given to grape culture. Some of the other crops he
mentions are tea grown from seed (China, Japan, and Assam tea origins), coffee beans
from Liberia, Japanese persimmon which his division has experimented with for years
and now has ten named varieties some of which are hardy in “Northern States,” figs
which are generating a lot of interest among growers in the north, and apricots.
In his report for 1879, Saunders’ remarks offer some evidence of how the work in Garden
and Grounds was accomplished and some information about priorities and research
results:
The distributions for the year have aggregated to the number of one hundred and
ninety-five thousand plants of various kinds, but almost wholly of those having
economic value, as the olive, Japan persimmon, tea, coffee, cinchona, orange,
lemon, fig, grape, strawberry, &c. Fully seven-eighths of these plants were
distributed by mail, involving much labor in their preparation for this mode of
transportation.
Estimating these plants at the very low price of 5 cents each, they would represent
a money value of $9,750, a sum considerably above the amount of the
appropriation allowed for labor for propagating, and for keeping the gardens and
grounds of the Department in order, which includes 25,000 square feet of glass
structures well stocked with plants and 40 acres of ground, much of it kept as
363
364

AR 1877, 56
AR 1877, 65

137

lawn and flower-garden, with numerous walks and drives, together with
collections of grapes, strawberries, and other hardy fruiting plants, all of which
require much labor and attention for ordinary care and keeping.365
There are no published reports from Superintendent Saunders for 1880 though the Report
of the Commissioner includes information about the Garden and Grounds. Neither is
there a seeds report. There is, however, an interesting 29-page section called Department
Correspondence that offers information about the acquisition and distribution of seeds
and plants at the Department, “The correspondence of the department is one of the most
distinguishing features of its operations, embracing as it does the current information of
the progress of agriculture at home and abroad, an interchange of seeds, &c., with foreign
governments and individuals, and inquiries as to such new and valuable seeds as the
department may have for distribution and trial, and particularly as to the most approved
methods of culture. The department, while it has availed itself of such opportunities of
obtaining information as this correspondence has afforded, has freely, and as fully as was
practicable, responded to the various inquiries. This correspondence has been held, not
only with the regular and numerous corps of reporters, and with agricultural societies,
and with individuals in every section of the country, who make occasional calls for
information and advice, but with foreign governments, United States consuls, and other
persons in foreign countries who are accustomed to solicit information from the
department in relation to agriculture and kindred topics, as the result of experience in this
country. We subjoin a few notes from this correspondence, which are of general
interest.”366
The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1881-1884 – George
B. Loring, Commissioner
Saunders’ reporting for Loring’s term as Commissioner (1881-1884) is extremely
uneven. To be fair the Department Annual Reports for 1881 and 1882 were published in
one volume. Saunders had one formal report in that volume and one in the Department’s
Annual Report for 1883. Loring’s report for 1884 mentions the work of the

365
366

AR 1879, 359-360
AR 1880, 609

138

Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds but there is no report from Saunders in the
Department’s Annual Report for that year. Saunders has no prefatory remarks of note in
his report for 1881-1882. Instead he launches right into his reports on a selection of crops
noting again the frequent letters to his division of the Department of Agriculture
requesting information, seeds, and plants. This is the first time he explicitly frames his
selection in reference to that correspondence which, he notes, is concerned with the
“adaptability of various tropical and semi-tropical plants for cultivation in Southern
Florida and Southern California” and he cautions “it may not be well to pronounce too
decidedly, in advance of practical tests, in regard to the successful culture of any tropical
product.”367
The crops he discusses take their origins across a wide range of global regions including
Asia, Central and South America, the Caribbean, and from some parts of Southern
Europe, the Middle East and Africa. They include the tamarind tree, cherimoyer fruit,
sweet sop, bromeliad, Paraguay tea tree (mate), the chocolate-plant (cacao), turmeric,
Sicilian sumac, Japan varnish tree, Lee-Chee tree, Sago palms, aloes, clove tree, Chinese
tallow tree, chayote, cork tree, camphor tree, cinnamon tree, nutmeg tree, allspice tree,
bayberry tree, arrow-root, cassava, pistachio, terebinth tree (turpentine), black pepper,
and vanilla. Most are economic plants like the orris-root which, he notes, “In its fresh
state the root is extremely acrid, and when chewed, excites a pungent heat in the mouth
which lasts for some time. It loses this when dry, and exhales a delightful violet
fragrance, which makes it useful in scenting toilet and sachet powders.”368
He notes that fences were needed to protect Department of Agriculture experimental
crops from wild life and packs of stray dogs in Washington, D.C.; experiments with
economic plants, requests for seeds and plants “received almost daily” but without an
awareness of their lack of adaptability to those climates/regions, the critical need to
experiment on crops “in climates where no protection is required” in order to understand
them fully and “render them fit for field culture.” These were all key points in his report

367
368

AR 1881-1882, 215
AR 1881-1882, 229

139

for 1883 as was his concern for the continued lack of funding support for the work of his
Division. He opens his report with concern for both the decreasing amount of land
available to the Department and the vulnerability of the experimental plots, “the exposed
condition of the grounds since the removal of the fences, and their proximity to the city,
renders it impracticable to protect fruits from being pilfered or destroyed before they
ripen, so that comparative tests cannot be obtained. Another evil consequent upon
insufficient protection is the depredations of animals, especially dogs, which during their
nightly visits displace and scatter labels, break plants, and commit havoc which cannot be
repaired. Under these conditions it is not possible to preserve accuracy in the names of
plants or cuttings, except those which are kept constantly under glass.”369
In the Annual Report for 1883 what I have been referring to as crop reports in Saunders’
previous reports is a section in his report called, Cultural Remarks.370 The reports for this
year include grapes, potato-rot, the management of orchards and where to best situate
them, the glazing of greenhouse roofs, raspberries, root-pruning trees, hedges, draining
lands, and flower pots. Two reports caught my eye one on lawns and the other on seedsaving. The former suggests that research by the Department of Agriculture helped to
inform the development of lawns and golf courses that were gaining popularity at this
time.371 For the latter, Saunders discusses the pros and cons of farmers and gardeners
saving seeds noting that “as a general rule it is cheaper, in the long run, to buy seeds than
to attempt to save them” because of how hard it is to insure the authenticity of the future
crop. He writes, “It is one of the great arts in seed raising to keep varieties true to their
descriptive peculiarities . . . .”372 He concludes on a recurring issue and stance, that is,
reports of bad seeds are less about the seeds supplied than how they were handled and
sown by the farmer or gardener.373
369

AR 1883, 181
AR 1883, 182
371
See, Virginia S. Jenkins, The Lawn: An American Obsession (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press, 2015). The USDA ARS continues to issue reports on best practices with grasses for golf courses.
See, for example, “Keeping the Green in Putting Greens,” a short summary of a longer study that appeared
in both the magazine of the ARS in May/June 2012 and the Journal of the American Society of
Horticultural Sciences. Machinery for mowing laws emerge at this time. https://www.ars.usda.gov/newsevents/news/research-news/2012/keeping-the-green-in-putting-greens/
372
AR 1883, 195
373
AR 1883, 196
370

140

The Report of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds, 1885-1889 – Norman
J. Colman, Commissioner
For the term of Commissioner Colman (1885-1889), the Superintendent of the Garden
and Grounds, William Saunders, submits only three published reports 1885, 1886, and
1887.374 The Department of Agriculture’s Annual Reports for this period include
extensive reports on seeds in the form of the Report of Chief of Seed Division, William
M. King and the Report of the Pomologist, H.E. Van Deman.375 Each of those reports
focus on plants and seeds.
The form and content of Saunders’ reports change in these years in some significant
ways. The report for 1885 is the closest to earlier reports with a short introduction in
which Saunders bemoans the lack of sufficient land for experiments by the Department.
He also reports on a selection of crops. In his opening remarks, Saunders writes about his
work “preparing exhibits” about the work of the Department of Agriculture for
expositions in Cincinnati, Louisville, and New Orleans. He reports that the exhibits were
opportunities for “presenting, as far as practicable, the operations of the various divisions
of the Department and their relations to the industries represented.”376
In his report for 1886 Saunders offers no introductory remarks. He reports on orange
culture and notes his “recent visits to Florida, in the interest of the Department have
enabled me to acquire some knowledge of the climate, soil, and productions of that State .
. . .” The tone of the section on the orange suggests Saunders is sharing his personal
observations and conclusions. His narrative also includes references to recent
publications by horticulturalists thus demonstrating his knowledge of the literature of
horticultural cultivation. He ends this section with an interesting statement about how
consumers are aware of qualities of various fruits and will expect “choice named kinds . .
374

Note that my study ends with the Annual Report of 1888 as the last one submitted before the
Department of Agriculture was elevated to a position in the President’s Cabinet in 1889.
375
The Report of the Pomologist ends with stunning illustrations of fruits – six full-page color plates and 3
black and white plates. (Between pages 652 and 653 of the Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for
1887.)
376
AR 1885, 33

141

. over those . . . gathered indiscriminately from groves of seedling trees and whose
uniformity cannot be guaranteed.”377
His report for 1887 departs significantly from his previous reports and in ways that are
especially interesting considering the focus of this dissertation. By this time Saunders has
worked at the Department of Agriculture for twenty-five years. Saunders decides to use
the space allotted him in the Annual Report to respond directly to “official
correspondence of the Department…referred to the Superintendent for consideration and
reply” noting that many of those inquiries have shared interests and yet, “as far as the
Department is concerned, reach only the individual addressed.” He writes that he
“selected the following from the many similar communications, with a view to lessen
repetitions . . . . ”378 The correspondence he responds to on the next eighteen pages
include inquiries for seeds and plants, requests for information about specific insects, a
request for advice on soil management, another request for “description and sketch of the
Lotus plant of Egypt,” advice for growing a lawn, report on progress of a “camphor tree
received from the Department six years ago” that flourished but did not seem to produce;
also requests for gum, opium, coffee, and ramie.379 The requests come from people in
Florida, Maryland, Delaware, South Carolina, New York State, New York City, Iowa,
Georgia, Virginia, Kansas, West Virginia, California, Texas, Missouri, Pennsylvania,
North Carolina, and Oregon. The initials for the name of the person making the request
and their location are included along with their question and Saunders’ answer. One
example from “C.E. of Liberty County, GA” concerns the opium poppy, “I have reason
to believe that the opium poppy will do well here, and would try it if I had enough seed of
the right variety to make a plantation of several acres. Can you furnish seed or procure it
for me at my expense?” The answer Saunders provides is long and discusses climate, soil,
and proper techniques for planting the seeds. He concludes with the following
information:

377

AR 1886, 691
AR 1887, 673
379
AR 1887, 676
378

142

It is highly improbable that it can be profitably produced in this country, as may
be gleaned from the details of collecting the juice.
When the seeds pods are properly matured the milky juice is obtained by making
incisions in the pod with small lancets. This requires great care, so that the
incision is not made through the entire substance of the pod: the surface only is
scarified. The cutting being performed in the afternoon, the opium is allowed to
exude and remain on the pod till next morning, when it is scraped off, drop by
drop, and thus collected in a small cup. Successive incisions are required to secure
complete exudation.
It is thus seen that the process is slow and tedious, and it is stated that the average
pay of the operators does not reach 10 cents per day.
The factory operations in preparing the article for commerce are also tedious and
complicated, involving much manual labor, which is cheaply procured in Asiatic
countries.380
It is interesting to note Saunders’ frustration with the number of requests for seeds and
plants from people who do not consider whether they have the proper climate and soil
conditions for those specimens.
Conclusion
The Organic Act of 1862 that established the Department of Agriculture explicitly
directed the new agency to focus a significant portion of its work on seeds and plants.
The specific language of the Organic Act on this aspect of the agency’s mission reads,
“Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled. That there is hereby established at the seat of
government of the United States a Department of Agriculture, the general designs and
duties of which shall be to acquire and to diffuse among the people of the United States
useful information on subjects connected with agriculture in the most general and
comprehensive sense of that word, and to procure, propagate, and distribute among the
people new and valuable seeds and plants.”381

380

AR 1887, 678
The full text of the Organic Act was reprinted in the Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the
Year 1862, the first issued by the new agency. (The emphasis is mine.) Page 3.
381

143

It is clear that Superintendent Saunders was wholly committed to fulfilling this mandate
of Congress. We have seen in his first report a measure of his commitment to meeting
those goals outlined by the U.S. Congress and, in fact, expanding and elaborating on
them, in what became the first official publication of the Department of Agriculture. In it
Saunders identified a detailed set of priorities for the Division of Gardens and Grounds at
the Department. The timing of this publication and the level of detail it offers suggest
Saunders had given a great deal of thought to this work even before the Organic Act
established the Department of Agriculture in 1862.
As this chapter has shown, his reports for the full length of my study, 1862 to 1888, offer
further evidence of the experience and background he brought with him to his role as the
first Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds. He not only had a plan but a network of
professional colleagues and informants in the United States and abroad. He called on that
network to identify and contribute seeds and plants for experimentation, exhibition, and
preservation in, for example, an herbarium and a national arboretum as part of the
agency’s grounds on what is now the National Mall in Washington, D.C. Culling the
information from the reports of the gardener I identify some patterns in terms of
crops/plants/seeds that raise questions about goals and priorities of the plant and seed
research and its place in the development/advancement of farming/agriculture in this
country. One example is the strong and persistent focus in his reports on efforts by his
division to establish a viable native grape industry as one way to reduce the quantities of
grape products imported – not just wine but also tannin used for curing animal hides.
What we also see is a system of information production and exchange that extended
beyond the states and territories of the United States and was global in its reach in terms
of both acquisition and distribution of seeds, plants, and research reports. Those efforts
drew on formal and informal networks of agricultural research and researchers outside of
the Department of Agriculture and outside the U.S. Some of those connections were
personal, but many were professional conducted via correspondence/letters, journals,
institutions, societies, expositions. They are further evidence of the Department’s
interactions with diverse publics and its global reach. However, we do not learn much in
the way of details about agricultural and horticultural research in other countries.

144

The reports of the gardener lack the rhetorical style and power of those of the
commissioners but one still finds in them evidence of the challenges faced by the new
Department in terms of funding and support as well as purpose/mission. They reveal
little about the community of scientists or staff at the Department of Agriculture and even
less about the culture of the work and workplace. They do offer some insight into the
scale of correspondence from farmers and other stakeholders in agriculture as Saunders
shares examples of both inquiries and reports from people who correspond with his
division at the Department.
Recurring themes in Saunders’ reports over the course of his work as Superintendent of
the Garden and Grounds include regular reports on the meager resources allotted by the
U.S. Congress for his work; the need for and value of collections of seeds and plants of
the United States and those from other countries that would thrive in the United States;
agricultural production as the foundation for the health of the nation; a concern for high
quality seeds and plants for research, curation, and distribution, identifying the best and
most suited plants and seeds for the various growing regions of the United States;
research on economic and medicinal plants like cinchona, coffee, tobacco, and tea; the
urgent need to test seeds and plants in local or regional settings best suited for those
crops; and a high level of engagement with the public from whom his section received a
large volume of correspondence on a regular basis. Evidence of Saunders’ frustrations are
also evident in that he was quick to complain about inquiries for seeds and plants that
failed to understand the soil and climate conditions necessary for a crop. He also
expressed considerable annoyance when those who received the seeds they requested
reported back to the Department that they failed to germinate or failed to yield a good
crop.
As the country expanded in terms of territory and population the demands put on the
work of the Department of Agriculture grew. Advances in scientific research resulted in
new specialties in agricultural research. With that growth, we see new and more refined
areas of work at the Department. Many of those new divisions did work that was

145

previously under the purview of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds.
Examples include divisions of chemistry, entomology, botany, and forestry. Still, the
Annual Reports demonstrate that William Saunders remained a significant force in the
growth and development of the Department of Agriculture under the commissionership.
He exploited his existing networks and established new relationships with colleagues in
the United States and abroad and used those networks to bring new plants and seeds to
the Department of Agriculture for analysis and experimentation with the purpose of
identifying those that would be best as crops in the United States and its territories.

146

CHAPTER 6: THE REPORTS OF THE STATISTICIAN, 1862-1888
Introduction
Prior to the establishment of the Department of Agriculture in 1862 as the federal agency
responsible for collection, research, and distribution of agricultural information, such
work (collecting and disseminating information about crops, crop yields, acres farmed,
prices, etc.) was part of the agricultural information work at the United States Patent
Office. Agricultural statistics were collected as part of the United States Census from its
beginning in 1790. The census was conducted every ten years as stipulated by the U.S.
Constitution, and United States Marshals were responsible for conducting the census and
providing the supplies needed to record the data collected, “From 1790 to 1820, U.S.
Marshals conducting the census were responsible for supplying paper and writing-in
headings related to the questions asked (i.e., name, age, sex, race, etc.). In 1830,
Congress authorized the printing of uniform schedules for use throughout the United
States.”382
In 1820, the United States Census began to include questions aimed at identifying the
number of people in the United States engaged in agricultural labor, “including
slaves.”383 The U.S. Census for 1840, included a section dedicated to agriculture and
agricultural work. The census for 1850 included two sections of questions relating to
agriculture: Section 14 and Schedule No. 4 – Productions of Agriculture for 1850. The
382

Measuring America: The Decennial Censuses From 1790 to 2000. September 2002. Report Number:
POL/02-MA(RV). U.S. Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2002/dec/pol_02ma.html The fieldwork required for conducting the census was a huge undertaking in terms of geography,
time, and the logistics of collecting, recording, and submitting information. U.S. Marshals were a prudent
choice as agents of the census given that they were stationed in each judiciary district of the country.
According to a report issued by the U.S. Government Accountability Office, Appointment and
Qualifications of U.S. Marshals, “The U.S. Marshal Service was created by the first Congress in the
Judiciary Act of 1789. U.S. Marshals were placed in each federal judicial district and were given broad
authority to support the federal courts and to carry out all lawful orders issued by judges, Congress, and the
President. Early duties of U.S. Marshals included taking the census, distributing presidential proclamations,
protecting the borders, and making arrests.” http://www.gao.gov/assets/100/91786.pdf
383
Ibid, 6. The instructions for administering the census for 1870 cautioned census workers to “be very
careful to distinguish between farmers and farm laborers.” (16) Digitized versions of the historical census
of agriculture for the United States – from 1840 – are available online via the Mann Library at Cornell
University,
http://agcensus.mannlib.cornell.edu/AgCensus/homepage.do;jsessionid=0C021FD1DDF481E91CE49FFF8
F179FE0

147

former gathered information about the number of acres, and people employed in
agriculture and the latter, with overarching categories of “livestock” and “produce,”
solicited more detailed information than in previous years. Those additional categories
evolved into the crop and livestock reports we see in the work of the Department of
Agriculture for the period of this study, 1862-1888.384 The agricultural statistics
published by the U.S. Patent Office and the Department of Agriculture’s reports on
agricultural statistics were drawn from what was essentially historical data collected by
the United States Census every ten years. The timeliness and usefulness of historical
census data was an early concern of the Statistical Division at the Department of
Agriculture. We will see later in this chapter the remedies to that problem proposed and
instituted by the Statistical Division at the Department of Agriculture.
As I noted in the previous chapter on the information work of the Superintendent of the
Garden and Grounds, of particular importance to my study is to identify in the Annual
Reports the methods, tools, and techniques used to fulfill the Department of Agriculture’s
mission to acquire and distribute agricultural information. In the case of the Annual
Reports of the Statistical Division of the Department of Agriculture I was interested in
seeing if the reports offered information on the systems and processes developed and
employed by the Division; how the information was acquired and disseminated; who did
that work; and ways collecting priorities and strategies changed over time.
The work of the Statistical Division as represented in the reports submitted to the
commissioners by the Statistician each year for the Department’s Annual Report suggest
that its work was more systematic than the work at Garden and Grounds. The Division
inherited systems and processes for the collection and distribution of agricultural
statistics employed at the U.S. Patent Office beginning in the late 1830s. The first reports
from the Statistical Division of the Department of Agriculture relied on information
gathered as part of the decennial United States Census and used that historical census
data to show evidence of changes in agricultural production including the conditions of

384

The Seventh Census of the United States, 1850. An Appendix. J.D.B. DeBow, Superintendent of the
Census. 1853. See, Forms Used in the Census Office section, xiv and xii.

148

the soil, the amount of land tilled, crop yields, and crop prices. The Department also
developed a deep and diverse network of information sources and resources for its work.
Examples from the Annual Reports demonstrate that those networks relied on a process
that exploited formal and informal networks, institutions, and individuals. Included in
those networks were diplomats, explorers, field agents in all the states and territories of
the country, as well as other agencies of the U.S. government. The Department itself
identified specific information it required or found useful and used its networks of agents
and correspondents to gather that information and send it back to the Division for
analysis, publication, and distribution. The reports of the Statistician between 1862 and
1888 describe how data was collected, processed, and disseminated.
Systems of information work
The agricultural information work of the Department of Agriculture was described and
shared in its Annual Reports. As I have discussed earlier in this dissertation, the data
gathered, analyzed, and disseminated by the Statistical Division constitute one form of
agricultural information the U.S. Congress tasked the new agency with collecting and
distributing. The analysis and presentation of the data as well as its interpretation and its
distribution by the Division, are examples of systems of information work at the
Department of Agriculture during the period of this study, 1862-1888.385 The acquisition
and analysis of statistical information about the state of agricultural work and production
were critical aspects of agricultural information work at the Department. The new agency
struggled to develop more efficient systems that would result in the information it
collected and analyzed reaching farmers and other stakeholders in agriculture while it
was still relevant and useful. We see in the Statistical Division reports evidence of that
information work, who contributed, and who used it. This is especially evident in the
correspondence from farmers and others and in the more formal data collected by
volunteer correspondents of the Department of Agriculture using surveys or circulars sent
out by the Statistical Division. It is also evident in the narrative sections of the reports of
the Statistical Division.

385

Black and Schiller (2014).

149

The Annual Reports include examples of an active and steady correspondence from a
constituency that included farmers, gardeners, and horticulturalists. Many requested seeds
and plants. Others offered information about their successes or failures with various crops
or reported on the general conditions of agriculture. We also see evidence of an
expansive network of information exchange among a diverse set of players. The venues
included journals, conferences, and correspondence; the types of information included
scientific reports, crop yields, informal observations, as well as plants and seeds.
The Reports of the Statistician for 1862-1888 reveal some of the ways this new agency,
charged with establishing the federal government as an authoritative and effective
resource in agricultural research and practice, drew on the legacy of informal (indigenous
or local) information / knowledge practices. It directly solicited a wide range of
information from farmers and horticulturalists and independent researchers. The
Statistical Division also made effective use of existing informal and personal
relationships with other scientists and agriculturalists working in botanical garden,
agricultural societies, and other state agencies both here and abroad or independent
researchers.
The Statisticians
The Statistical Division was established at the Department of Agriculture in 1863.
Between 1863 and 1888 three men served as the statistician for the Department of
Agriculture. Their service is best seen in the Annual Reports they authored: Lewis
Bollman (1863-1864), Jacob Richards Dodge (1865-1877), Charles Worthington (18781880), and Jacob Richards Dodge (1881-1888).386
Lewis Bollman was appointed as the first statistician for the Department in the spring of
1863 shortly after the Statistical Division was established at the Department. Bollman
was a farmer in Indiana before coming to the Department where he served as the first
head of the Statistical Division at the Department of Agriculture for approximately three

386

List by Titles of Publications of the United States Department of Agriculture from 1840 to June, 1901,
Inclusive (1902), 173-174.

150

years. The Annual Reports for his years as Statistician indicate that he followed the
examples set by the statistical work on agriculture at the Patent Office. The second man
to serve as the head of the Division was Jacob Richards (J.R.) Dodge. He came to the
new agency in 1862 from the U.S. Patent Office where he worked as a clerk and had a
hand in the collection of agricultural statistics. Dodge first served as the editor of the
Annual Reports and was responsible for the publications of the Department. He became
the head of the Statistical Division at the Department of Agriculture in 1867. Dodge
served in those capacities until June 30, 1879 when he left the Department to head the
agricultural section of the U.S. Census. He returned to the Department of Agriculture in
July 1, 1881 to resume his position as head of the Statistical Division, which he held until
1893.387 Among Dodge’s many tasks were extending and refining the practice that began
with agricultural statistics work in the Patent Office prior to the establishment of the
Department of Agriculture in 1862. The Commissioner’s 1864 Annual Report described
the value of agricultural statistics in his letter to the U.S. Congress, “These estimates are
also published in the reports of this department, and by the information thus made public
the commerce in farm stock and their products is regulated, and the farmer’s attention is
timely directed to a decrease or over-production of any one of them. Heretofore an evil
in our agriculture, was over-production, occasioned by a casual demand from abroad; but
the tables of this department like the regulator of the steam-engine, will do much to
prevent either a deficiency or its opposite.”388
The Annual Reports of the Statistical Division for the period from 1862 through 1888 are
filled with tables of numbers drawn from varied sources including the U.S. Census and
surveys administered by the Department of Agriculture itself. The Statisticians and each
Commissioner were careful to point out the value of statistical information for
agriculture. It is critical to place this commitment to and value for agricultural statistics in
the historical context of the development of statistics. In his book, The Rise of Statistical
387

Greathouse writes that Dodge wielded significant influence as Statistician from the outset. Dodge left
the Department to head the Census in 1879 in large part because he and Commissioner Le Duc had
significant disagreements. Charles Worthington wrote the annual reports for the Statistical Division for
1878 to 1880 and in each identifies himself as the Statistician according to the annual reports of the
Department of Agriculture. It may be that Dodge had to serve out the fiscal year but that Worthington was
the appointed head of the Division and thus responsible for the Division report for 1878.
388
AR 1864, 8-9

151

Thinking, 1820-1890, Theodore Porter argues that the use of the term “statistics” is
associated with a “great explosion of numbers” in the early 19th century. It had a dramatic
impact on the organization and expression of knowledge by the expectations it “placed on
people to classify things so that they could be counted and placed in an appropriate box
on some official table, and more generally its impact on the character of the information
people need to possess before they feel they understand something . . . .”389 Porter
distinguishes “political arithmetic” from statistics, which was tied to both scientific
thought and philosophical theory interested in explaining natural and social phenomena.
The former, political arithmetic, was more directly used by or for the state's centralizing
bureaucracy and its use of information to control. The latter, statistics, became associated
with science and assertions about natural law locating truth in something outside the
state. The statistical work of the Department of Agriculture grew under Dodge in the
same period that Porter suggests a transition from political arithmetic to statistical work
concerned with variation, but not yet at the point of demonstrating causal relationships
and measuring probability.390
What evidence do we see in the Annual Reports of the Statistical Division at the
Department of Agriculture of how and why statistical work evolved at the Department?
What was the significance of its work? What kind of information did the Division collect,
process, and distribute? What influences were there on statistical work at the Department
of Agriculture – social, cultural, economic, and political? What were the characteristics
of the system(s) of information it generated? Do we see in the Division Reports any
evidence of challenges to the authority of the Department's agricultural statistics? These
are questions I brought to my reading of the Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture’s Statistician under the Commissionership, 1862-1888.
The Annual Reports of the Statistician by the Term of Each Commissioner, 18621888
389

Porter (1986), 11.
Porter (1986), 3. In his chapter on the origins of statistics, Daniel Headrick (2000) suggests that statistics
were used in the U.S in the early 19th century to promote moral reform. Examples include temperance
campaigns, the importance of religious and moral instruction for the “poor,” and the pervasiveness of
prostitution and the negative effect it had on society. (Headrick, 79)
390

152

The following analysis organizes and examines the Reports of the Statistical Division of
the Department of Agriculture in clusters defined by the term of office of each
commissioner of the Department between 1862 and 1888. I looked at each report of the
Statistical Division and noted a great consistency of focus. I cover the full range of years,
1862-1888, but use this chapter to highlight areas of significance or divergence in the
work of the Division. I am especially interested in identifying references to agricultural
information work in the reports for the Statistical Division, evidence of the perceived
importance of that work, and evaluation of the effectiveness of it, as well. I look for
patterns and progressions within the term of each commissioner and conclude this chapter
with a discussion of what we learn about the information work and information systems
of the Statistical Division from 1862 through 1888.
Terms of the Commissioners of Agriculture:
1862-1867

Isaac Newton391

1867-1870

Horace Capron

1871-1876

Frederick Watts

1877-1880

William G. Le Duc

1881-1884

George B. Loring

1885-1889

Norman J. Colman392

The Report of the Statistician, 1862-1867 – Isaac Newton, Commissioner
I devote more attention to the reports of the Statistical Division for Newton’s term as
commissioner for two reasons: first, because these are the first years of work at the
Department but, also, because we see in the reports for these years the emergence of
systems for the collection, analysis, and dissemination of agricultural statistics.

391

As noted previously in this dissertation, Commissioner Newton died suddenly while still in office in
June 1867. The chief clerk of the Department, John Stokes, assumed his duties as commissioner until the
appointment of the next permanent Commissioner in November 1867.
392
The Department’s status changed during the term of Commissioner Colman. In February 1888 the
Department was elevated to Cabinet-level status. It remained in the Executive Branch but the change in
status meant the Department had a seat in the President’s Cabinet, the Secretary of Agriculture.
Commissioner Colman’s status changed and his last month of service to the Department was as the first
Secretary of the Department of Agriculture. (Greathouse, 1898; 20-21)

153

The first report of the Statistical Division of the newly established Department of
Agriculture was for 1862. It was called, “Reports and Tables of Agricultural Statistics,”
and was not signed by the Statistician, Lewis Bollman. Historians of the Department
suggest Dodge, who came to the Department in 1862 after having worked with
agricultural statistics as a clerk at the Patent Office, submitted that first report. The
content and format of the report followed the example set at the U.S. Patent Office. It
included information and estimates about crops, yield, prices, and acreage for 1859 and
1862 based on the returns for the United States Census for 1860. The author, Dodge the
editor of the Annual Reports of the Department, begins his 42-page report with four short
paragraphs to orient the reader, “The census returns for 1860 having been published, it is
due to agriculture that at the earliest moment the returns of the principal agricultural
products should be republished in the Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture.
The reports accompanying the tables have been prepared in the hope that they would
serve to give greater interest in the tables. Any inaccuracies which may be found, must be
attributed to the yet imperfect manner of collecting statistics, and to want of time and
means for verifying them.”393 Dodge continues by offering context for the report and its
comparisons of agricultural production for the “loyal” and the “disloyal” states:
The agriculture of the United States, either as to its amount or the variety and
importance of its productions, is without a parallel. The changes it is undergoing,
and the causes producing them, cannot but be deeply interesting to all, but more
especially to the manufacturing and commercial interests, the prosperity of which
is so completely dependent on the progress of agriculture.
The reader will see that these tables give the agricultural statistics of the loyal and
disloyal States separately. The year of the rebellion followed that in which these
statistics were taken. This fact, therefore, naturally suggested the utility of
exhibiting their absolute and comparative progress, that the world might judge
how far this rebellion was justified by any want of prosperity in the south,
indicative of grievances that demanded redress.
The object of this article is to show the vastness of American agriculture, the
changes it is undergoing, the causes of these changes, and the progress made by
the loyal and disloyal sections of the Union in their agricultural industry. That

393

AR 1862, 546

154

object will be best accomplished by a brief consideration, separately, of the
leading products of our agriculture.394
Subsections of this first report of the condition of agriculture in the United States as
demonstrated by data collected by the U.S. Census include: Animal Stock of the Farm;
the Corn Crop; Wheat—its Production and Exportation; Tobacco—its Increase and
Foreign Trade; Cotton and Wool; Sorghum Molasses and Sugar (this includes a section
on imports of each product between 1856 and 1861); Hay Crop; Destruction of the Soil;
Domestic Manufactures (fibers); and the Influence of Railroads upon the Value of Farms;
Farming Implements and Machinery. The subsection of the Statistical Division’s report,
the influence of manufactures upon agriculture, the agriculture, manufactures and
commerce of the United States has additional subsections that include: The relative profit
of agricultural labor, the mutual dependence of all states, prosperity of the southern states
– the rebellion). The statistical tables for agriculture in the report for 1862 include: 1860
population of loyal states (22 million) and population of disloyal states (9 million),
agricultural production of “loyal” and “disloyal” states for 1840, 1850, 1860 both detailed
tables and a summary, The Collection of Statistics, principal crops for 1862 with yield
per acre, acreage planted, average prices by (loyal) state, total value by state, summary by
(loyal) state shows value at 736 million with 51 million acres sown.395
This first report also includes a special report on agriculture in California. Dodge
expresses concern that many were not convinced of the value of agricultural statistics and
he notes that California is one of the few states that fully participates in the collection of
agricultural statistics for the Department. The state, “exhibits a juster regard for statistical
information than any other State.”396 He introduces the section on the agriculture of
California with a few short paragraphs in which he discusses the importance of statistical
work and, too, popular distrust for it. Dodge offers the example of Scotland, which had a
tradition of collecting agricultural statistics. He points to one necessary condition for
statistics of agriculture to have authority, that is, that every state contribute to the

394

AR 1862, 546
AR 1862, 588
396
AR 1862, 574
395

155

agricultural census. He quotes the Duke of Argyle, president of the Highland Agricultural
Society of Scotland, on how collecting agricultural statistics for just one part of a country
compromised their value, “in England at least, there is a very great prejudice against
statistical information; and I believe that there is a sense of the comparative inutility of
collecting it in one part of the country when it is not done over the whole country, and the
impossibility which every government has hitherto found in insisting upon that
information being collected in England, has been one of the causes which have led this
society to drop the collection of these statistics. I do not wonder at it. It was a
circumstance of very great discouragement, because the value of statistics depends upon
their completeness, and if you have not statistics for the whole island, undoubtedly the
utility of the statistics you have gathered is very much impaired. Nevertheless, I cannot
help expressing the hope that the time is not very far distant when these prejudices to
which I have referred, which do not exist in Scotland, will be overcome in England, and
that, under the guardianship of the law, a complete system of agricultural statistics will be
organized for the whole kingdom.”397 This is just one of several references in the
Department’s Annual Reports to demonstrate a keen awareness of and engagement with
similar work in other countries (especially those in Europe) as well as the lessons the new
Department could learn from those colleagues.
Dodge uses the example of California to discuss what he sees as the limitations to a
decennial census of agriculture conducted as part of the larger census for the United
States.398 He identifies limitations both in terms of timeliness and the type of information
collected. Dodge offers these observations and concern, “A portion of the agricultural
statistics of the whole country is taken every ten years by the general government; but it
397

AR 1862, 574
Dodge concludes this section on the agriculture in California with discussion of the unique challenges of
agricultural production in that state that turn on issues of land ownership: The great body of California
lands not sold are those reserved from sale as mineral lands. The policy of the government is to prevent
them from being absorbed by speculators. This is a just policy, for it favors the laboring classes, and the
welfare of these should ever be regarded. Whether the laborer is a miner or a farmer is immaterial; he
should not be subjected to the capitalist. But as fast as these lands are exhausted of their minerals, they
should be surveyed and disposed of to the actual settler. From this rapid consideration of the agriculture of
California, it will be seen that the chief danger to it lies in the accumulation of its best farming lands in the
hands of a few proprietors under the Mexican grants [that established ranchos intended to be used as
pasture]. The power to remove this evil is with the legislature of the State. (AR 1862, 597)
398

156

has reference less to the improvement of agriculture than to the assistance of commerce.
It is simply an inventory of the leading crops and of the chief items of agricultural
investment. It does not aim to unfold our vast internal commerce, by showing the cost of
market transportation and in what sections the crops are consumed. The relation of the
different parts of agriculture to each other, to manufactures and commerce, is but
imperfectly and very generally exhibited. A political consequence of this was the
attempted usurpation of cotton. At what expense to the farmer these crops are produced;
at what cost to the soil; what are the errors of our agriculture, its difficulties, its
hardships, its wrongs—all such matters are neither directly nor indirectly a purpose or an
accomplishment of our decennial statistics.”399
Dodge reports that the Department of Agriculture sent out its own inquiries in an effort to
construct more meaningful and timely statistical information about the condition of
agriculture in the United States. The inquiries from the Department took the form of
surveys sent, “to every county in the loyal States, making inquiries relative to the prices
of agricultural products in them and the average yield per acre of the leading crops. He
issued others, during the summer and fall months, to make known the monthly condition
of the crops, their amounts, &c. The medium, for communicating the knowledge obtained
through the latter to the public, was monthly reports, and the following tables will show
the statistics obtained in answer to the first circular.” Anticipating a change in the
frequency of the agricultural census that came in the first decades of the 20th century,
Dodge asks, “Could the several States and the general government be induced to adopt a
uniform and thorough system of taking agricultural statistics but once in ten years—the
States every fifth year of this period and the general government every tenth year—the
basis thus furnished would be sufficient for this Department, through its regular
correspondents, to derive correct information of all matters embodied in this system for
the remainder of the years of the decade.”400

399
400

AR 1862, 574
AR 1862, 574-575

157

In his first report as the statistician for the Department of Agriculture for the year 1863
and dated August 1864, Lewis Bollman writes that the approach to the collection of
agricultural statistics at the Department is based on a plan offered by Orange Judd, editor
and owner at the American Agriculturalist.401 Judd’s plan, Bollman notes, while useful
also had considerable limitations in an American context, “To Mr. Judd belongs the
credit of giving definite shape to a plan for the annual collection of the statistics of the
crops, by which their amount could be approximated to sufficiently near for all practical
purposes. His plan is virtually the same as the Prussian, and it is the one adopted by this
department. The details, however, have been much changed by it, and made applicable to
almost every matter belonging to agricultural production.”402 Bollman outlines a list of
priorities that reveal some of the systems the Division and the Department were
developing to ensure accurate and meaningful information was both collected and
disseminated:
1. The collection of agricultural statistics showing the condition and amount of
the crops at brief intervals, monthly or bi-monthly, as the interests of
agriculture demand.
2. The collection and arrangement of such statistical matter as exhibits the
commerce, both foreign and domestic, in the leading agricultural products:
that, having the tables always at hand, and understanding from them the
influence of this commerce on prices, the farmer may intelligently direct his
labor to the culture of such crops as the statistics indicate will be most in
demand.
3. The collection of information on all subjects connected with the advancement
of agriculture. This information is obtained through circulars issued to
401

Judd grew up in New England where he graduated from Wesleyan College (CT) in 1847. He was a
powerful player in American agriculture in the 19th century. He became the owner of the agricultural
newspaper, the American Agriculturist (also referred to as the American Agriculturalist) in 1856. The
Wikipedia entry for Judd is surprisingly complete and the citations accurate and useful. The entry also
confirms information found in Bollman’s report for 1863 (587) that under Judd’s direction, the newspaper
developed a system for collecting agricultural statistics via surveys sent to its subscribers. The paper then
published that information. The biographical entry continues, “His success helped make American
Agriculturist into one of the leading agricultural journals in the nation, going from a circulation 1,000 in
1856, to over 100,000 in 1864…. [Judd] would stay there [at the paper] until 1881, alongside being the
agricultural editor of the New York Times from 1855 to 1863. He became the principal member of the firm
Orange Judd and Company, located in Chicago, which focused on publishing agricultural and scientific
books…from 1870 to 1873.” It is interesting to note that like Commission Frederick Watts (1871-1877),
Judd was president of a regional railroad company in the late 1860s.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orange_Judd
402

AR 1863, 589

158

correspondents, in which inquiries are made as to the condition and amount of
the various crops, and also of the causes of success or failure.
4. In order to accomplish the foregoing objects it became indispensably
necessary to publish a monthly report. This was done during the summer and
fall of 1863, after which it was changed to bi-monthly, because returns of the
circulars could not be had in time for a monthly.403
Bollman also offers this observation about the perceived audiences for the statistical
reports: how it was collected and how it was useful, “Through these reports the condition
and amount of the crops have been laid before the country quickly, that the grower of and
the trader in agricultural products might base commerce on them by the law of supply
and demand; and their influence has everywhere been acknowledged as beneficial to
both, and not less so to the consumer. They have been distributed to correspondents, who
reply to the circulars, and to their assistants; to agricultural societies; to members of
Congress, and to all persons desiring them.”404 Bollman’s report shares the general focus
and format of the statistical report that preceded it and those that followed. He compares
the way the Department of Agriculture collects statistical information on the state of
agriculture with similar efforts in England and Prussia.405 His reports on estimates of
agricultural crops, acres farmed, agricultural prices and the value of crops, and livestock
403

AR 1863, 579
AR 1863, 580
405
Bollman reports that in England, “…this nation, where agriculture has attained such high perfection, no
mode of ascertaining its product, established by law, exists. The farmers of England oppose it, whilst those
of Scotland favor it. Attempts have been made in Parliament to establish one, but as yet unsuccessfully.
Their only result has been to elicit the reasons of this hostility of the English farmers, which, so far as we
have seen them, are refuted by experience here.” (AR 1863, 581) Bollman continues his criticism of the
English approach, “The plan as seen in these extracts has great objections. After reading all the returns,
who can tell their result? They convey an impression that the crops are good, but how much above or below
a standard, or a normal, or an average crop, no one can tell. They are too prolix, although as much
condensed as the plan will allow. For the forty counties of England they would require thirty-two pages of
the size of those of this report. For the United States they would demand a large volume, which would be
read by not more than one person in a half million of our population. Nor does this plan institute a
comparison with the crop of any preceding year. These objections do not obtain to the plans adopted in the
United States or Prussia.” (AR 1863, 584)
404

His report for Prussia offers this assessment: “This nation has a department of agriculture, presided over by
a secretary. In its operations agricultural societies act as an aid to the department. They meet together and
make up an annual report of the crops. We have no knowledge of the means adopted by them to collect the
information they embody in their report…. Their estimates…are comparative, and the standard of
comparison is one hundred, representing an imaginary normal crop. As no census has ever been taken there
of the number of bushels produced in any one year, the comparison must always be with this imaginary
standard; nor can their returns be reduced to bushels, as there are here, for want of a basis which such
census would furnish.” (AR 1863, 584)

159

in the “loyal” states compare numbers for 1862 and 1863. Bollman includes “tables of the
exports of the principal agricultural products of these States [loyal states of the U.S.],
their prices at New York and in England; the receipts and shipments of them at the two
principal centering points – New York and Chicago – and their prices in these cities.”406
We see reflected in Bollman’s introductory remarks, the scope of the focus of the
Department in terms of what information it deemed especially critical to collect and
disseminate to farmers and the other stakeholders for agricultural production in the
United States.
The Annual Report for 1864 offers more insight into the extent of professional contact
between the Department of Agriculture and governments in Europe. The Annual Report
for 1864 includes a special section by Dodge that sits just before the Bollman’s report on
the work of the Statistical Division for the year. Dodge’s contribution, “Consular
Correspondence,” not only offers evidence of Dodge’s interest in and influence on
statistical work at the Department of Agriculture but also demonstrates a global reach and
community for the development of agricultural statistics, “A system of correspondence
with our consuls abroad, designed to elicit information concerning the character and
condition of foreign agriculture, and to procure an exchange of industrial statistics, has
been initiated by the Department of Agriculture. . . . [T]he consuls have generally
manifested, not only a willingness, but a decided interest, and some-times enthusiasm, in
their efforts to render this service as valuable as possible. Much of this matter, though
useful and indispensable to the office, is not of a character to spread upon the pages of the
annual report.”407
The report of the Statistical Division for 1864 strays little from the established format and
content but does explicitly address the relevance of the Department’s expansive
definition for what counts as agricultural statistics:
Although some of these statistics are financial and commercial, rather than
Agricultural, yet they should not be separated, for the present mode of raising the
406
407

AR 1863, 579-580
AR 1864, 564-565

160

revenues of the government gives rise to legislation affecting the interests of the
farmer, and the statistics showing the operation of laws should not be withheld
from him.
The farmer, too, is interested in the foreign trade of the country…it is this foreign
trade that relieves the home markets from the surplus production which would
weigh down domestic prices, and thereby fixes the standard of home values, it
must never be regarded with an anxious interest by every agriculturist.408
The Annual Report for 1865 includes the first report of the Statistical Division to be
publicly acknowledged as the work of Dodge and his first as the Department of
Agriculture’s Statistician. In his opening remarks, Dodge cautions his readers and
tempers their expectations citing his short time as head of the Division. He also directly
contradicts Bollman’s inclusion of financial and commercial statistics noting, “I have not
enjoyed the advantage of a supervision of all the data employed in estimates of crops and
stock, but have used all of such material that was deemed essential to a condensed
summary for the year, and have prepared concise statements of kindred facts originating
in other departments of the government, and used such other reliable, though unofficial,
material as seemed best adapted to my purpose. I have excluded commercial and
financial statistics as subjects not strictly within the province of the statistical division . . .
.”409
It is worth noting that this is the first Annual Report to include the Report of the
Statistician toward the front of the volume. Given this is Dodge’s first official report as
the Statistician for the Department of Agriculture and his role as editor this may not be a
coincidence. As with Bollman’s reports, the bulk of the statistical report is made up of
tables and charts. The first set of charts show crop estimates for the year, 1865, by state
and by individual crop and showing total amount of yield; average yield per acre; number
of acres for each crop; value per bushel or pound; total value. Dodge offers a short
explanation of each set of charts. There are charts for livestock, tables drawn from the
census of the United Kingdom showing cattle; table showing livestock totals in a number
of other countries including U.K., Russia, Sweden, Prussia, Holland, Belgium, France,
408
409

AR 1864, 564-565
AR 1865, 54

161

and Spain. Dodge concludes his first report with a short report, Sheep Killed by Dogs
(and the loss to agriculture).410
The Report of the Statistician, 1867-1870 – Horace Capron, Commissioner
The introduction to the Report of the Statistician for 1867 is worth quoting at length as it
exemplifies Dodge’s rhetorical style and his values:
In my report upon the facts of agriculture for 1866 there appeared, amid much
that was prosperous and cheering, a few circumstances that were discouraging and
unpropitious. The wheat harvest, for the third consecutive year, had proved
deficient; the corn crop had been injured by early frosts, and other farm products
were variable in their yield and value; in the south it was as yet uncertain who
would work and who would play, and cotton suffered from years of neglected
culture, and was worked at too great expense for labor and supplies. There were
everywhere too many consumers and too few producers. Young and old, black
and white, flocked to the cities, all hoping to obtain large returns from little effort,
and the natural result was an increase in prices of meats, bread-stuffs, fruits, and
vegetables, which were still more enhanced by speculators, hucksters, and the
whole race of middlemen, in their effort to obtain more for selling than farmers
were allowed for producing the prime essentials of subsistence.”411
Dodge concludes his report for 1867 with a statement alerting the reader to a separate
section in the volume on the “condition and prospects of southern agriculture.”412 In the
report for 1867, Dodge reports it was a better year than 1866 and reviews the same set of
categories we see in earlier reports: basic crops (corn, wheat, rye, oats, barley,
buckwheat, potatoes, tobacco, cotton, and hay), comparisons by year, exports and
imports, totals and broken down by state. He also reports on livestock, domestic sugar
production, wool and woolens, agricultural exports. He includes a long section on land
values by state and concludes it with a summary showing the percentage of increase or
decrease since 1860. The states showing increased land value were in the north and west;
those showing decreases in land value were the southern states.413
The Report of the Statistician, 1871-1876 – Frederick Watts, Commissioner
410

AR 1865, 73
AR 1867, 77
412
AR 1867, 128
413
AR 1867, 119
411

162

The report for the Statistical Division of the Department of Agriculture for 1871 is, at 56
pages, the longest section in the Annual Report for that year.414 The content and format
follow the same pattern as previous reports of the division covering crop reports and
estimates, land tilled, crop value and prices, livestock, etc. The section on crop estimates
offers information about how the division conducted its work, the challenges it faced and
the inaccuracies that resulted. Dodge expresses his concern about the increased
challenges posed to a national census in a country growing in terms of territory,
population, manufacture, and commerce, “In view of the fact that no national census was
ever known to agree closely with a State enumeration, and that repeated efforts by the
same authority do not reach precisely the same results, it has seemed little less than
temerity to attempt to estimate the varying yields of crops from year to year. Infallibly
close approximation, in every instance, is, indeed, impracticable. Local statisticians find
it difficult to estimate accurately for a single State; with all the States and Territories
included, the distances augmented and areas for examination enlarged, the problem
becomes far more difficult of solution. Were the fluctuations of production less marked,
it would be easier to calculate the effect of change-producing causes. The minor crops are
quite too variable for any mode of estimating that does not require at least a partial
census. The extent of this fluctuation, even in the principal crops, is not generally
appreciated . . . .”415 He also suggests that the rate of growth in newly admitted states to
the Union and the precarious situation of the southern states makes the collection of
accurate information for both difficult:
There are other elements of difficulty peculiar to this changing, growing country.
New States spring into existence; young States are creating new counties and
peopling most densely those already existing, oftentimes with such rapidity that
the more observant citizen is unable to calculate with accuracy the rate of growth.
The returns of one year, therefore, fail to cover the area or the population
represented by those of the next. In States like Kansas or Nebraska, this difficulty
is almost insuperable.

414

Dodge’s role as editor of the annual reports for the Department as a whole is evident in the Table of
Contents for 1871. The section of miscellaneous papers in the annual report is preceded by a Report of the
Editor, J.R. Dodge.
415
AR 1871, 15-16

163

In the South, where the changes of five years had almost obliterated important
industries, and the memories of reporters in 1866 failed to make accurate
comparisons with the census year 1859—where the changes of the labor system
and the losses of a fearful civil war gave a gloomy tinge to the most deliberate
effort of the judgment—the case was worse. Still, results have been comparatively
successful wherever our system has been fully in operation, and especially with
regard to the principal products.416
Dodge is careful to express strong confidence in the Statistical Division’s methods and
goals, note its limitations, but assert the accuracy of Department agricultural statistics
compared to those collected by individual states. He also notes the inconsistency of the
returns between the two efforts. The examples he gives of differences in the statistics
collected provide evidence of his concern for accuracy, “While our plan has only been in
partial operation for the latter half of a decade, its success, wherever our lists of
correspondents have been complete, have been sufficient to show its superiority to any
undertaken by individuals or associations. It has proved in some instances, in fact, to be
more reliable than a state census. In Minnesota, where the returns received (by my
predecessor) were, at first, very incomplete, and the estimates widely at fault, the wheat
crop of 1869 was placed at 19,000,000 bushels; the United States census made it
18,866,073 bushels; while the State returns (assumed to be authoritative in their
accuracy) gave only 17,660,467. In Illinois, without aid, year after year, of State returns
or local estimates whatever, except our own, the wheat estimate was 29,200,000 bushels,
while the census exhibit was 30,128,405. The crop of corn varied by a small percentage
of difference, and the numbers of cattle and horses were almost exactly those of the
census. Yet, in minor products, in newer or distant States, and with less complete
arrangements, wide discrepancies have sometimes occurred.”417
An interesting final sentence to this section alerts the reader to the report of the Statistical
Division on farm animals. The Division’s count includes livestock kept in urban and rural
areas, which is different from how the 1860 Census counted farm animals. This is another
example of the Department’s more expansive idea of what should be counted as relevant
to the agricultural economy of the nation, “The estimates of farm animals, in the
416
417

AR 1871, 15-16
AR 1871, 16

164

following tables, are intended to include those kept in cities; the census enumeration
includes only animals on farms….”418 Dodge discusses this distinction later in his report
for 1871. In a short paragraph, “Horses and Cattle not on Farms,” he writes, “The census
returns of domestic animals include only those on farms. No provision is made for
enumeration of horses, cattle, or other animals kept for work, milk, or for fattening, in
cities, or those in transitu by rail or otherwise to the feeder or butcher.”419
For Dodge the limitations of the U.S. Census as an effective way to collect agricultural
statistics is a recurring theme. He includes in his report for 1871 a short discussion of the
census of 1870. He reports that the timeliness of the collecting for that year and,
especially, the fact that the Statistical Division at the Department of Agriculture received
“advanced sheets of the agricultural tables” of the census were important factors that
allowed the Division to include more timely information in its report for 1871.420 Dodge,
who later leaves the Department of Agriculture to head the U.S. Census, does not
hesitate to point out some of the ways in which the collection of statistical information by
the census is inefficient and problematic, “It is no fault of General Walker [head of the
U.S. Census] and his assistants that the enumeration was left in charge of officers with
duties entirely foreign to this work, to be accomplished by crude methods devised for the
first general enumeration undertaken by the Government, and to exclude some of the
most essentially important schedules, such as area in the different crops, which is the first
point secured in European enumerations, and in some cases has been the only one. The
enumeration was taken under the law of 1850, as slightly amended, after the failure of a
general bill for taking the census of 1870.”421
He is careful not to blame the head of the census, Superintendent General F.A. Walker,
and he lets readers know he has the general’s ear, “The Superintendent, in accordance
with my earnest solicitation, divided the ‘unimproved’ land, making separate schedules
for ‘wood land’ and ‘other unimproved,’ by which, for the first time, can be shown
418

AR 1871, 16
AR 1871, 54
420
AR 1871, 45
421
AR 1871, 45
419

165

approximately the extent of area in forest.”422 Dodge concludes the report for 1871 by
noting the information included for that year is incomplete, “The publication of this
volume is made this year too early to include the usual record of agricultural exports of
the fiscal year. Much other matter has been deferred, either from lack of space or
incompleteness of data; and a portion of the statistical work of the year will be found in
the report of the editor.”423
Dodge is a strong and vocal advocate for the work of the Statistical Division and
agricultural statistics throughout his years as Statistician at the Department of
Agriculture. His advocacy takes various forms in different venues including the
agricultural and mainstream press, meetings and conventions, and the pages of his reports
as Statistician. His introduction to the report for 1876 is one example:
The advance of the world in industrial invention and social science has demanded
increased activity in statistical investigation, and greater accuracy and breadth in
statistical statement. The progress of nations in beneficent legislation and good
government has been found dependent upon the work of the statistician. The
profit of the tradesman and the thrift of the farmer are greatly affected by the
accuracy of the information upon which the business operations of each are based.
The intelligent farmer is beginning to learn that misrepresentation of crop
prospects, in the interest of higher prices, meets with but temporary and partial
success, followed by revulsion and disaster.
He continues,
It is conceded that the Government has an interest and a stake in the
enlightenment of laborers, agricultural and mechanical, the makers of the wealth
and conservers of the prosperity of the country, for their guidance in production in
kind and quantity required and for their protection against the pirates of trade. The
revenues of the Government, as at present secured, depend upon the ability of the
masses to consume the products of native and foreign industry; and the prosperity
of the nation is involved in the welfare of the industrial classes. Even monarchical
governments see the necessity of aiding industry by technical, agricultural, and
industrial education; by commissions for scientific and statistical investigation; in
brief, by doing for the producers collectively what they have no means or
422
423

AR 1871, 45
AR 1871, 68

166

sufficient inducement for doing individually, or even by organized association.
Millions annually are spent for such purposes by France, Austria, Italy, and other
European governments. Reports of investigation bearing on the interests of labor
are multiplied annually, greatly to the advancement of industry and human
happiness.
Dodge challenges the U.S. Congress to support efforts to collect and publish
“international crop reports…and the prompt exchange of current statistics” by the
participants of the International Statistical Congress and argues that the U.S. Department
of Agriculture should be leading that work.424
Dodge also uses the section of his 1876 on crop estimates to further convince the U.S.
Congress of the critical nature of the work of the Statistical Division at the Department of
Agriculture. He argues that the investment in terms of the appropriation of funds is
greatly exceeded by the use and usefulness of the information provided by the Division to
farmers especially as compared to the cost and limitations of the decennial census, “The
national census, costing millions once in ten years, is more a series of minor estimates
than an actual enumeration, so far as crops are concerned.” Dodge asserts the value of
estimates and in his effort to persuade Congress to offer more support he gives readers
some details about how the Division does its work, the state of that practice, and the labor
it involves:
What are our facilities for such work? Meager enough in some respects, costing a
mere trifle in money, but involving gratuitous work of thousands of earnest men.
We have a board of statisticians in each county, trained for the work of
comparison with former areas in specific crops, with the normal condition of the
plant of each from month to month, and ultimately with the result in quantities
produced. These returns are scanned, and any obvious error corrected before
recording. The records are made by the counties as reported, summed up and
averaged, and such averages corrected by a duplicate record, in which the
differences in productive value of the counties is considered. The corrected result
stands as an average, not inevitably of the whole State, but of such portion, half or
two-thirds, or whatever area is reported of the entire State.
Now, these men are fallible and may err in judgment. If their exact figures are
taken, and made to cover unreported areas as well, and their errors are annually
424

AR 1876, 87-88

167

piled on errors, the cumulative inaccuracy might become something utterly, if not
monstrously, unreliable. What is done next? Here is where all routine arithmetic,
all ordinary clerical effort, is found unavailing and worthless. There are now tests
to be applied by which errors are eliminated; first, by comparison of results of
separate returns made at different times, as changes in acreage tested by returns of
quantity produced, rate of yield per acre, etc. When discrepancies are found, they
must be reconciled by an investigation of the local circumstances affecting the
result, the history of the season in the monthly returns of condition, returns of
prices as a valuable indication of increased or decreased supply, the various
existing causes of local changes in cropping, and outside data from State or other
reports.425
The Report of the Statistician, 1877-1880 – William G. Le Duc, Commissioner
The Report of the Statistical Division for 1877 begins with no introduction and instead
launches right into “Crop Estimates of 1877.”426 Dodge offers crop estimates data for
corn, wheat, oats, barley, rye, buckwheat, potatoes, cotton, and hay for the entire decade
1870-1877.427 Later in the report are the state-by-state tables of crop estimates for the
same crops, save cotton. As with earlier years, the reports for the Statistical Division
include state-by-state information on livestock. In the report for 1877 Dodge includes a
section dedicated to information on rice production, and a long section on flax and flax
products. Dodge references his report on agricultural exports in the Annual Report for
1862 and reports that sort of information continued to be collected after 1862: “In the
Report of Agriculture for 1862 a compilation from the official reports was made by the
undersigned of the distinctively agricultural exports of thirty-seven years. A similar
compilation and analysis has been continued since, until the record extends to fifty-two
years.” Exports, Dodge reports, “are divided into five classes: Animals and their
products, breadstuffs, cotton (including its manufactures), wood, and miscellaneous
products. necessarily the extension of raw materials, as manufactured meat-products,
lumber, vegetable oils, must be considered, and the direct manufacture of a single and
uncombined product of the farm, to render it available for exportation, was deemed for
this purpose an agricultural product.”428

425

AR 1876, 89-90
AR 1877, 149
427
AR 1877, 149-156
428
AR 1877, 184
426

168

The Statistical Division report for the year 1877, as in earlier reports, consists of topical
sections with tables and charts that are introduced with a short narrative. Some examples
of information included in the report for 1877, “Market prices of Farm Products” by
month;429 “Livestock Markets” “receipts and shipments” for New York, Boston,
Baltimore, Cincinnati, and Chicago;430 “pork-packing” by season – summer and winter
packing, by year, by U.S. city and, oddly, “Canada.” Dodge, as editor of the Annual
Reports, is still including in the Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture a
section, “Miscellaneous Papers” that follow the Statistical Division report. These articles
total more than 350 pages and account for more than half of the content. The last paper
for 1877 is titled, “European agricultural statistics.”431 It includes details on how that
work is conducted in Britain, “The statistical returns of Great Britain are made annually
by the officers of the inland revenue department, and tabulated and published in the
statistical department of the Board of Trade under the direction of the superintendent and
statistician, B. Giffen, esq. The annual returns are now made on the 4th of June instead of
the 24th, and are presented to the public about the 21st of August. The main features of
these returns are the areas in crops and the numbers of farm animals. The number of
"holdings'' or farms is given, and in recent years inquiry has been made concerning
allotments, or small holdings of laborers—from one to five acres, and also those of less
than one.”432
Information on agricultural production in Germany is broken down into regions for 18671877 and shows, Dodge reports, affinity with methods used by his Division: “The official
crop returns of Germany are substantially upon the same basis as those made to the
Department of Agriculture in this country, especially the reports of condition of growing
crops. The returns of harvested crops, instead of comparing with the preceding, the
percentage of a fall or normal crop is given, not an average crop, as in ten years there are
few crops coming up to 100, which is the normal or unimpaired crop.”433

429

AR 1877, 204-217
AR 1877, 218-222
431
AR 1877, 577
432
AR 1877, 577
433
AR 1877, 579
430

169

In his first report as Statistician for the Department of Agriculture in 1878, Charles
Worthington echoes some of the concerns expressed by Dodge in the Annual Reports he
authored. These include insufficient support from the U.S. Congress, issues with the
timeliness of information in the decennial census, and the difference in results between
the returns of statistical information collected for a state census compared to that of the
U.S. Census:
The importance of statistical information of agriculture is conceded by all who
have given thought to the subject, and has attracted the attention of scholars since
the remotest ages, still the difficulty of finding persons who are capable and
willing to furnish reliable estimates, the limited amount of appropriation, the lapse
of years from one census to another, and the apathy of so many of the States in
regard to their own statistics, all tend to make the most careful estimates at times
inaccurate.
In fact, the national census never agrees with the State returns. Discrepancies and
differences always appear.434
The form and focus of this report by Worthington are essentially the same as the reports
of both Bollman and Dodge. We see his voice in a short section that precedes the charts
and tables on the condition of farm animals in the United States as well as an assertion by
example of the importance and relevance of information from the Department:
In many of the States, in pastures usually covered with snow, grazing was
uninterrupted throughout the winter; and even from the more northern States few
reports were received of disaster to cattle from the severe cold and violent storms
so prevalent in those high latitudes.
As a further result of the open winter, lung disease, epizootic, and similar
disorders, were almost unheard of; and what is more important the gestation of all
animals was more general and the offspring better developed. From this one fact
the farmers and stock raisers of the country may learn, if they do not already
know, that they will always find their account in keeping their breeding animals in
a thriving, healthy condition, not overfat, but pinched at no time by hunger, nor
left to shake unsheltered in the blasts of winter and the no less chilling winds and
rain of early spring.435

434
435

AR 1878, 257
AR 1878, 271

170

Worthington begins his discussion of sugar production by reviewing the changes in the
United States. He notes that in 1860 the United States raised “more than one-half of the
sugar it consumed.” In 1878 sugar production had fallen considerably and consumption
increased so that less than 15% of sugar consumed in this country was raised here. In his
discussion of sugar production in Louisiana, Worthington points to the danger posed by
flooding should the levees on the Mississippi fail. Another example of an awareness by
the Department of the ways infrastructure affects agricultural production.436
In his report on the production of hops for 1878, Worthington writes that the Statistical
Division solicited, via circular distributed by its correspondents, information from hop
producers outside of the state with the most consistent and highest hop production,
Wisconsin, “The department instituted an inquiry in regard to the crop of 1878 by
sending circulars to correspondents in the leading hop-producing counties of the Union.
The result showed a reduced acreage for 1878, with the assured prospect of a still heavier
reduction for 1879. The following extracts of correspondence will show the local aspects
of this industry….”437 He reports that results indicated a fall in hop production and
Worthington notes that at the same time overseas demand waned. Citing a source for
agricultural estimates in England, Worthington notes that hop production there was
experiencing similar problems.438
Worthington reports on the exports of the products of U.S. agriculture by amount and by
country purchasing them. The products of live animal exports listed included: cattle,
hogs, horses, mules, and sheep; “dead animal matter” included: bacon and hams, lard,
pork, lard-oil. There are separate itemized tables for exports of beef products which,
Worthington reports, “constitutes over 30 per cent of our last annual export of animal
matter.” These include: fresh beef, salt beef, butter, cheese, condensed milk, tallow, glue,
hides, neat’s-foot oil, candles, and varieties of leather.439

436

AR 1878, 275
AR 1878, 277
438
AR 1878, 279
439
AR 1878, 292-293
437

171

The final section in his report focused on agricultural statistics for the year in the United
Kingdom and France and compares crop estimates, livestock, yield per acre with that of
the United States.440 In every crop estimate category the United States far exceeds the UK
except for the production of barley. The total yield for potatoes in the two nations is quite
close. This difference is even more pronounced with livestock where the numbers for the
United States are significantly higher in all categories except sheep.441
Worthington concludes his first report as Statistician at the Department of Agriculture by
noting increased demand from all constituencies including the U.S. Congress for
statistical information from the Department and locates that demand in a desire for
progress in production, “It is the province of agricultural statistics to measure the extent
of our resources; to contrast the actual with the possible in our production: to estimate the
effect of overproduction in the diminution of prices and to mark the progress of science
in its application to the business of the cultivator and aid the ruralist in keeping pace with
such progress.” He is also careful to note that the small staff size of the Division makes
the fulfillment of the Division’s responsibilities challenging, “The clerical force
employed in this division consists of the statistician, one assistant, and five clerks,
engaged in tabulating and computing the returns, a force totally inadequate to a proper
and thorough investigation of many matters of great and increasing interest.”442
The report for the Statistical Division of the Department of Agriculture for 1879 opens
with news about changes in the decennial census that will affect the Division and draws
attention to the number of volunteer correspondents working for the Division – now at
4000:
In the estimates submitted great care has been given to the compilation from the
returns made by some four thousand correspondents; they comprise
representatives in two-thirds the counties of the whole country, and while it is not
claimed that they are exact as to the whole, it is claimed that they are for the
proportion they represent, and experience yearly shows that the portions not
440

Worthington reports that the numbers for the French wheat estimates were taken from “L’Economiste
Francais.”
441
AR 1878, 317-320
442
AR 1878, 20

172

represented hold about the same conditions of increase or decrease as those
reported.
The area sown or planted in the different crops of this country has never been
taken by any previous census, but I am happy to state that the omission of former
investigations is to be remedied in the census to be taken in 1880, and
arrangements have been made for a full and complete enumeration of the acres
planted in each principal crop. With this additional light on the subject there is
assured in the future a more complete and accurate estimate than was possible in
the past.443
This report generally follows the same pattern and plan as those before it. One sees
mention of new types of crops including peanuts and cranberries but the overall format
and focus does not stray from earlier reports of the Division. In the section of his report
on land values, Worthington notes the Department’s interest in assessing the awareness
among immigrants of the availability of land from the government. He concludes that,
given the limitations of the recordkeeping by the General Land Office in Washington, the
agents of the Department would not identify that information via circular or survey.444
Again, his report on the exports of the United States gives a sense of the reach of
agricultural products and crops and, according to his report remained steady, “The export
to the United Kingdom about maintains its former proportion; that of France, Germany,
Holland, and Belgium has increased, while the rest of Europe declines. British North
America has slightly increased its ratio, while all other countries of the world have fallen
off. The United Kingdom takes nearly all our hops and oil-cake, and all our cotton-seed.
France takes nearly half our export of alcoholic spirits, using it largely to qualify her
wines. Germany takes the largest proportion of our leaf-tobacco and starch. Most of our
ginseng is sent to Hong-Kong where it is sold to the Chinese in the interior. There is a
decline in this export, as the stock of this raw material in the country is running short.”445
The section of the Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture on European
agricultural statistics for 1879 includes a report on Australian agricultural production.
The tables for the section show agricultural statistics for an increased number of countries
443

AR 1879, 127
AR 1879, 148
445
AR 1879, 167
444

173

including Russia, Germany, Romania, Egypt, Canada, Spain, Austria. Even
Worthington’s report on sugar production titled, “Sugar crop of the world” suggests an
increased awareness and a more diverse market. He reports that the world’s sugar supply
is estimated to be nearly 5 million tons but he is careful to acknowledge the countries
“inaccessible to investigation” including China, Japan, Spain, Mexico, and “British
India.” The number of countries he does cover is impressive and includes most of the
countries of the Caribbean, Brazil, Peru, “Java,” Australia, the Sandwich Islands, and
“Manila.” He reports the sugar production totals for the “world” in 1878-1879 at more
than 1.5 million tons of beet sugar and more than 4.5 million tons of cane sugar. The state
of Louisiana, he adds, produced 100,000 tons of cane sugar of the US total of 110,000
tons.446
Worthington concludes his report for 1879 by returning to the question of the value of
agricultural statistics collected and distributed by the Department of Agriculture and the
diverse set of users of that information, “In conclusion I would remark that in addition to
the monthly report on the condition of crops made by this division there have been many
investigations and compilations made for members of Congress, agricultural societies,
and boards of trade, which, although of a public character and value, are not published,
for want of space, in this report.” 447
The Report of the Statistician, 1881-1884 – George B. Loring, Commissioner
With the appointment of George B. Loring as Commissioner in 1881, Dodge returns to
the Department of Agriculture and his post as the Statistician. He holds the position of
head of the Statistical Division through the period of my study (1888) until 1893 when he
finally retires from the Department of Agriculture. The reports follow the same patterns
in terms of content and form and Dodge also continues to provide readers with
information about how the work of the Statistical Division is conducted.

446
447

AR 1879, 184-185
AR 1879, 185

174

In his introductory remarks for the report for 1881, Dodge again challenges the U.S.
Congress to increase support for agricultural statistics work. He informs them of progress
in crop reporting in Germany. 448 In the section of his report on the wheat crop for 1881,
Dodge again helps his reader understand how the work of the Statistical Division is
conducted and he interprets and summarizes the information in the charts and tables:
The average weight of the crop is slightly increased, scoring the highest point for
several years, 58.5 pounds per measured Winchester bushel. The record for the
crop of 1886 was 58.4; for 1885 it was 57 pounds; for 1884 it was 58.3 pounds;
and for 1883 it was 56.9 pounds. This makes an equivalent of 445,047,538
bushels of 60 pounds each.
In fixing the averages for States, estimates have been received from three sources:
(1) from county correspondents, (2) from State agents, (3) from millers. In most
cases there was a reasonable agreement. Where discrepancies occurred, they were
harmonized in accordance with the history of crop conditions affecting quality.
The millers have the best opportunity to test weights, and if they know how their
takings compare with the body of wheat of all grades, their judgment is entitled to
preference; they do not always agree, however, in their estimates. 449
The reports from correspondents in the field as well as information from state and local
agencies are referred to with some frequency by Dodge. In his report on flax seed for
1887 Dodge notes a change in where flax seed producers, in what is now the American
Midwest, take their seed to be processed. Previously, flax seed harvested in the Midwest
was largely processed at mills in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Dodge offers the following
as an explanation, “Chicago, Saint Louis, and Milwaukee are the great flaxseed markets
and our correspondents generally speak of their products as going directly or indirectly to
these great marts. There are scattered through the producing region numbers of local oilmills, which take a portion of the crop without the expense of long shipments, but the
bulk of the crop finally reaches some of the great central markets. In Ohio, Indiana, and
Illinois mills which formerly consumed a considerable portion of the local grown seed
have been compelled to go out of the business on account of the refusal of farmers to
grow it for them, and for others yet running it is only grown by cultivators to whom the

448
449

AR 1881, 577
AR 1867, 543

175

mill-men lend the seed for sowing, the planters taking too little interest to preserve their
own seed.” 450
In the conclusion to his report for the Statistical Division at the Department of
Agriculture for 1883 Dodge writes that the number of volunteer correspondents working
on gathering information for crop reports is “about eight thousand…reporting from more
than two thousand counties.” Dodge also provides information about who these agents
are, “A parallel and supplementary work is carried on through statistical agents
representing each State and Territory. These agents are executive officers of State official
systems of crop reporting in the States where such work is organized, thus combining the
State and National organizations, and unifying and perfecting the work.” 451 Dodge
continues to draw the attention of his readers and especially the U.S. Congress to the state
of agricultural statistics work in Europe and notes the placement of an agent of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture in London to monitor crop reporting.
The Report of the Statistician, 1885-1889 – Norman J. Colman, Commissioner
The reports for the period of Norman Colman’s term as Commissioner of the Department
of Agriculture closely follow patterns established in the earlier reports. I turn to the final
report for the period of my study as both an example of some changes that emerge in
terms of the degree of detail and an expanded focus for more refined information in terms
of the agricultural production of other countries. In his report for 1888, Dodge begins by
noting it is his twentieth year as the Department’s statistician. He reports that demand for
and use of the output of the Division have both increased and are clearly valued, “The
year has been one of great activity. The usual range of effort in domestic and foreign
statistics has been traversed. The records of foreign official and other investigation have
been materially enlarged during the year, and facilities for international comparisons have
been much increased. The long-continued fiscal discussion during the last session of
Congress made heavy demands upon this branch of the service. The legislator of the

450
451

AR 1887, 549
AR 1882, 423

176

present day relies much upon the aid of statistics in the prosecution of his work, and has
available a treasury of facts not attainable by the statesmen of the former generation.”452
In his report for 1888, Dodge comments at length on the system of crop reporting work at
the Division defending the work and the workers, and offering some details about how it
is done:
The crop-reporting branch of the service, which includes a corps of county
correspondents and their assistants, State agents and their assistants, and a foreign
agent connected with our consular system, has somewhat extended its territory
and enlarged its work. The county correspondents now number 2,331, their
assistants are fully three times as many, and the State agencies have a large list of
correspondents. Altogether over twelve thousand persons are connected with the
work of statistical investigation. The State agencies are relied upon for duplication
of the principal work of the county correspondents, for comparison and
verification, and neither result is authoritative as against the other, but any
discrepancies are adjusted with reference to consistency and probability. The
State system, though useful and necessary, especially for local and special
investigation, has as many separate heads as there are States, possessing different
degrees of efficiency and value in experience, and therefore lacks unity and
equality in accuracy. The Statistician consequently finds the regular corps of
reporters an invaluable resource as a balance-wheel. It is found that the agents of
greatest skill and experience agree more closely with our direct returns than do
those of less experience. Even if there were but one system of returns, that of
State agents and their correspondents, their work would be so various in mode and
result as to be unequal and chaotic, without the direction, revision, and control of
one central head. There may be forty local assistants, but not forty independent
statisticians. 453
Dodge ends his introductory remarks by engaging the issue of whether correspondents of
the Statistical Division should be paid. He argues they should not because they could not
be paid well-enough for the work they do and lower pay would attract less competent
workers. His argument prefigures the idea of extension agents as agricultural educators
and representatives of the Department of Agriculture in the field. He also argues for an
approach to hiring correspondents that gives priority to their knowledge and their
commitment by linking the work they do to an idea of the service for the public good,

452
453

AR 1888, 405
AR 1888, 405

177

“Shall correspondents be paid? The idea has been frequently suggested, and the work is
of sufficient importance to warrant a generous outlay. The unpaid service, for utility and
practical value, possibly outranks other lines of expenditure which have amounted to
many millions in recent years . . . . It is certain that there would be a scramble for the
hundred dollars, under this plan, and almost equally certain that a most incompetent and
self-seeking individual would secure influential indorsement, and render the
responsibility of appointment a difficult and thankless burden, and the result in many
instances, however careful and honest the effort, an inferior and unprofitable selection,
The present plan is to obtain the services of the most observant farmer of the best
judgment, of greatest promptness, who is willing to serve in a great corps of agricultural
educators for the public good, and the especial illumination of the district which he
represents. The best is none too good, and whatever the politics, religion, age, sex, or
condition of one clearly entitled to this distinction, that person is the one, and the only
one, that is wanted for county correspondent.” 454 The experience and knowledge
necessary to be a good correspondent for the Division is a theme that is repeated in a
number of Dodge’s reports.
The information in the report of the statistician for the Department of Agriculture for
1888 follows, in terms of format and basic content, that of earlier reports. However, we
do see in this report more detailed attention to agricultural production in other countries.
One example is the dedicated section on agricultural production of Japan which, Dodge
reports comes from, “Publications of the Bureau of Statistics of Japan, prepared under the
direction of S. Ishibashi, are acknowledged. A statistical annual is published and a
condensation is issued in Japanese and French for foreign circulation. This nation
exhibits remarkable enterprise m statistics, setting an example to some of the European
States that are scarcely as progressive in this direction.” 455 Some of the other examples
of international agricultural statistical reports that appear as dedicated sections in the
report of the Statistical Division of the Department of Agriculture include agricultural
production in Egypt, another on Australia and surrounding countries. Dodge reports that

454
455

AR 1888, 406
AR 1888, 454

178

the information used for both Egypt and Australia was taken from “official reports.” In
the case of Egypt we learn the source is a “French summary.” 456 Where previous
information for India or France would be included in a chart with other producing
nations, we see in this report separate sections, for example, The Distribution of Land in
France drawn from the French agricultural census for 1840, 1852, and 1862 and 1882,457
and the Wheat Crop of India where the numbers are only identified as coming from “the
official statement of area and product.” 458
Conclusion
The reports of the Statistical Division during the Commissionership at the Department of
Agriculture, 1862-1888, are on average, the longest in the Annual Reports of the
Department. The bulk of the information they offer is conveyed in charts, tables, and
graphs with each carefully interpreted for the reader. But the information about how the
work was done, who did it, and why it was significant is found in the textual aspects of
the reports of the Statistical Division. Like the reports of the commissioners in their
narrative reports, the Statistician used those opportunities to introduce a table or chart to
call attention to the condition of agricultural statistical work at the Department and
internationally. Dodge, in particular, made a point of drawing the attention of the U.S.
Congress to the successes and the missed opportunities due to insufficient funding. He
provided readers examples that illustrated both in ways that he clearly thought would
garner greater support for the work. His examples were often the condition of agriculture
in other countries as seen in the agricultural statistics of that country.
The basic methods used for collecting agricultural statistics – historical data like the
census and surveys that looked at types of crops, yields, soil and climate conditions,
prices – were not new techniques nor new categories. Farmers took note of that kind of
information and exchanged it informally; the agricultural press in the 18th and early 19th
centuries did the same but with the addition of making it available to a bigger community
by publishing it. Institutions and agricultural societies were attentive to the need for that
456

AR 1888, 459-460 and 464-469
AR 1888, 469-471
458
AR 1888, 472
457

179

same type of information. The agricultural statistics work conducted at the U.S. Patent
Office followed in the same manner and with the same focus. The newly established
Department of Agriculture was aware of these traditions and examples and, in particular,
expanded on the model for statistical work done in the U.S. Patent Office. Guiding those
efforts was recognition by the Statistician that agricultural statistics were useful to
agricultural production and the economy of the nation only if they were both accurate and
timely. It is clear from the Reports of the Statistical Division that the Department of
Agriculture was keenly aware of similar efforts by private and government agencies both
domestically and overseas. It is also clear that Dodge, Bollman, and Worthington
recognized the value of the information in crop reports of other countries. Dodge in his
role as Statistician was an advocate for common standards in agricultural statistics
internationally and he felt strongly that the Department of Agriculture should be the
leader in efforts to realize that goal.
One sees in these reports of the statisticians a genuine interest in gathering and sharing
information that would be valuable to farmers – agricultural producers. Having a sense of
market value, current prices, and the amount of grain, for example, on the market helped
farmers make informed decisions about production, harvest, and transporting to market.
Accurate and timely information could help protect them from speculators both in the
domestic market and an emerging global market. We see in these reports evidence the
Department of Agriculture worked deliberately and self-consciously to establish its
position as the authoritative provider of agricultural statistics/information not just in the
United States but internationally.

180

CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSION
Introduction
This dissertation examined the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture from its
founding in 1862 through 1888, the year before it achieved status as an executive agency
with a seat on the President’s Cabinet. I focused my research on questions that sought to
identify and understand the agricultural information work done at the Department as
mandated by the U.S. Congress in the Organic Act of 1862 that established the
Department. These government documents, the Annual Reports, are unique resources for
historical study about the work of a newly formed federal agency, the Department of
Agriculture. My close and critical reading of them demonstrates not only the centrality of
agricultural information to the economy of the United States in the second half of the 19th
century, but also that agricultural information generated and circulated by the Department
of Agriculture was a key and powerful way the federal government asserted its authority
and the idea of a nation and modern state during an especially turbulent and formative
period in the history of this country.
As I discussed in this dissertation, I first turned to the National Archives and Records
Administration and the National Agricultural Library’s Special Collections but the
absence of an administrative record for the work of the Department during this period
forced me to rethink my sources and methods. I decided to use the Annual Reports of the
department as my primary sources. The Annual Reports were mandated by the
Department’s funder, the U.S. Congress, as the formal and official documentation of the
work done at the Department. They were also circulated broadly to the public
(particularly farmers and other agriculturalists). They are different from more traditional
archival resources like agency memos, work orders, logs, and informal and official
correspondence in significant ways, not the least of which is that they come with a
narrative. Instead of being simply reports or records of the Department’s activities, their
purpose – to communicate the work of the Department to multiple constituencies –
suggested they would be a rich and useful primary source. It was no surprise that they
proved to be less straightforward than the administrative records one associates with

181

archival material related to government work. As texts, they presented a political and
self-interested rhetoric to wade through written in language filled with historical and
religious allusions.
I began this research with conflicting expectations. The language of the Organic Act of
1862 that established the Department of Agriculture, as well as the little I had seen of the
reports themselves, suggested that the information work at the Department was driven by
a sense of a common purpose: striving to improve agricultural methods and tools to
secure a strong agricultural economy and thus, a healthy and strong nation. There were
also glimmers of evidence that the research output of the Department – its publications
including the Annual Report, seeds, plants, illustrations – was offered as a public good to
the nation and particularly to agricultural producers. That valuing of the people was also
evident in the ways the Department engaged farmers and other agricultural stakeholders
in the collection of agricultural information.
I expected to find in the Annual Reports the voices of a privileged class of people. The
commissioners, the gardener, and the statisticians were well-educated and they came to
the Department with backgrounds as political leaders and advocates especially in local
agricultural societies. They were focused on agriculture as a national issue and thus
interested in developing methods and tools that would increase agricultural production. I
expected to see in the reports of the commissioners and the heads of the Department’s
divisions distinct self-interest as well as distrust and disdain for farmers as a class of
workers; I thought I would find evidence of an agency directed by people who felt their
responsibility was to instruct an ignorant agrarian class that was tied to old methods,
resistant to change, and working for its own sustenance and survival with little regard for
the nation and a growing national market. I expected I would see evidence that the
Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Congress saw the role of the federal government
as responsible for directing the work of agriculture by asserting its authority in the daily
lives of farmers without acknowledging the practical knowledge of a class of people who
made up nine-tenths of the working population of the country.

182

While there was evidence of some of these tendencies and interests in the Annual Reports
for the period from 1862 through 1888, the Department drew on a long tradition of
communication and circulation of agricultural information found in the agricultural press,
horticultural science (domestically and internationally), and agricultural societies and
fairs. We see the tools and systems of information developed by the Department
emerging from those models reworked to put the Department at the center but with the
farmer as a valued partner. We also see how the Department of Agriculture refined and
adjusted those models and methods in ways that allowed it to assert its own authority via
the accuracy and timeliness of the information it distributed to farmers and other
stakeholders domestically and to agriculturalists and the governments of a number of
other countries.
I developed a set of research questions in order to focus on the Annual Reports
themselves. I realized, too, that I needed to understand not only the mandate for the
Department of Agriculture from U.S. Congress but also the Department itself and how it
understood that mandate and executed its work. I was not always able to find in the texts
of the Annual Reports sufficient evidence or discussion to answer those questions to my
satisfaction. I revisit my original research questions below and discuss the information
the Annual Reports provided and where the Reports proved to be a limited information
resource.
Research Questions Revisited
1. What were the systems of information developed at the Department of Agriculture
between 1862 and 1889?
Information work at the Department of Agriculture was at the very core of the mandate
from the United States Congress when it established the agency in 1862. It advised the
new agency to “acquire and diffuse” agricultural information that included research based
in chemistry, entomology, statistics, and propagation of seeds and plants. The Act also
required the new Department to actively “procure, propagate, and distribute” seeds and
plants, themselves agricultural information. The areas of information work at the

183

Department quickly expanded to include, for example, botany, forestry, animal diseases
and husbandry, ornithology, and pomology.
The Annual Reports offer clear evidence that the systems of information developed at the
Department drew on traditional methods of information sharing and experimentation used
by farmers and other agriculturalists including seed and product sharing, discussion about
trends in the weather, soil health and ways to maintain its vitality, and market prices for
crops. That traditional network included farmers, the agricultural press, various organized
societies, and county and state fairs. The Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture from 1862 through 1888 offer evidence of a federal agency using those same
methods and resources in ways that expand the scope of the information network to
include, in their own words, “every county” in the country but also the governments and
research universities of a number of other countries. What is especially important about
how those systems of information collection and distribution evolved and functioned is
the consistent and concerted effort by the Department of Agriculture to place itself, as an
agency of the federal government of the United States, at the center of the work in a
practical sense but also in terms of its role as the authority for agricultural information in
the second part of the 19th century. We see in the information work of the Department of
Agriculture a particularly strong example of the ways information and systems of
information are firmly rooted in social, political, and economic interests.
2. Looking specifically at the report of the commissioner of the Department of
Agriculture that opened each Annual Report, I investigate the following questions: How
did the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888 understand its mission and
contribution to scientific work supported by the federal government? What did the
Department of Agriculture view as its essential mission in its early years? How did this
change over time?
As discussed in Chapter 4 of this dissertation, each commissioner presents his annual
report to the U.S. Congress with reference to the mandate outlined in the Organic Act that
established the Department in 1862. One sees a consistency of mission across the 27
years of leadership at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888. From the

184

outset one sees in the reports of the commissioners a clear expression of the importance
of the information work of the Department of Agriculture. That importance is framed in
historical and religious references that see strong agricultural production as a critical
foundation to any nation’s health and economy.
The extent of that work as seen in the reports of the commissioners was from the
beginning more than just a domestic enterprise. The people who worked at the
Department of Agriculture drew on their professional networks of colleagues and
associates both domestically and internationally and clearly saw the economy of the
United States as intricately tied to the ability for the nation’s agricultural producers to
create a supply that would satisfy not just the nation but produce strategic crops for
export in a world market.
The Reports for this period demonstrate both a criticism of and appreciation for farmers
by the commissioners. The Department’s approach portrayed farmers as incapable of
understanding the wider implications of their work and the products of agriculture, as a
class of workers tied to old ways that could not meet the needs of a growing nation. The
reports convey a strong belief on the part of each commissioner that the federal
government and the Department of Agriculture in particular were the obvious source for
accurate and authoritative information about best methods, tools, seeds, and plants.
Though that information offered by the Department to farmers and other stakeholders in
agricultural work was essentially practical it was presented as more accurate and useful
because it was the product of more rigorous experimentation and analysis. We see in the
Reports of the Commissioners a growing awareness of the necessity for local and
regional agricultural research. The Department cultivated partners including educators
and researchers at the land grant colleges and later the state and regional agricultural
experiment stations but, as it did with farmers, the Department continued to understand
and assert its role as the obvious and critical center for managing and distributing that
information.
Change at the Department seemed to evolve and grow almost organically from its early
practices and its original mandate. One example from the work of the Statistical Division

185

is the very early realization that reports written and distributed annually would not meet
the need for timely and accurate agricultural statistics. In addition to the production of
monthly statistical reports, we see in these reports evidence of a regular and significant
body of supplemental reports by that Division. The lists of supplemental publications by
the Department when included in the report of the commissioner were overwhelmingly
associated with the Statistical Division. Changes over time in the distribution of seeds
and plants were also deliberate and made with reference to the Organic Act mandate to
identify, acquire, and distribute new and rare seeds and plants. One sees in the reports of
the commissioners in the 1870s and 1880s increased frustration with members of
Congress who expected the Department to be their source of common flower and
vegetable seeds that they could use as political capital with their constituents.
A consistent and growing concern expressed by each commissioner during this period
was directed at the U.S. Congress. Funding from that body was never considered to be
sufficient and the reports offer evidence of the inadequate infrastructure in terms of
buildings, land, and money for the collection, analysis, and distribution of information it
deemed as essential to progress in agriculture. That struggle with Congress was not just
about the allocation of resources to the Department but also about the authority and role
of the Department in the federal government.
3. The reports of the gardener and the statistician will be the frame for my approach to
these questions: How was research of the Department of Agriculture prioritized and
conducted? Who and what guided those decisions? How was the resulting information
and new knowledge disseminated? To whom did it circulate?
One sees in the Annual Reports of both the gardener and the statisticians a strong
commitment to meeting the mandate for the new agency as stipulated by the U.S.
Congress. As reflected in his Reports, the gardener focused his efforts on identifying and
documenting native plants as well as new and rare plants that could be of economic
interest to the United States. Those specimens were, for the most part, received by the
Department of Agriculture from others – professional associates and diplomats – and not
the result of field work by members of the Department. The Department continued the

186

practice of receiving plants and seeds as well as narrative accounts of agricultural
practice in other countries from diplomats and other travelers with formal and informal
ties to the government of the United States. There were several long-standing sources of
seeds and plants including the consular corps, the U.S. Navy, and government-funded
research expeditions in North America and abroad. To what extent was the acquisition of
new seeds and plants planned? The sections of the Annual Report of the Department of
Agriculture that I examined for this research offer little evidence to address this question
with any authority. We do learn that common flower and vegetable seeds were purchased
from private seed companies for distribution by the Department and by members of the
U.S. Congress. We also see in the distribution charts for seeds patterns that suggest
certain types of crop seeds were targeted for distribution and experimentation in regions
of the country where that crop was needed or traditionally grown (for example, grass
seeds to the states with open range livestock). We also see evidence new seeds and plants
sent to regions and climates where they were most likely to grow or had a history of
growing (for example, new types of tobacco seed distributed to farmers in the Carolinas).
The Reports of the Statistical Division offer greater insight into how relevant information
was identified and how it was gathered. These reports differ significantly from those of
the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds in length as they includes pages of
detailed charts comparing crop yields, market prices, export volumes over several years
and often decades. Why certain crops were tracked is never explicitly stated or discussed.
An educated reader does see patterns that suggest, for example, a focus on animal feed
crops, grasses for grazing livestock, and grains and fiber crops for export. One also sees
evidence of increased yields for crops like wheat, sugar beets, feed corn, cotton, and
various sources of fiber each discussed in the Annual Reports as crops essential to the
nation’s self sufficiency in terms of basic agricultural products.
As discussed earlier, the distribution of seeds and plants and the publication and
dissemination of reports of agricultural statistics form a significant part of the narratives
of both the report of the gardener and those of the statistician. The agricultural
information produced by the Department of Agriculture had myriad consumers. Members

187

of the U.S. Congress received the bulk of that information (be it seeds or printed matter)
and the reports of the commissioners suggest it was used as political capital by legislators
with their constituencies. But, we also see in the Annual Reports systems of information
transfer that use the resources of the federal government to circulate agricultural
information as a public good. Agricultural information came to the Department in several
ways. It was directly solicited in the form of surveys conducted by correspondents or
agents of the Department. Seeds and plants distributed by the Department were sent with
a request that the recipient share information about how those seeds performed with the
Department. In each instance, the vehicle for moving information from the field to the
Department and back out again was usually the U.S. mail. The Department was quick to
recognize the need for timely crop reports and had its agents use the telegraph to
communicate information from the field to the Department. Seeds, plants, and printed
matter were distributed by the Department of Agriculture free of charge as a public
service. The distribution of that information from the Department was understood as
critical to continued progress in agriculture and necessary for the growth and health of the
nation. That exchange of agricultural information from the field to the laboratories and
workrooms of the Department of Agriculture and back out to farmers is a critical example
of what distinguishes the work of the Department from other federal agencies at the time.
The U.S. Census gathered information and made it available and the U.S. mail facilitated
the circulation of information, but only the Department of Agriculture exploited a system
of information collection, production, and distribution that engaged diverse
constituencies in ways that viewed them as essential partners in that network. That effort
resulted in an expansive network that both fed information to and consumed information
from the Department of Agriculture. The scope and geographic reach of that information
work in the second part of the 19th century cannot be overstated.
4. What impact did the information work of the Department of Agriculture have on the
practice of farming in the United States in the second half of the 19th century?
The Annual Reports shed little light on this question. What we do learn from the Annual
Reports of the Department of Agriculture is that many farmers, agriculturalists, citizens,
and members of the U.S. Congress began to turn to and expect useful, timely, and

188

relevant agricultural information from an agency of the federal government. How that
information was used and the extent to which it changed the tools, methods, and products
used by farmers was not evident in the sections of the Annual Reports I examined.
However, one does see in the correspondence to the Department of Agriculture, which is
reprinted in several of the reports of the Superintendent of the Garden and Grounds and
the Statistician, evidence of interest in acquiring and experimenting with new types of
crops as well as an awareness of the importance of sharing information about
propagation, soil health, and farming methods with a wider audience as afforded by the
Department of Agriculture.
5. How did the information work at the Department of Agriculture help transform the
political economy of agriculture in the U.S. in second half of the 19th century and why
does this matter?
The information work at the Department of Agriculture focused on the collection and
dissemination of practical information that would help facilitate changes in agricultural
practice to better serve a growing nation with significant interests outside its own
(expanding) borders. Farming and agricultural work relied on transportation and
communication infrastructure to bring supplies to the farm and move products from it.
We see in the Annual Reports some evidence of awareness at the Department of the need
for a strong federal government that would regulate not just transportation and
communication but the self-interested speculation associated with a market economy in
order to protect agricultural production and thus the foundation of the economy of the
nation.
We can see in the Department’s focus on the identification what it called the best seeds
and plants a push to move farmers and farm production toward crops with high yields for
an expanding market. It would seem that such an effort would result in changes in the
size of farms and the diversity of crops over time. However, I saw no evidence to suggest
this was a desired outcome by the Department nor any suggesting the size of farms grew
that crop diversity diminished. This is not to say that it did not happen but rather that

189

there was no evidence in the Reports that I examined that it was a direction the
Department sought for agricultural production in the United States.
Limitations
The major limitation of this study of the 1862-1888 Annual Reports of the Department of
Agriculture is also its greatest asset. Because there is no known administrative record of
the Department for this period, I turned to the Annual Reports as the best available
primary source. The reports present a surprisingly complex and nuanced picture of the
information work at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888. As formal
and constructed narratives, they carry and convey more than administrative records of
daily work, such as a ledger, a set of memos, or even formal correspondence. Each report,
from the commissioner or from a division head, is written with at least one audience in
mind, the U.S. Congress. Unlike archival records, these Annual Reports have a
consciously developed message for that audience. However, they also convey more
nuanced and often subtle narratives that reveal relations of power within the Department
as well as between professionals working at the Department and their peers outside the
agency. In terms of the focus of this research, the Annual Reports of the Commissioners
helped me both understand and situate the work of the Department of Agriculture in
historical and social and political contexts. These include a nation ravaged by a Civil
War; growing economic tension as the nation shifted from a rural focus to an urban and
industrial focus; a massive rise in immigration; and the development of critical
transportation and communication infrastructure by private interests that both facilitated
and served territorial expansion by the United States.
Future research
The research accomplished with this dissertation offers unique and valuable information
about the information work at the Department of Agriculture from 1862 through 1888.
The approach I took to this work is essentially that of identifying and describing the
anatomy of a critical historical resource that has not been carefully examined by
historians interested in understanding information in society. Historians, myself included,
can use this work as the foundation for research into the ways the information work at the

190

Department of Agriculture directly contributed to nation-building and the formation of
the modern state in 19th century United States. The Department’s consistent assertion of
its authoritative role and its expansive understanding of what counted as agricultural
information place it at the center of the transformation of the United States after the Civil
War and through significant social change that too often is narrowly seen as attributable
to immigration and industrialization. This reading of the Annual Reports of the
Department of Agriculture suggests that the relationship between agricultural
development and industrialization is more complex than commonly discussed and is
intertwined in significant and necessary ways that call for further research and
examination. This research into the Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture
from 1862 through 1888 also points toward a series of questions that seek more
information and analysis about the role of the Department of Agriculture – and
particularly its information work – in the U.S. nation and society that emerged from the
turmoil of the 19th century. This turmoil included the Civil War; the promise and failure
of Reconstruction; and the ongoing struggles for the civil and human rights for women,
workers, ethnic immigrants, and free and emancipated African Americans.
Conclusion
My research suggests that this information work at the Department of Agriculture was
very practical in its orientation. During this period, 1862 through 1888, the United States
fought a civil war that had an economic impact that cannot be overstated.459 The
economy of the United States in the 1870s was unstable at best and in crisis for a good
part of the decade. The Department focused its energies on efforts to develop systems
that would allow them to identify, process, and disseminate information to a large and
varied constituency. Its primary focus was on strengthening the agricultural economy by
educating farmers; providing them with information on best practices, new methods and
tools; identifying and distributing hardy seeds and plants that would result in increased
crop yields. The Department estimated crop yields and prices at market; it collected
information about agricultural production in counties in an effort to anticipate

459

See, for example, Nell Irvin Painter’s Introduction to her study, Standing at Armageddon: The United
States, 1877-1919.

191

opportunities for exports and identifying competition. Dual goals of both the Department
and the federal government were national self-sufficiency in terms of food and the crops
like wool, cotton, corn and other feed and grazing crops, for the nation at home; and,
managing and developing hardier crops and larger yields that would strengthen the
nation’s economy via exports in an increasingly competitive global market. Despite the
significant barriers and challenges to U.S. agriculture at that time, my research suggests
that the information the Department of Agriculture procured, propagated, and distributed
was instrumental in the stability and health of the nation and served to establish the
authority of the federal government in a vital area of the economy during a particularly
turbulent and unstable period of U.S. history.

192

BIBLIOGRAPHY — SOURCES CITED AND CONSULTED
Archival Sources
Records of the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture, Record Group 16, National
Archives and Record Administration.
Capron, Horace M. Memoirs of Horace Capron. 2 vols. [1884]. Special Collections,
National Agricultural Library.
William Gates Le Duc: An Inventory of His Papers at the Minnesota Historical Society.
Manuscripts Collection, http://www2.mnhs.org/library/findaids/01177.xml
Government Documents and Publications
United States Department of Agriculture. Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1862-1888.
United States Department of Agriculture. Report of the Secretary of Agriculture.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1889.
United States Department of Agriculture. The Story of U.S. Agriculture Estimates.
Washington, D.C.: April 1969.
United States Patent Office. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1839.
Annual Report of the Public Printer. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1876, 1881, 1884.
Books and Articles
Adkinson, Burton W. Two Centuries of Federal Information. Stroudsburg, Pa.: Dowden,
Hutchinson & Ross, 1978.
Barron, Harold S. Mixed Harvest: The Second Great Transformation in the Rural North,
1870–1930. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
Bauerly, Brad. The Agrarian Seeds of Empire: The Political Economy of Agriculture in
US State Building. Leiden: Brill, 2017.
Bell, Daniel. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society. New York: Basic Books, 1973.
Bensel, Richard F. Yankee Leviathan: The Origins of Central State Authority in America,
1859–1877. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

193

Black, Alistair. “Information History.” Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology 40, no. 1 (2006): 441–73.
Black, Alistair, and Dan Schiller. “Systems of Information: The Long View.” Library
Trends 62, no. 3 (2014): 628-662.
Buck, Solon J. The Granger Movement: A Study of Agricultural Organization and its
Political, Economic, and Social Manifestations, 1870–1880. Gloucester, Mass.: Peter
Smith, n.d.
Carman, Harry J. "Jesse Buel, Early Nineteenth-Century Agricultural
Reformer." Agricultural History, Vol. 17, No. 1 (January 1943).
Carpenter, Daniel P. The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputations, Networks, and
Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, 1862–1928. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2001.
Carter, Susan, et al., eds. Historical Statistics of the United States. Millennial ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 20006, http://hsus.cambridge.org/
Casper, Scott E. “The Census, the Post Office, and Government Publishing.” In The
Industrial Book, 1840-1880, edited by Scott E. Casper . . . et al. Chapel Hill:
Published In Association with The American Antiquarian Society by The University
Of North Carolina Press, 2007.
Colman, Gould P. “Innovation and Diffusion in Agriculture.” Agricultural History 42,
no. 3 (1968): 173-88.
Cortada, James W. Before the Computer: IBM, NCR, Burroughs, and Remington Rand
and the Industry They Created, 1865–1956. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1993.
Dowd, Douglas Fitzgerald. The Twisted Dream: Capitalist Development in the United
States since 1776. Cambridge, Mass.: Winthrop Publishers, 1977.
Dupree, A. Hunter. Science in the Federal Government: A History of Policies and
Activities to 1940. New York: Arno Press, 1980. First published 1957 by The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
Ebling, Walter H. “Why the Government Entered the Field of Crop Reporting and
Forecasting.” Journal of Farm Economics 21, no. 4 (November 1939): 718–34.
doi:10.2307/1231782.
Estabrook, Leigh S. “Library and Information Science.” In Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Sciences, 3rd ed., edited by Marcia J. Bates and Mary Niles Maack.

194

Taylor and Francis, 2010. Article published online December 9, 2009.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1081/E-ELIS3-120044044.
Evans, James F., and Rodolfo N. Salcedo. Communications in Agriculture: The American
Farm Press. Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1974.
Farrell, Richard T. “Advice to Farmers: The Content of Agricultural Newspapers, 1860–
1910.” Agricultural History 51, no. 1 (1977): 209–17.
Finlay, Mark. “Transnational Exchanges of Agricultural Scientific Thought form the
Morrill Act through the Hatch Act,” in Science as Service: Establishing and
Reformulating Land-Grant Universities, 1865-1930. Ed. Alan I. Marcus. Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press 2015: 33-60.
Fite, Gilbert C. The Farmers’ Frontier, 1865–1900. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1966.
Fitzgerald, Deborah. Every Farm a Factory: The Industrial Ideal in American
Agriculture. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003.
Frankel, Oz. States of Inquiry: Social Investigations and Print Culture in NineteenthCentury Britain and the United States. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2006.
________. “The State Between Orality and Textuality: Government Reports as
‘Orature.’” In Cultural Narratives: Textuality and Performance in the American
before 1900, edited by S.M. Gustafson and C. Sloat, 276–96. South Bend, Ind.: Notre
Dame University Press, 2010.
Fuller, Wayne E. The American Mail: Enlarger of the Common Life. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1972.
Fusonie, Alan E. “The History of the National Agricultural Library.” Agricultural History
62, no. 2 (1988): 189–207.
Gates, Paul W. Agriculture and the Civil War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965.
Gaus, John Merriman, and Leon O. Wolcott. Public Administration and the United States
Department of Agriculture. Chicago: Public Administration Service, 1940.
Geiger, Roger L. To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of American Research
Universities, 1900–1940. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Greathouse, Charles H., comp. Historical Sketch of the U.S. Department of Agriculture:
Its Objects and Present Organization. Washington: Government Printing Office,
1898.

195

Gruber Garvey, Ellen. Writing with Scissors: American Scrapbooks from the Civil War to
the Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press. 2013.
Hagenstein, Edwin C., Sara M. Gregg, and Brian Donahue. American Georgics: Writings
on Farming, Culture, and the Land. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011.
Hahn, Barbara. Making Tobacco Bright: Creating an American Commodity, 1617–1937.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011.
Hamilton, David E. "Building the Associative State: The Department of Agriculture and
American State-Building." Agricultural History 64, no. 2 (1990): 207–18.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3743810.
Harding, Thomas Swann. Two Blades of Grass: A History of Scientific Development In
The U.S. Department Of Agriculture. New York: Arno Press, 1980 [c1947].
Harrison, James L. 100 GPO Years, 1861–1961: A History of United States Public
Printing. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1961.
Headrick, Daniel R. When Information Came of Age: Technologies of Knowledge in the
Age of Reason and Revolution, 1700–1850. New York: Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Higgs, Edward. The Information State in England: The Central Collection of Information
on Citizens since 1500. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Hobsbawm, E. J. The Age of Capital, 1848–1875. New York: Random House, 1975.
Hodge, W. H., and C. O. Erlanson. “Federal Plant Introduction: A Review.” Economic
Botany 10, no. 4 (1956): 299–334. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4287909.
Hoffer, Williamjames Hull. To Enlarge the Machinery of Government: Congressional
Debates and the Creation of the American State, 1858–1891. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2007.
Jenkins, Virginia. The Lawn: A History of an American Obsession. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994.
John, Richard R. Spreading the News: The American Postal System from Franklin to
Morse. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Kerr, R.M. History of the Government Printing Office (at Washington, D.C.), with a Brief
Record of the Public Printing for a Century, 1779-1881. Lancaster, PA: Inquirer
Printing and Publishing Co, 1881.

196

Kloppenburg, Jack R., Jr. First the Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2004.
Lee, Guy A. “The General Records of the United States Department of Agriculture in the
National Archives.” Journal of Agricultural History 19, no. 4 (1945): 242–49.
Machlup, Fritz. The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Marcus, Alan I. Agricultural Science and the Quest for Legitimacy: Farmers,
Agricultural Colleges, and Experiment Stations, 1870–1890. Ames: Iowa University
Press, 1985.
________. Science as Service: Establishing and Reformulating Land-Grant Universities,
1865-1930. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press 2015.
Marcus, Alan I., and Richard Lowitt. “Introduction.” Agricultural History 64, no. 2
(1990): 1–4. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3743791.
Mosco, Vincent. The Political Economy of Communication. 2nd ed. London: Sage, 2009.
Nyhart, Lynn K. “Voyaging and the Scientific Expedition Report, 1800-1940,” in eds.,
Rima D. Apple, Gregory J. Downey, and Stephen L. Vaughn, Science in Print:
Essays on the History of Science and the Culture of Print. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 2012, 65-86.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul Webb Rhode. Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation
and American Agricultural Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2008.
Painter, Nell Irvin Painter. Standing at Armageddon: The United States, 1877-1919. New
York: W.W. Norton, 1999.
Parry, Bronwyn. Trading the Genome: Investigating the Commodification of Bioinformation. New York: Columbia University Press, 2004.
Pauly, Philip J. Fruits and Plains: The Horticultural Transformation of America.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Peterson, Trudy H., ed. Farmers, Bureaucrats, and Middlemen: Historical Perspectives
on American Agriculture. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1980.
Pinkett, Harold T. “Records of the First Century of Interest of the United States
Government in Plant Industries.” Journal of Agricultural History 29, no. 1 (1955):
39–40.

197

_________. “Early records of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.” American Archivist
25, no. 1 (1962): 407–16.
_________. “The Archival Product of a Century of Federal Assistance to Agriculture.”
American Historical Review 69, no.3 (1964): 689–706.
Porat, Marc Uri. The Information Economy. Washington, D.C.: Department of
Commerce, 1977.
Porter, Theodore M. The Rise of Statistical Thinking: 1820–1900. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1986.
Postel, Charles. The Populist Vision. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Prakash, Gyan. Another Reason: Science and the Imagination of Modern India.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Rasmussen, Wayne D. “The People's Department: Myth or Reality?” Agricultural
History 64, no. 2 (1990): 291–99. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3743818.
Rasmussen, Wayne D., and Gladys L. Baker. The Department of Agriculture. New York:
Praeger Publishers, 1972.
Ross, Earle D. “Lincoln and Agriculture.” Agricultural History 3, no. 2 (1929): 51–66.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3739788.
________. “The Civil War Agricultural New Deal.” Social Forces 15, no. 1 (1936): 97–
104.
________. “The United States Department of Agriculture during the Commissionership:
A Study in Politics, Administration, and Technology, 1862–1889.” Agricultural
History 20, no. 3 (1946): 129-43. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3739805.
Rossiter, Margaret W. The Emergence of Agricultural Science; Justus Liebig and the
Americans, 1840–1880. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1975.
________. “The Organization of the Agricultural Sciences.” In The Organization of
Knowledge in Modern America, 1860–1920, edited by Alexandra Oleson and John
Voss, 211–48. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979.
Sanford, Albert Hart. The Story of Agriculture in the United States. Boston: D.C. Heath,
1916.
Schement, Jorge Reina, and Leah A. Lievrouw. Competing Visions, Complex Realities:
Social Aspects of the Information Society. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Pub. Corp, 1987.

198

Schiller, Dan. How to Think About Information. Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
2007.
Schramm, Wilbur L. The Role of Information in National Development. Paris: UNESCO,
1964.
Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
Condition Have Failed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998.
Shannon, Fred A. The Farmer's Last Frontier: Agriculture, 1860-1897. New York and
Toronto: Farrar & Rinehart, 1945.
Slotten, Hugh Richard. “The Dilemmas of Science in the United States: Alexander Dallas
Bache and the U.S. Coast Survey.” In The Scientific Enterprise in America: Readings
from Isis, edited by Ronald L. Numbers and Charles E. Rosenberg, 37–60. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Smith, Mikki, and Christine D’Arpa. ““What’s History Got to Do with It? Seventy Years
of Historical Dissertation Research at the iSchool at Illinois.” Library Trends 65, no.
4 (2017 – in press).
Solberg, Winton U. The University of Illinois 1867–1894: An Intellectual and Cultural
History. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1968.
Stoner, Allan, and Kim Hummer. “19th and 20th Century Plant Hunters.” HortScience
42, no. 2 (2007): 197–99.
Swank, James Moore. The Department of Agriculture: Its History and Objects.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1872.
Taylor, Henry Charles, and Anne Dewees Taylor. The Story of Agricultural Economics in
the United States, 1840–1932: Men, Services, Ideas. Ames: Iowa State College Press,
1952.
True, A. C. “The United States Department of Agriculture.” The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 40 (1912): 100–09.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1012800.
________. The History of Agricultural Education in the United States, 1785-1925.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1929.
Utley, Robert M. and Barry Mackintosh. The Department of Everything Else: Highlights
of Interior History. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1989.
Wanlass, William Lawrence. The United States Department of Agriculture, A Study in
Administration. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1920.

199

Weist, Edward. Agricultural Organization in the United States. Lexington, Ky.:
University of Kentucky, 1923.
Weller, Toni, ed. Information History in the Modern World: Histories of the Information
Age. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
__________. “An Information History Decade: A Review of the Literature and Concepts,
2000–2009.” Library & Information History 26, no. 1 (2010, March): 83–97. doi:
10.1179/175834909X12593374744122.
__________. “Information History: Its Importance, Relevance, and Future." Aslib
Proceedings 59, nos. 4-5 (2007): 437–48.
__________. “All the Facts: A Review of the Literature and Concepts, 2000-2009.”
Library & Information History 26, no. 1 (March 2010): 95.
Williams, William Appleman. The Roots of the Modern American Empire: A Study of the
Growth and Shaping of Social Consciousness in a Marketplace Society. New York:
Random House, 1969.
Yates, JoAnne. Control through Communication: The Rise of System in American
Management. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.
Theses and Dissertations
Cohen, Benjamin R. “Notes from the Ground: Science and Agricultural Improvement to
the Early American Republic.” PhD diss., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, 2005.
Fullilove, Courtney. “The Archive of Useful Knowledge.” PhD diss., Columbia
University, 2009.
Geong, Hae-Gyung. “Exerting Control: Biology and Bureaucracy in the Development of
American Entomology, 1870 –1930.” PhD diss., The University of Wisconsin —
Madison, 1999.
Gwinn, Nancy E. “The Origins and Development of International Publication Exchange
in Nineteenth-Century America.” PhD diss., The George Washington University,
1996.
Jones, Jeffrey J. “The World Was Our Garden: U.S. Plant Introduction, Empire, and
Industrial Agri(culture), 1898–1948.” PhD diss., Purdue University, 2004.
Lung, Kai Lum “A Financial History of the United States Department of Agriculture.”
Ph.D. diss., Cornell University, 1924.

200

Mastroni, Lawrence S. “The Conflicted Mission of the United States Bureau of
Biological Survey, 1885–1940: Wildlife, Uncertainty and Ambivalence.” PhD diss.,
University of Oklahoma, 2012.
Ron, Ariel. “Developing the Country: ‘Scientific Agriculture’ and the Roots of the
Republican Party.” PhD diss., University of California, Berkeley, 2012.
Sisson Lessens, K. J. “Master of Millions: King Corn in American Culture.” Ph.D. diss.,
University of Michigan, 2011.

201

APPENDIX A: OVERVIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1889460
Date

Units

Appropriations
1860 $40,000

No. of Staff

1862

Establishment of the Department
Disbursing Office
Superintendent of the Propagating Garden
Division of Chemistry
Library
Division of Entomology
Division of Statistics
Fibre Investigation

1862

$64,000

1862

9

1863

$80,000

1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886

$199,770
$112,304
$167,787
$199,100
$279,020
$172,573
$156,440
$188,180
$197,070
$202,440
$257,690
$321,079
$249,120
$194,636
$198,640
$206,360W
$198,361
$275,460
$363,011
$456,396
$416,641
$655,930
$677,973

1869

90W

1872

100

1879

93W

1887
1888

$657,641
$1,027,219
1889

479W

1863

1865

Analysis of Soils

1868

Division of Botany

1871

1877
1878

Division of Microscopy

Forestry Investigations
Investigation of Animal Diseases

1880

Forestry Division

1883
1884
1885
1886

Veterinary Division
Bureau of Animal Husbandry
Section of Ornithology
Division of Ornithology and Mammalogy
Division of Pomology
Division of Vegetable Physiology
and Pathology
Office of Experiment Stations
Secretary of Agriculture at Cabinet-Level

1887
1888
1889
460

Wanlass, W.L. (1920) The United States Department of Agriculture: A Study in Administration.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, p. 124. Appropriations from Greathouse (1898), p67. Number of
employees for scattered years from Greathouse (1907), Historical Sketch of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture; Its Objects and Present Organization. Washington: GPO. (first published in 1898 and updated
for 1907). Wiest, Edward (1923) Agricultural Organization in the United States. Lexington: University of
Kentucky. (NB: Wiest is listed on the title page as “Professor of Economics, University of Kentucky;
author of the ‘Butter Industry in the United States’”). Tables showing growth of the Department (pp33-48).
Chronological development of the organization of the Department of Agriculture (33-34). Personnel
numbers other than those from Wanlass (1920): Swank (1972); Rasmussen (1990); and Greathouse (1898).

202

APPENDIX B: SEED PACKET DISTRIBUTION BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, 1865-1910461
Year
1865
1870
1880
1890
1905
1910

461

Number of Packets
750,000
350,000
1.5 million
5.5 million
36 million
60 million

Information included here was culled from the annual reports of the Department of Agriculture.

203

APPENDIX C: PRINT RUNS FOR THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1862-1888
Year
1862
1865
1866
1867
1869
1870
1871*
1877
1878
1879
1880
1882**
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888

Total
120,000
188,000
188,000
220,000
225,000
225,000
255,000
300,000
300,000
300,000
300,000
300,000
300,000
400,000
310,000
400,000
400,000
400,000

House
Senate
100,000
145,000
17,000
145,000
20,000
180,000
20,000
180,000
20,000
150,000
50,000
180,000
50,000
224,000
56,000
224,000
56,000
214,000
56,000
214,000
56,000
214,000
56,000
214,000
56,000
300,000
70,000
200,000
80,000
300,000
75,000
300,000
70,000
300,000
70,000
_____________

Department of Agriculture
20,000
20,000
23,000
20,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
20,000
20,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
25,000
30,000
30,000

The print runs and allotment as reported at the front of each Annual Report.
* 1863-1864, 1868, and 1872-1876: information on print runs is not available
** 1881-1882 printed together in one volume
By the mid-1880s the cost of printing was approximately $200,000.

204

