JUDGING A BOOK BY ITS COVER: THE CONTEXT BOOK COVERS PROVIDE
by
Virginia Emily Cranwell
Bachelor of Arts
Roanoke College, 2013

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Master of Arts in
English
College of Arts and Sciences
University of South Carolina
2017
Accepted by:
Susan Vanderborg, Director of Thesis
Jessica Crouch, Reader
Cheryl L. Addy, Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School








ProQuest Number: 10266506





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10266506
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Virginia Emily Cranwell, 2017
All Rights Reserved.

ii

DEDICATION
To my parents, Wes and Lindy; thank you for raising me to be a curious
person, and for supporting me in all my endeavors, especially those that
challenged me. To my sister, Grace, and my cousin, David; thank you for
listening to all of my rants and complaints, and for reminding me that I am not the
only one who finds their twenties to be a weird and confusing time. Finally, to
Gregory; thank you for being a refuge for comfort in all of my most difficult
moments.
I could not have completed this thesis or these degrees without all your
support and encouragement.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
With special thanks to Dr. Susan Vanderborg in the English Department at
the University of South Carolina who helped me stay excited about the work I
was doing, and to Jessica Crouch, archivist in the Irvin Department of Rare
Books and Special Collections, who pushed me to trust myself and my abilities.
In addition to the immense help from Dr. Vanderborg and Jessica Crouch, I
would like to acknowledge the help of Dr. Patrick Scott, emeritus professor at the
University of South Carolina for his help with all things Alasdair Gray and printing,
and the help of Elizabeth Sudduth, director of the Irvin Department for giving me
the opportunity to work at a Rare Books and Special Collections library in order
to gain hands on experience with preservation and study.

iv

ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to prove how the context of books, specifically the book
jackets and bindings, are a crucial part to understanding the history and the text
of the story. The paper begins with printing history in order to illustrate how the
context of books has changed, and how the Twentieth Century saw a use of
book jackets to promote the book. The paper then looks at the books of a
particular author, Alasdair Gray, as an example of how the context of the book
can be used to enhance and reveal aspects of the text. Finally, this paper
discusses how Special Collections libraries play a unique roll in the preservation
of the whole book as a material object in order to preserve the full context of the
book for future study.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION ........................................................................................................... iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................ iv
ABSTRACT .............................................................................................................. v
LIST OF FIGURES ....................................................................................................vii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF PRINTING .............................................................. 5
CHAPTER 3: ALASDAIR GRAY ................................................................................. 17
CHAPTER 4: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES ..................................................................... 79
WORKS CITED....................................................................................................... 84

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3.1 Lanark 1981 Canongate front cover .................................................. 58
Figure 3.2 Lanark 1981 Canongate back cover .................................................. 59
Figure 3.3 Lanark 1981 Canongate binding ........................................................ 60
Figure 3.4 Lanark 1981 Canongate Book 4 frontispiece ..................................... 61
Figure 3.5 Lanark 1982 Granada paperback cover............................................. 62
Figure 3.6 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 3 front cover ...................................... 63
Figure 3.7 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 3 back cover ...................................... 64
Figure 3.8 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 1 cover .............................................. 65
Figure 3.9 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 2 cover .............................................. 66
Figure 3.10 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 4 front cover .................................... 67
Figure 3.11 Lanark 2001 Canongate Book 4 back cover .................................... 68
Figure 3.12 Lanark 2001 Canongate Books 3 and 4 binding .............................. 69
Figure 3.13 Lanark 2001 Canongate Books 1 and 2 binding .............................. 70
Figure 3.14 Lanark 2016 Canongate paperback front cover ............................... 71
Figure 3.15 Lanark 2016 Canongate paperback back cover .............................. 72
Figure 3.16 Poor Things Bloomsbury 1992 front cover ....................................... 73
Figure 3.17 Poor Things bindings ....................................................................... 74
Figure 3.18 Poor Things American first edition violet endpapers ........................ 75
Figure 3.19 Poor Things American first edition white endpapers ........................ 76
Figure 3.20 Poor Things 1994 Harvest paperback edition .................................. 77
vii

Figure 3.21 Poor Things 2009 Dalkey Archive Press paperback edition ............ 78

viii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Books have been used as a way to preserve and study history and stories, but a
preference for the pages of text over the physical whole has often been the
primary concern for that preservation and study. A book is more than just the
pages of its text – it is also the bindings, the illustrations, and the dust jackets, all
of which provide context for the pages of text within. Unfortunately, the content of
the pages has often been considered more important than the context of the
book, so there has been a trend of removing the pages of text from their original
context. A perfect example of this preference can be seen in library accession in
the mid-twentieth century – when libraries acquired a new book, they stripped it
of its original binding and replaced it with a more durable, hard buckram binding
in order to protect the pages of the book and increase the longevity of books in
high circulation libraries.1 The problem with the preference for pages of text is the
fact that the context of the book – the bindings, the book jackets, the publishers,
etc. – can provide insight to the history and the story of the text as well.
Book historians understand that the context of a book provides just as
much information as the text itself, but they often focus on the historical
revelations. The study of the context of books is beneficial to many other
1

Weiss, 10. For more information about library bindings, see the Library Bindings
Institute.
1

scholars as well, such as literary scholars who may use the physicality of a book
to reveal the design of a book and the authorial intent behind that design. Any
authorial input to the design of a book should be considered important to the text
because the physical aesthetic of a book impacts the way a reader approaches a
text. The context and physicality of a book are impacted by more than just the
author’s intention, though. In fact, they are both often affected by the publishers
of the book (as much if not more so than most authors), usually for marketing
purposes. Therefore, those who study the context of the book should be aware of
the impacts of publishers and authors on the context before delving into an
interpretation of the physicality in relation to the narrative of the book.
The aim of this paper is to examine the context of a few select books at a
Special Collections library within an understanding of publishing history.
Specifically, this paper seeks to show how the size of a publishing house and the
financial power it has impacts the amount of artistic input or revision for the
physical book, which in turn complicates the way readers approach a text;
Special Collections libraries play a crucial role in preserving the publishing
history, the cultural history, and the literary history of modern texts as Special
Collections libraries are the only libraries whose purpose is to preserve the whole
book as an artifact rather than only focusing on the pages of text. To prove this
point, this paper will provide a brief history of publishing in the West with a focus
on printing in the United Kingdom, and then will discuss the evolution of the
physical context of a book alongside the type and size of publisher. Finally, this
paper will discuss how Special Collections libraries play a crucial role in the

2

scholarship of book context, as they are the libraries most equipped to preserve
and maintain the book as a whole artifact – pages, bindings, book jackets, and
more. Moreover, the study of multiple editions and copies of two Alasdair Gray
novels and the importance of the access to these multiple copies should prove
the need for a completionist approach for collections.
The books chosen for this study – Lanark: A Life in Four Books and Poor
Things – are by Alasdair Gray, a well-known Scottish author and artist. Gray is
specifically known for being involved in the production of his books; he often
illustrates the book jackets (and subsequently paperbacks) as well as designing
stamps for the bindings of his books. He may be a modern exception in this
regard, but he is not the only author to be wholly involved in his book production;
rather, he is a part of a long tradition of artists and authors stretching back to the
monks who illuminated each text they created with scenes based on Biblical
stories to the well-known William Blacke. Gray’s artistic input for the physical
design of his books is an ideal example as his books and their artistic context are
ripe for study, both literarily and historically.
Printing history in the West has often focused on its beginnings in
Germany and Italy and on England in the modern era. This is understandable to
an extent as Germany was the birthplace of the European printing press and Italy
quickly became dominant in developing the quality and design of the printing
process we recognize today. Although England was not the birthplace of the
physical aspects of printing, it is the place where the modern idea of copyright
began, dictating the way books were written, made, and commodified for years to

3

come. The focus on these three countries’ printing traditions, though, means that
other countries’ printing history has gone fairly unnoticed. This is why a study of
Alasdair Gray is of particular importance – his books serve not only as an
example of modern craftsmanship but also as an example of Scottish printing
trends in the Twentieth Century.

4

CHAPTER 2
A BRIEF HISTORY OF PRINITING
It is helpful to have a brief history of printing to understand how publishing
practices and modern book styles came to be, and then how those changes or
modern styles align with Alasdair Gray’s books. While Gray’s books were printed
in the Twentieth Century, this history of printing and publishing will start several
centuries earlier to establish a history of printing in the United Kingdom,
specifically England and Scotland, and how it resulted in unique Twentieth
Century books.
It is well known that Johannes Gutenberg brought the printing press to
Europe in the mid-fifteenth century; the changes that the printing press wrought
are perhaps equally well known. It is not an overstatement to say that the printing
press changed history, as it allowed for the transmission of ideas and
philosophies to spread quickly and multiply readily. The Renaissance and the
Reformation are thought to have originated, or at least been hastened, by the
arrival of the printing press and moveable type; appropriately, the printing press
has been described as an “epoch-making invention.”2 What is perhaps less well
known is the history of printing after the invention of the printing press (that is not

2

Steinberg, 1996, 1
5

to say it has not been studied, but rather than is it not a prominent part of our
cultural memory).
According to noted bibliographer S.H. Steinberg, there are five periods of
moveable type printing:
(1) 1450-1550, the creative century, which witnessed the invention and
beginnings of practically every single feature that characterizes the
modern printing piece; (2) 1550-1800, the era of consolidation which
developed and refined the achievements of the preceding period in a
predominantly conservative spirit; (3) the nineteenth century, the era of
mechanization… (4) 1900-1950, the heyday of the private presses and the
inception of paperbacks; and (5) the post-war period, which has seen
typesetting, printing and publishing turned upside down.3
Alasdair Gray’s first novel, Lanark: A Life in Four Books was first printed in 1981
in Scotland, and Poor Things was first printed in 1992 in England. Therefore, the
focus of this paper is on the printing history of England and Scotland in the
Twentieth Century. However, it is easier to understand the significant trends of
English and Scottish printing with a brief history of how printing and publishing
began in the British Isles.
After Gutenberg’s introduction of the printing press and moveable type,
printing presses quickly sprang up around Europe. In less than 30 years after the
introduction of the printing press to Europe, printing was brought to England in
3

Steinberg, 1996, 1
6

1476 by a German trained English merchant.4 That German-trained English
merchant was William Caxton and is he considered hugely influential to the
tradition of printing in the British Isles not just because he brought the printing
press to England, but also because of his business acumen. As John Feather
says, “Caxton was not a printer in the literal sense of operating a printing press;
he was an employer of labour whose own function was as capitalist and
salesman. In other worse, he was primarily a publisher.”5 Caxton laid the
groundwork for the important traditions of printing and literature in the United
Kingdom. While many of his contemporaries on the continent were printing
religious texts, Caxton was printing vernacular texts such as “romances and
poetry…[and] the works of Gower, Chaucer and Lydgate, among others, and
thus prepared the way for the English literary tradition of the Middle Ages to be
transmitted to the writers of the Renaissance.”6 Indeed, Caxton’s choice of texts
to publish affected the English printing tradition for centuries to come, as “the
Englishness of English publishing is one of its abiding characteristics. From the
beginning, it was predominantly in the English language, and predominantly
literary…and popular.”7 Caxton’s techniques were picked up by others, and the
increase in printers produced an increase in authors, both of whom began to
realize they needed to protect their investments. This realization led to the
introduction and prominence of publishers who acted as the intermediary
between printers and authors. The development of publisher began in the mid
4

Febvre and Martin, 2010, 182
Feather, 1988, 10
6 Feather, 1988, 11
7 Feather, 1988, 12
5

7

sixteenth century and continued through the seventeenth century (essentially the
second period of printing that Steinberg defined) and is important because they
laid the groundwork for the modern book trade and the division of labor where
authors dealt primarily with the text, publisher dealt with marketing and design,
and printers dealt with the physical object..
William Caxton established his printing and publishing business in London
before the kingdoms of England and Scotland were united. There were printing
presses in Scotland before the unification of the two kingdoms in 1607, the first
established in 1508 in Edinburgh by Walter Chepman and Andrew Myllar.8 After
the unifications of the kingdoms in 1607, though, London became the dominating
political and economic place in the kingdom. Since Caxton had laid the
groundwork for a thriving printing community in London, the economic power of
London drew printers and publishers, and there was little incentive for publishers
and printers to go to Scotland. Therefore, England’s publishing tradition
flourished and was the place for publication of many United Kingdom authors,
even Scottish ones. The printing presses that were founded in Scotland after
unification mimicked much of the English production even though they often
could not invest like English publishers because they did not have the same
financial backing. Even Scottish publishers who had success struggled, such as
James Ballantyne Co., based out of Edinburgh, who published Sir Walter Scott
and yet collapsed financially in the middle of Scott’s tenure.9

8
9

Edwards, 2011, 68
Encyclopedia Britannica, Sir Walter Scott, 2016
8

The 1710 Licensing Act (also known as the Copyright Act), enacted after
the closing of the Scottish Parliament in 1707, further solidified the publishers
power in the printing business as well as the power of London publishing houses.
The Licensing Act “gave the copyright in new books to their authors rather than
their publishers,”12 and was obviously beneficial for authors because it elevated
their work, giving them “a valuable commodity for which they could claim the
protection of the law and as a property of which they could dispose in the open
market to their best advantage,”13 allowing them to have negotiating power with
publishers. However, the Licensing Act was also beneficial to publishers because
the law now protected both the buyer and the seller of intellectual property14
which made it easier to prosecute printers for pirated editions, thereby giving
more printing authority and power to the publishers. As the number of pirate
printers diminished, the market steadied and publishers were able to “fix the price
of [their] wares at a level which at the same time ensured [them] a reasonable
profit and permitted [them] to let [the] author share in it.”15 The Licensing Act and
the steading markets worked particularly worked in favor of London publishers
because licenses were created and given in London as the capital of the
kingdom. The powers and protections of the Licensing Act and the safer markets
eventually resulted in the payment system that we recognize today – royalties, in
which an author is given a fixed portion of the money from the sale of their

12

Rota, 1998, 27
Steinberg, 1996, 107
14 Steinberg, 1996, 107
15 Steinberg, 1996, 107
13

9

books.16 This payment arrangement made the sale and marketing of books
essential if everyone in the book trade – author, publisher, printer, and book
seller – were to make a profit. “Advertisements, prospectuses, stock-lists, general
and particularized bibliographies, critical – if possible, favourable – reviews in
newspapers and periodicals”17 were all used as a means of marketing books, but
publishers soon realized that the presentation of the book would help sell them
too.
The publisher who is credited with first realizing the marketing potential of
the physicality of the book was John Newberry who realized that “advertising sold
goods” so “he applied the lesson to his publishing work.”18 Newberry is the first
recorded publisher to create edition binding, which meant he bound all of his
books with an identical binding before sale and incorporated the expense into the
retail price of his books.19 Before Newberry’s edition binding, printers rarely
bound the books they printed. This separation of labor was for a variety of
reasons, most of them economic. First, it was easier to ship and distribute flat
paper because paper was not as heavy as bound books which were initially
bound with boards. Second, printers were already investing a great deal of
money into the supplies to print the text, foregoing binding divested them of
another expense and instead made that expense the responsibility of the
customer (who would then take the book to a book-binder and have it bound as
they wished). However, after the system of royalties was firmly in place,
16

Feather, 1988, 178
Steinberg, 1996, 107
18 Feather, 1988, 119
19 Feather, 1988, 119
17

10

Newberry’s idea of edition binding became mainstream because recognizable
marketing was becoming necessary.
The relationship between publishers and authors continued to develop
throughout the Nineteenth Century, but these foundations in the Eighteenth
Century provided the basis for the basic duties and responsibilities of publishers
today. Primarily, the eighteenth-century foundations solidified the publisher as
organizer, financier, and marketer of the book trade. The changes in the physical
production of books through the Nineteenth Century expanded the organizational
responsibilities of the publisher to the point where, today, their responsibilities
chiefly deal with preparing a book for market – “[the publisher] prepares
manuscripts or typescripts for printing. He arranges for the production of the book
by printers and bookbinders. He organizes the provision of illustrations and dust
jackets. He advertises and promotes the book in his catalogue and through
various media.”21 The Nineteenth Century changes of book production was due
to industrialization. Papermaking and printings became mechanized, as well as
the book binding22 process. The mechanization of book binding suggests that
while the book trade industrialized, publishers were aware of and cared about the
physical attractiveness of the book.
The physical changes to the book throughout the nineteenth and
beginning of the twentieth century led to the modern book forms we recognize
today, i.e. cloth or Linson bound hardbacks with book-jackets and paperbacks.

21
22

Feather, 1988, vii
Feather, 1998, 134
11

While aspects such as typography and paper changed alongside design and
binding, for the purposes of analyzing Alasdair Gray’s novels this paper will focus
on design and binding as well as the introduction of book-jackets.
As mentioned earlier, the beginning of the nineteenth century saw the
mechanization of book creation, and by 1820 cloth bindings were steadily
replacing leather bindings. While some scholars, like noted bibliographer S.H.
Steinberg, believe that the quality of book binding declined after its
mechanization, this process did result in the “technical and aesthetic perfection of
the cases.”23 For example, the mechanization of binding allowed for the imprint of
the name of the work, the author, and the publisher on the spine of the book, a
practice that is still done today. Mechanization also allowed for the
experimentation of different types of cloth for binding, which ranged from the
luxurious (like silk) to the hardy (like canvas). In terms of aesthetics,
mechanization drove the invention of an embossing machine which could apply
gold leaf to cloth covers.24 Embossing drove a particularly important aesthetic
development, as antiquarian bookseller Anthony Rota explains: “the spines of
books not only acquired more fanciful lettering but often also rather elaborate
illustrations that gave some hint of the contents of the book – either as
reproductions of the pictures in the book or somehow symbolic of the contents”25
(my emphasis added). These embossed spine illustrations seem to have
influenced other aesthetic aspects of the book, as by the end of the nineteenth

23

Steinberg, 1996, 140
Rota, 1998, 113
25 Rota, 1998, 115
24

12

century illustrations had moved to the fronts and backs of covers, endpapers
became decorative rather than simply utilitarian, and the edges of book pages
were gilded.26 While the decorative embossing of book covers declined at the
start of the twentieth century due to costs, it did have a lasting impact on the next
trend of book design – the book-jacket.
The book-jacket was developed to protect permanent cloth bindings which
needed to be kept clean for sale purposes. The first book-jackets were purely
economical and meant to protect books as they were transported. While it is
difficult to trace the history of paper book-jackets due to their transience,
bibliographers and researchers have discovered that “the most commonly used
jackets were at first simply plain paper with, at most, a hole cut out to make the
title on the spine visible.”27 The use of book-jackets seems to have risen in direct
correlation with the decline of cover ornamentation, or the end of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twentieth. As book-jackets became the norm, “it
was natural that the jacket should attract more and more attention from the
publisher and designer.”28 Early book jacket designs ranged from simple
reproductions of title pages to illustrations borrowed from the book, but
publishers quickly realized the advertising potential of book-jackets and began
using the flaps and the reverse side of book-jackets to list their other titles, and in
1899 the first recorded ‘blurb’ was printed on the book-jacket of a Harper book.29
By the 1920s, publishers realized they could do more than simply advertise on
26

Rota, 1998, 117
Rota, 1998, 127
28 Rota, 1998, 128
29 Rota, 1998, 130
27

13

the book-jackets, and they began to make their book-jackets more distinctive by
either adopting a single style associated with the publisher and used for all books
printed by that publisher (such as the early, distinctive Penguin books), or they
commissioned an artist to create a unique piece of art for the book-jacket. The
artistic design of book-jackets was and still is primarily up to the publisher’s
discretion. Occasionally a well-known author did and may give input for the final
design, but only very rarely did and does the author also function as artist for
book-jacket design.30
The rarity of authors acting as their own book-jacket designers alone
makes Alasdair Gray’s books interesting and ripe for study, but antiquarian
bookseller Anthony Rota frames why twentieth century books and their bookjackets in general are important from a collecting and research standpoint. In his
book, Apart from the Text, Rota argues that book jackets are important to keep
and preserve even if they are not artistically interesting because book jackets
provide a crucial pieces of information about the book and “may provide clues to
prevailing literary taste, economic circumstances, or snippets of publishing
history.”31 According to Rota, a plethora of information can be gleaned from
book-jackets, from information about the author to information about the
reception of the book. The creation of new book-jackets for new editions can
attest to the popularity of a book, or its long print history, as publishers try new
covers to attract new audiences. In the same way, the decline in popular
reception can be traced through the falling prices often printed on the book30
31

Rota, 1998, 133
Rota, 1998, 134
14

jacket. Book-jackets can also reveal the trends of a publisher based on what is
advertised on the jacket and how it is advertised, or they can reveal what was
important at a specific cultural moment. Perhaps one of the most interesting
insights book-jackets can provide is the comparison between cultures, such as
the comparison between English and American editions of the same book: “More
and more frequently, they will have different jackets with different illustrations,
blurbs, and, of course, prices. Simply comparing the different marketing
strategies used for the same book can shed light on the subtle differences that
separate nations that share a common language.”32 Unfortunately, throughout
most of the twentieth century, book-jackets were only considered useful in so far
as they protected the book before it was sold; once a book was bought, the bookjacket was often discarded. This idea about the book-jacket’s function was so
prevalent that even booksellers discarded the book-jacket before handing books
over to customers because they and the customer believed the book-jacket had
“fulfilled its dual purpose of identifying (even promoting) the book and keeping it
in perfect condition to the point of sale.”33 Fortunately, the current book collecting
trade suggests that there has been a reversal in attitudes about book-jackets, at
least in collecting and scholarly circles, because “not only will many collectors
refuse to buy books that lack their jackets but a number will also turn down
copies in jackets that have had the prices clipped from them or that show even
the smallest sign of fraying.”34

32

Rota, 1998, 135
Rota, 1998, 137-138
34 Rota, 1998, 139
33

15

Rota’s book, Apart from the Text, strongly suggests that twentieth century
books have the cultural gravitas that makes their preservation a necessity, but
more importantly Rota argues for the preservation of books as a whole, with the
preservation of their book-jackets and original bindings due to the cultural
implications and history the book-jackets and bindings reveal. Preservation of all
the physical parts of a book is historically important, but this paper aims to show
how preservation of the whole is important literarily as well by examining the
novels Lanark: A Life in Four Books and Poor Things by Scottish author and
artist, Alasdair Gray.

16

CHAPTER 3
ALASDAIR GRAY
Since the publication of his debut novel, Lanark, Alasdair Gray has been lauded
as the greatest Scottish writer since Sir Walter Scott and “one of the most
important living writers in English.”35 Lanark specifically has been described as
“’a cultural time-bomb which had been ticking away patiently for years”36 and is
considered by some to be the work that reinvigorated the Scottish literary
renaissance. Poor Things, published almost a decade after Lanark, is also
considered one of Gray’s literary greats, as Poor Things won the Whitbread Prize
for Best Novel as well as the Guardian Fiction award.37 Lanark and Poor Things
are completely different stories as far as plot and content, as one is reminiscent
of Dante and the other is reminiscent of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, but both
deal with a main character who is trying to come to terms with their disillusioned
view of society – and it is a society that is indeed broken, which makes their
reckoning all the more difficult. These novels and Gray’s others “characteristically
[introduce] political and historical concerns,”38 making these texts worthy of
study, as they provide a look at a unique part of Twentieth Century Scotland and
English literature. Gray’s books provide this unique look because their material

35

Bernstein, 1999, 17
Bernstein, 1999, 17
37 Bernstein, 1999, 21
38 Bernstein, 1999, 29
36

17

paratext reveal the publisher paratext and how Gray’s books moved from a small,
independent Scottish publisher to a large multinational corporate publisher, and
how that move resulted in less authorial intervention.
Gray’s stories are culturally important in their own right, as they deal with
distinctly Twentieth Century themes such as the fear of nuclear fallout and the
continual struggle of feminism. Gray has done more than simply write stories,
though – he has also designed them. Specifically, Gray intimately involves
himself in the book jacket artwork and the binding design of his books unlike
most authors through the history of printing, although he follows in a long
tradition of author/artist. Trained as a mural artist at the Glasgow School of Art39,
Gray does all the illustrations and book cover design for his works, including the
cloth cover design and the book jacket design. This attention to overall design, as
Stephen Bernstein explains, “make [his books] total works of art; comparisons to
the visionaries William Blake and William Morris have been frequent.”40 In fact,
as can be seen in a few editions of some of his works, Gray is so attentive to
detail that he has contributed blurbs and reviews for his stories, which are often
placed strategically on his dust jackets. These attentions make Gray’s books as a
whole historically, culturally, and literarily important.
The University of South Carolina’s Irvin Department of Rare Books and
Special Collections has an impressive collection of Scottish literature, including
extensive holdings of Robert Burns and Walter Scott. Additionally, the collection

39
40

Cameron, 2011
Bernstein, 1999, 17
18

has many Alasdair Gray’s works of literature and art. Therefore, the libraries at
the University of South Carolina and their Alasdair Gray holdings were used for
the purposes of this study alongside personal copies. Only physical copies of
both Lanark and Poor Things were examined; electronic copies are of interest
and worthy of study, but are a subject for a different paper. Two libraries within
the University of South Carolina library system have copies of Gray’s Lanark and
Poor Things: the Irvin Department of Rare Books and Special Collections in
Hollings Library and Thomas Cooper Library. Of the seven copies of Lanark that
were examined for this paper, the Irvin Department holds five, while Thomas
Cooper holds only one; the final copy was a personal one. Of the eight copies of
Poor Things that were examined for this paper, the Irvin Department holds five,
Thomas Cooper holds two, and again the final copy was a personal one. As
mentioned earlier, Gray’s novels deal with Twentieth Century issues, and since
they argument of this paper is that his covers are a part of the whole story, a plot
summary of each book is helpful for understanding what is going on within the
artwork of the various covers.
Lanark: A Life in Four Books is Gray’s first book, published in 1981 but he
began writing it when he was at the Glasgow School of Art in the early 1950s.
Gray grew up during World War II and had been sent to live in the highlands as a
child. As a teenager and young man, then, he lived through the Cold War and
fear of nuclear fallout. Lanark is a response to those fears and feelings of
helplessness in a world that is cruel and not ruled by “the people” but rather
large, impersonal powers. This is why Lanark is compared to Dante, for as one

19

Hell is left behind, another appears. The details of the novel, are difficult book to
explain because it does not follow linear narrative structure. The novel is indeed
composed of four different books, but begins with Book Three which starts in the
city of Unthank, a sunless, timeless, decaying industrial city. Lanark, the main
character, arrived in Unthank by train, but does not know who he is or how he
came to be in Unthank. Unable to work because of an ineffective government,
Lanark wanders around the city without direction or purpose which seems to
result in an illness called dragonhide which begins to cover his body in scales.
Lanark learns that many people in the city have similar afflictions, specifically a
woman named Rima who Lanark falls in love with but does not reciprocate his
affection. As the dragonhide takes over Lanark’s body and he increasingly feels
disconnected from those around him, alone and desperate he cries out for a
wayto escape Unthank. In response, a mouth opens in the ground and swallows
Lanark, bringing him to the Institute and curing him of his disease. The Institute is
well lit, runs efficiently, and has many working, productive people. For a while,
Lanark is happier and he is given the task of studying the most stubborn cases of
dragonhide. The longer Lanark is in the Institute, though, the more he begins to
suspect the way it runs; he discovers that the Institute runs off the lost cases, or
the people whose afflictions are too far gone, or people who are otherwise
considered unfit by Institute standards – these “lost cases” are ground up and
used for energy, both as power and as food. Horrified, and having just saved
Rima from such a fate, Lanark decides to leave the Institute in search of a better
place.

20

This brings the novel to Book One followed by Book Two, both of which
tell the story of Duncan Thaw. Book One follows Thaw through his childhood and
adolescence in Scotland during World War II and traces the difficulty Thaw has
with understanding his world which is on the brink of nuclear warfare. From a
young age, Thaw finds it difficult to connect with people, and alternately sees the
world as grotesque and as beautiful. This duality warps his teenage sexual
fantasies, making it even more difficult for him to connect to the women in his life,
including his mother and his sister. Book One ends with the death of Thaw’s
mother and his entrance into the Glasgow School of Art which quickly eclipses
the former event. Book Two begins with Thaw’s attendance at the Glasgow
School of Art where he trains as a painter. Although at first excited, Thaw
becomes disillusioned with the school as he feels his art and his abilities are
underappreciated by teachers and students alike. Meanwhile, Thaw tries to win
over a young art student, Marjory. Over time, it becomes clear Thaw feels like the
problems with his artwork are exacerbated by his inability to connect with
women, especially Marjory. Thaw’s inability to connect with people, but especially
women, is apparent throughout Books One and Two, although in Book Two it
drives him to insanity. Unable to complete a mural and upon having it and himself
portrayed as grotesque by a female reporter, Thaw seeks solace in a prostitute
who turns him away because of his eczema. This drives Thaw to search the city
for a woman to connect with, but his wanderings are driven by insanity and the
connection he makes is through murder. Book Two ends with Thaw leaving
Glasgow for the Scottish Highlands; seeking distance from civilization, Thaw

21

wanders off to the sea where he finally throws himself into the waves and
drowns.
After Thaw’s suicide, the novel returns to the Institute and Lanark and
Rima’s pending departure. They discover that instead of being able to go a city
with sunlight, they must go back to Unthank with the promise that they will soon
be allowed to move onto a better city called Provan as the city of Unthank is
scheduled for demolition. Rima gives birth to their son shortly after arriving in
Unthank, and Lanark tries to find work again, but the situation is much the same
as the first time Lanark was in Unthank; the government is still inefficient and
does not or cannot help its citizens. Lanark, in a last ditch effort to be of use for
improving his community decides to go to Provan to argue against the
destruction of Unthank –Upon arrival in Provan, though, Lanark discovers it to be
as Hellish as Unthank and the Institute because the Council in Provan is corrupt
and does not care about the poverty or destruction It wreaks on places like
Unthank. Returning to Unthank without having accomplished anything, Lanark
arrives just in time for the destruction of his city; he is reunited with his son
Alexander and Rima one last time, but his continual absence from their lives in
pursuit of a better world leaves him disconnected from them as well. Ultimately,
Lanark welcomes death alone.
Lanark was first published by Canongate Publishing in 1981. Canongate is
based out of Edinburgh, Scotland and was founded in 1973 as an independent
publisher. Their mission is “to unearth and amplify the most vital, innovative

22

voices we can find, wherever they come from.”41 Canongate’s status as an
independent publisher means they are not owned by a parent company, nor have
they subsumed other publishing companies. Thus, the independent status
usually indicates that a publisher is a smaller, less powerful publishing house
compared to larger publishing firms. Although today Canongate is considered a
“successful global niche publisher,”42 it did not always have the power it has
today – Lanark is considered to be the work that made Canongate a viable force
in the publishing world. It should be remembered, however, that Canongate is
still labelled as “niche” meaning even today it does not carry the power and
financial backing of large publishing firms.
The Irvin Department has two copies of the first edition of Lanark,
published in 1981 by Canongate Publishing, but these copies were printed and
bound in the United States of America by Fairfield Graphics. The fact that this
first edition was published by a company in the United Kingdom but printed in the
United States is significant. As discussed earlier, Canongate was still a small
press in 1981, and Lanark is considered to have been its break into the larger
world of publishing. Prior to Lanark, however, Canongate did not have the full
financial backing it would take to print a book the size and complexity of Lanark.
Therefore, Canongate had a grant through the Scottish Arts Council which paid
for the costs of printing. This particular situation in which a small publishing
house outsourced the printing to a company in another country and paid for it
through a grant illustrates the lack of financial power that smaller publishing
41
42

Canongate, 2017
Kovac and Squires, 17
23

houses have, but the following discussion of the different cover artwork (for both
Lanark and Poor Things) aims to reveal how small, independent publishing
houses may have more flexibility for author design involvement than larger
publishing houses.
This is not a bibliographic paper so copy specific details are not
necessary. The details of the binding and book cover attributed to the first edition
are important, though. Both copies in the Irvin Department share these binding
and book jacket details. For instance, both are bound in black cloth with “Lanark,
Alasdair Gray, Canongate” stamped on the spine in gold, with bright red
endpapers and flyleaves. There is no other ornamentation on the bindings for
these editions (see Figure 3.3). This may be because Gray had not yet decided
to include decoration on the bindings of his books, or it may have been because
the printing costs for a smaller press that was already printing from grant money
could not support decorative bindings. Either way, it is an important detail when
compared to later editions of many of Gray’s other works.
The book jacket of the first edition is the most recognized cover for
Lanark, although it is not the only cover used over the years. This book jacket is
especially important for the first edition because the binding of the book does not
bear the art of the author, while the book jacket does. The cover artwork by Gray
wraps around the book and is a black and grey drawing of a cityscape with
images of people throughout. The front side of the cover has a naked woman on
the right side of the image standing in the sea and looking like she is about the
step out into the city. Her arms are above her head and she is holding the sun

24

which is colored gold (see Figure 3.1). Above her is a god who is shooting a gold
lightning bolt out of his eyes toward the man on the left side of the drawing, which
also happens to be on the back side of the cover. The man mirrors the woman on
the front in many ways, as he is also large, naked, and has his arms above his
head. He appears to be holding the moon (again, mirroring the woman), but his
hands are unclear and ill-defined (see Figure 3.2). In fact, in comparison to the
woman on the front cover, the man on the back is unclear both linearly and
structurally. What this means is the woman on the front cover is clearly defined
with decisive, black lines outlining all parts of her body, from her nipples to her
abdomen to her pubic hair. Additionally, the woman is obstructed by nothing else
in the drawing – there are no other images within her body and no part of the title
obstructs her. Comparatively, the man naked man on the back cover is undefined
in a number of ways. For instance, within the man’s abdomen is a woman tied
up, and two swans are flying away from her. There is no definition of muscle to
his body, but rather his body is shaded in a way that suggests infinite space, with
stars beginning to fill his arms. These elements ultimately obscure him from the
viewer. The information about the books, in an arrow on fire that spans the
artwork and holds the title of the work (saying LANARK ALASDAIR GRAY on the
front and spine and A LIFE IN 4 BOOKS on the back) also partially obstructs the
reader’s view of the man, almost covering his face. Even the moon that the man
holds is partially obstructed, as it is a half moon rather than a full moon. Although
the man is prominent based on perspective, these obstructive elements suggest
he is not the focus of the story.

25

In addition to the two large naked figures, there are portraits of five people
across the bottom of the piece – a man with black hair, a woman, a man with a
mustache, another woman who is looking at the viewer, and an old man in a
tweed hat and jacket. In terms of perspective, these five profiles appear closest
to the viewer. On the spine of the cover is a baby being born from the view of the
mother, with a dragon like creature and two seraphs watching above the spine
scene.
The interspersing space is covered in architecture from a city, like
smokestacks, bridges, government buildings, and churches. The back of the
cover has three particular images that suggest the cityscape is that of Glasgow,
Scotland; the distinctive statue of John Knox from the city Necropolis is visible,
as is the cathedral and the Glasgow Victoria Infirmary Teaching Hospital. The
text of the story also suggests the book jacket artwork is of Glasgow, as Duncan
Thaw is working on a painting of the city in Book Two and the description of it
seems similar – “The enlarged landscape would show Blackhill, Riddrie, the
Campsie Fells, the Cathkin Braes and crowds from both sides mixing around the
locks in the middle.”43 However, the story reveals Unthank may be a Hellish
version of Glasgow, so it is unclear which version of the city the artwork portrays.
The people on the cover suggest both – the large woman could be Rima with her
dark hair or Marjory who was supposed to model naked for Duncan Thaw. The
large ill-defined man looks young with no beard so could be Duncan Thaw (and
the tied up woman is indicative of his perverted sexual desires), but the ill

43

Gray, 2016, 287
26

definition could be Lanark who is covered in dragonhide and struggles to
understand who he is. The point is the cover presents a little bit of both narratives
and literally illustrates how they are the same.
Some of the inner artwork of Lanark is important to mention because it
plays an important part in future editions as well as the interpretation of the story.
As the title of the novel suggests and as mentioned earlier, the novel is split into
four books. Gray illustrated a frontispiece for each of the books, which will be
discussed in the order in which they appear in the novel. Book Three’s
frontispiece has a woman named Magistra Vitae, or teacher, in the middle of the
image. She is clothed in armor and is holding up the world which is full of
monsters and both real and fictional places, while stepping on the skeletal bodies
of Mors (death) and Oblivio (forgetfulness). Magistra Vitae is flanked by two
women, Experientia (experience) on the left and Veritas (truth) on the right.
Experientia is an old woman with a covered head and holds plumbing tools. She
is between two columns covered in books and symbols of learning. Veritas is a
naked young woman holding nothing and is between two columns with images of
youth. One column is covered in flames and says, “Lux Veritatis” loosely
translated to light of truth, while the other column is covered in greenery and
says, “Vita memoriae” loosely translated to living memory. There are two more
women at the top of the image; Fama Bona or Good News, and Fama Mala, or
Bad News. Fama Bona is above Experientia and is in the light while Fama Mala
is above Veritas and is in the dark. Both are blowing trumpets above the world,
toward the word “Providentia.”

27

The frontispiece for Book One varies from the style seen in Book Three.
There are no allegorical figures. Instead, this image has a ship, a sea monster,
and a recreation of Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan – only half of the Leviathan is
visible, and is the half holding a sword. These figures are in the sea, which is
flooding a city, presumably Glasgow based on the text in the image. The text of
the image is placed on two columns (which are not holding anything up); the left
column says, “Let Glasgow Flourish” and the right column says, “By Telling the
Truth.” A lightning bolt coming from the Leviathan’s mouth goes behind one
column and around the other, heading for Glasgow. Finally, there are three
portraits at the bottom of the page – a man on the left and two women on the
right. One woman is young and one is old; the young woman is looking down
while the old woman is looking out toward the reader. The man is looking at the
women, although it seems as if he is focusing on the young woman.
The imagery used in the frontispiece for Book Two returns to some of the
imagery from Book Three, or the first book in the novel. The frontispiece for Book
Two is within a lecture hall, and the room is full of men. A woman is being
dissected on the table, and a skeleton oversees the operation at the head of the
table. The windows reveal the night sky, and two naked children, who may be
cherubs based on their flight, holding a seal with a tree, a book, a bell, a fish, and
a scepter. The book reads “Via Veritas Vita” loosely translated to “The way of life
and truth” The floor of the lecture hall is checkered, and a sign at the bottom
says, “Homo a se coctum esumque crustum est hoc fecit separatio.” This Latin
phrase was difficult to decipher because of the conjugations, but a loose

28

translation translates this phrase to “Man himself a cooked meat pie made with
this separation.
Finally, the frontispiece for Book Four returns to the imagery found in the
Book One frontispiece but is more directly reminiscent of Thomas Hobbes’
Leviathan frontispiece. Gray’s Leviathan looms above a city much like the
Leviathan in Hobbes’ frontispiece. However, Gray’s version rises out of the sea
which indicates that the city Gray’s Leviathan looms above is Glasgow. Like
Hobbes’ Leviathan, Gray’s Leviathan has a body made up of many people, he is
wearing a crown, and he is holding a sword on the left and a scepter on the right.
Gray’s Leviathan differs in subtle ways, though, such as the fact that the
Leviathan’s eyes are closed, and the sword and scepter he holds are named
“Force” and “Persuasion,” respectively. In the clouds surrounding Gray’s
Leviathan the phrase “Foremost of the Beasts of the Earth for Pride, Job
c41,v34.” The bottom third of the frontispiece is also structured like Hobbes’
frontispiece, with panels of civilization surrounding a banner. Gray’s frontispiece
only has eight panels, but the illustrations also seem to illuminate civilization,
although Gray’s illustrations come from civilizations of the Twentieth Century.
From left to right and top to bottom, the images are: a nightstick; a police and
military cap; the union jack and lines of soldiers being inspected; a city scape
burning with a plane overhead and a tank aiming at citizens (men, women, and
children); a scroll; a graduation cap and lawyers wig; a classroom with a male
teacher teaching math to a full class; a factory making automobiles. The curtain
in Gray’s frontispiece only says, “Book Four,” but Gray borrows from Hobbes’

29

frontispiece once more when he inscribes a plaque at the bottom of the piece
with the phrase, “The Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth.” (see Figure
3.4)
The reason for describing these frontispieces becomes readily apparent
when discussing the next edition of Lanark. The Irvin Department owns a 1982
paperback edition of Lanark that was printed by Granada publishing, which in the
1980s operated out of London, Toronto, Sydney, and New York. This paperback
edition was printed and bound in Great Britain by Hazell Watson & Viney Ltd. It is
difficult to find information on Granada Publishing today because it has since
dissolved. The University of Glasgow has records that reveal some of the history
of Granada Publishing – it appears that Granada publishing actually started off
as The Hour Press Limited but was renamed Granada Publishing in 1966 when it
was made a subsidiary of the Granada Group Incorporated. Granada Publishing
Inc. operated as the Granada Group’s publication branch and through the 1970s
acquired other publishers. By 1999, though, the Granada Group had sold
Granada Publishing, which was subsequently dissolved by its new company.44
This history reveals that by the time it was publishing the 1982 paperback edition
of Lanark, Granada Publishing was part of a large publishing firm with a great
deal of financial backing and oversight.
The cover for the Granada 1982 paperback does not use the original book
jacket artwork but rather takes the frontispiece from Book Four and transposes it

44

University of Glasgow Archives, 2008

30

onto the cover. The cover does not use the entirety of the frontispiece, either, but
rather uses only the part with the Leviathan rising out of the sea above Glasgow.
It cuts out the panels of civilization and it does not include the quote above the
Leviathan’s head. Additionally, rather than incorporating the title into the artwork
as is done on the first edition’s cover artwork, the full title is placed above the
artwork while a quote of praise and the author’s name are placed below (see
Figure 3.5). Oddly, the spine and the back cover do use elements from the first
edition book jacket artwork, such as the mother’s perspective of the birth of her
baby, the profiles of the men and women, and part of the cityscape. Specifically,
the 1982 Granada edition used the images of John Knox’s statue and the
cathedral from Gray’s original cityscape. The choice to take a frontispiece from
within the novel and make it the cover artwork raises the question of how much
Gray was involved in the production of this particular edition. Additionally, this
cover artwork choice prioritizes one section of the book over the other as readers
will recognize the art when they arrive at Book Four.
In 1985, another hardback edition of Lanark was printed, but it was
published by the United States publisher George Braziller who founded, owned,
and operated George Braziller Incorporated in New York City. Braziller founded
the company in 1955, and it remains an independent publisher to this day.
George Braziller Inc. is like Canongate in this way, as it has not been subsumed
by a large publishing firm at any point in its history. While this means that George
Braziller Inc. may not have the financial flexibility of a large firm, it does mean the
company has been able to focus “on publishing serious literary works and works

31

of art history, architecture, and criticism” as well as “timely and beautiful visual
books.”45
The 1985 George Braziller Inc. edition has new book jacket artwork and a
new binding design. The new artwork is by Gray and is related to the story, while
the binding design an early indication or attempt at the way Gray would
eventually design all his hardback bindings. The book jacket artwork is by Gray,
but does not wrap around the cover. The cover is beige and the front illustration
has a white and black pen drawing, with a large naked woman coming out of the
frame slightly. She splits the image between day and night and holds the moon,
while a naked Zeus wields a lightning bolt and has an eagle behind him on the
woman’s forehead. She appears to be walking off a stage in a round auditorium
where there are many rows of people. The image is framed by the entirety of the
title which runs along one side of the illustration while the author’s name is
underneath (see Figure 3.6). Like the 1982 Granada paperback edition, the spine
of the cover has three illustrations, separated by the title and the author’s name.
The top image is the portrait of an old man looking away and a young woman
looking at the viewer. The middle and largest illustration is the part of the
cityscape of Glasgow, with John Knox’s Necropolis statue, the cathedral, and the
Glasgow Victoria Infirmary hospital in flames, and people fleeing the scene at the
bottom of the illustration. The final, bottom illustration is of a child being born from
the perspective of its mother. The back of the 1985 cover has two illustrations.
The top is the Leviathan from Book Four’s frontispiece, but only illustrates him

45

George Braziller Inc., 2017
32

from the waist up, holding a sword and scepter and a city scape on both sides of
him. The bottom is a portrait of four people, two men and two women, alternating.
The woman on the left is the same woman from the spine of the book, and these
four portraits are the same from the 1981 edition. In between these two
illustrations are “Praise[s] for “Lanark”” and some quotes from people/reviews.
The book is bound in black cloth with LANARK stamped in gold down the spine.
ENDURE/YOU A is stamped in gold on the back, and E NOT/ALONE is stamped
on the front cover. If the book is opened all the way, the A and E intersect with
the R in LANARK, so that the cover reads ENDURE/YOU ARE NOT/ALONE.
The new artwork and binding of the 1985 edition provide a new
perspective for the novel. The book jacket artwork described above is related to
the story, but while the 1981 edition provided a look and focus on
Glasgow/Unthank, the auditorium on the 1985 edition suggests the council in
Provan that Lanark attends as a delegate in Book Four, while the woman who
occupies most of the space in the image may represent the love or purpose
Lanark tries to find while in Provan. The binding of the 1985 edition also provides
a message for the reader, although the phrase “Endure you are not alone” may
have many meanings or connotations. Regardless, the 1985 edition’s cover and
bindings provide a new access point for the reader, and this revision of the
context seems to have been Gray’s choice based on the fact that this edition’s
cover has completely new artwork and the bindings begin a trend of binding
design seen on later Gray books.

33

In 2001, Canongate printed a new edition of Lanark and there are many
indications that Alasdair Gray was intimately involved in the production of this
new edition. This is evidenced by the fact that it was a limited run (only 2000
copies were printed), and the fact that there was a space printed specifically for a
signature on the box the edition came in. This edition is vastly different from
former editions in many ways. To begin with, the 2001 edition is printed in four
volumes. This means that each volume has a new book jacket, and each of the
book jackets has a different piece of artwork. All of the artwork is by Gray, but
from before his career as an author, which is to say all of the pieces of art were
created and finished before Lanark was published. This first volume, which is
also Book Three, has cover art that wraps around the book, like a mural, and is
framed in white with room on the bottom for “LANARK (in gold letters)/ A LIFE IN
FOUR BOOKS/ BY ALASDAIR GRAY (in black letters)/ VOLUME 1, BOOK 3 (in
red letters). The spine of the book jackets says, “LANARK VOLUME 1” with
Lanark and Volume in white, the number is in red. According to back flap, the
cover art is a painting by Alasdair Gray, titled Cowcaddens Landscape 1950,
painted in 1963. The painting seems to be a city street corner, allowing the
viewer to look up one street on the front of the cover and up another on the back.
The street corner is not barren, as there are several people both near and far, but
none seem to interact with each other (see Figures 3.6 and 3.7). The front flap
has a synopsis of the contents of Volume 1, Book 3;
The first volume of this novel is Book Three because it starts in the middle.
The location is a clockless city where the sun rises for only a few minutes

34

at irregular intervals and nobody does essential work. Lanark has recently
arrived there with no memory of other places. He joins a clique led by
Sludden, a smart manipulator, and at last discovers that he is in Hell. He
escapes to a subterranean institute that turns out to be another region of
Hell and here wins the love of a woman he seems to have known in an
earlier life. This book ends with him contacting an Oracle who will tell him
what the earlier life was. It is the story told in Volumes 2 and 3.
As for the binding of Volume 1, Book 3, the book is bound in maroon Linwood
paper, with a design stamped on both the front and back covers in gold. The
design is two thistles, between which a cherub is emerging from a broken skull at
the bottom of the design. The phrase “work as if you lived in the early days of a
better nation” are written on a ribbon that curls between the two thistles, ending
above the cherub’s head. The ribbon breaks the continuity of the gold frame
around the image (see Figure 3.12). The image is repeated on the back cover.
Additionally, the book has navy blue endpapers and flyleaves. The detail of the
color of the endpapers is significant because of the colors of the rest of the
Volumes/Books.
Volume 2, Book 1 (which actually contains Book 1 and the Interlude) has
cover art that, according to the back flap, is a Gouache painting by Gray, titled
Two Hills, painted in 1950. The painting is confined to the front and the back
rather than wrapping around the spine like a mural. The art work on the front is a
cityscape; on the left is a church on a hill, and on the right is a factory also on a
hill but the perspective suggests the factory is in the distance. Regardless of the

35

perspective, the factory is almost level with the church (see Figure 3.8). The back
cover has the same painting but in mirror of the front. The art is framed by white
and there is room at the bottom once again to have the title, author, and
volume/book listed (in same color scheme as Volume 1/Book 3). The spine
announces the book’s title and volume again, just like Volume 1, but this time the
title and volume are in gold letters. The front flap of this volume also has a
synopsis:
This tells the story of Duncan Thaw from his infancy in a pleasant
Glasgow housing scheme in the early days of the Second World War to
his acceptance as a student by Glasgow Art School, in the high noon of
the British Welfare State. Like other confused adolescents Thaw sees the
world as a horrid reflection of his own condition, but the good sense and
humour of his family, of his friend Coulter, and of friendly teachers brings
this book to a happy ending.
Volume Two is bound in navy blue paper with the same design as Volume 1, but
stamped in silver (see Figure 3.13); the back is once again the same design, and
the endpapers and flyleaves are maroon. In essence, then, the binding of
Volumes 1 and 2 are opposites. This is especially interesting when considering
the contents of the volumes – one contains the story of Lanark and the other
contains the story of Duncan Thaw. When looking at Volumes 3 and 4, it
becomes apparent that one style is used for Lanark’s story and another is used
for Duncan Thaw’s story, and that this style extends beyond the bindings but also
to the book jacket construction and artwork.

36

For example, Volume 3, Book 2 is bound exactly like Volume 2, Book 1,
which is to say it is also bound in maroon paper, has the same design stamped in
silver, and has navy blue endpaper and flyleaves. The book jacket also mimics
that of Volume 2, Book 1 in that the image on the book jacket is confined to the
front and back rather than wrapping around the book like a mural. Additionally,
this painting is framed in white with room on the bottom for the title, author’s
name, and volume/book, all in the same color scheme as previous volumes,
while the spine’s title and volume match the color scheme found on Volume 2,
Book 1’s spine. The painting on the Volume 3, Book 2 cover is again by Gray,
titled The Garden of Eden, and was painted in 1967. There is a couple
embracing in the middle of the painting, but the male figure has his face hidden
by the woman’s hair and he is red. They are watched by God, but only the back
of God is visible to the viewer. There is another couple to the top left, where the
woman is simultaneously picking fruit and handing it to a man who is sitting
down. There are many animals but none of them in pairs, and the top of the
painting holds scenes from outside of Eden, as it is a rough sea and a burning
town. Specifically, these scenes depict stories from later in the Bible; Noah’s ark,
Moses and the ten commandments, Sodom and Gomorrah, and the crucifixion
(see Figure 3.9). Like Volume 2, Book 1, this painting is mirrored on the back
cover. The front flap once again has a synopsis, which says,
This continues the story of Duncan Thaw from his entry into Glasgow
School of Art through his training and effort to paint a huge masterpiece,
an effort leading to madness and suicide. Three things stop this from

37

being a wholly miserable tale. (1) Black comedy. (2) The vitality of the
people he meets. (3) Our knowledge that he will be reincarnated as
Lanark, whose only ambition is to find some love and sunlight, so has
more hope of succeeding.
The choice of this painting for this Volume/Book is especially significant based on
what happens in Book Two – the huge masterpiece that is referenced in the
synopsis is a mural that Thaw paints within a church, so the subject of his mural
is religious. The book describes this painting almost exactly as part of the mural:
The reporter looked at the Eden wall and said, “Who’s that behind the
bramble bush with a lizard at his feet?”
“God,” said Thaw, glancing uneasily at the minister…
“But why is Adam a Negro?”
“He’s actually more red than black,” the minister murmured, “and the
name ‘Adam’ derives from a Hebrew word meaning ‘red earth.’”
“But Eve is white!”
“Pearly pink,” said Thaw. “I’m told that for a few moments love makes
different people feel like one. My outline shows the oneness, my colors
emphasize the difference.”46

46

Gray, 2016, 325-326
38

The book jacket artwork for this book emphasizes this particular part of the book,
and visually represents an integral part of the story, as Thaw’s inability to
complete the mural and find consolation for that fact drives him to insanity.
The fourth and final volume of this 2001 Canongate edition is Volume 4,
Book 4. The book is bound in maroon paper, the thistle and ribbon design is
stamped in gold, and the endpapers and flyleaves are navy blue, just like the
binding of Volume 1 Book 3. Additionally, the artwork on the book jacket wraps
around like a mural again just as it did with Volume 1, Book 3. This binding and
book jacket design matches Volume 1, Book 3’s binding and book jacket design
because both contain the story of Lanark rather than Duncan Thaw. The artwork
for the Volume 4, Book 4 book jacket is again by Gray, and is titled The Triumph
of Death, 1960. It depicts the destruction of an industrial city, most likely Glasgow
based on the cathedral and Glasgow Victoria’s Infirmary hospital on the back
side of the book jacket, which is a reoccurring image of Glasgow in Gray’s works
(as is evidenced on some of the covers of other editions of Lanark). The
destruction appears to be at the hands of skeletal demons, many of which have
only huge, gaping mouths for heads. The humans in the painting have
expressions of suffering but are not taking any action (see Figures 3.10 and
3.11). Again, as with the other volumes, the front flap of the book jacket has a
synopsis which says,
Accompanied by the woman he loves, Lanark returns to the dark city of
Unthank, for he has been told it is a way-station to the sunlight he desires.
Here his son is born, and the mother leaves him for Sludden who is now

39

Unthank’s Lord Provost. Sludden persuades Lanark to attend a world
congress as a spokesman for the place where the only peoples he loves
now live. Lanark’s experiences of being politically great and sexually
desirable is shown to be a delusion, but he learns he was always
supported by more love than he ever noticed, and sees the dawn of a new
long day breaking over Unthank, the dark side of any city.
Like Volume 3/Book 2, Volume 4/Book 4 also has a description within the text
which reflects the painting on the book jacket. It comes when the author, Nastler,
is telling Lanark about the end of his story and the destruction of Unthank:
“…the landscape is tilted at a peculiar angle, rioters are attacking the clock
towers and much of the city is in flame…you stand with Rima on the height of the
Necropolis watching flocks of mouths sweep the streets like the shadows of huge
birds, devouring the population as they go.”47 Once again, the choice of this
painting for the book jacket makes this passage stand out to the reader, as well
as the chapter where Unthank is indeed destroyed. A great deal of action
happens in Book 4, and many other details are important, but the book jacket art
forces this focus. This focus is not a bad thing, but it certainly different from the
focuses of previous editions’ artwork.
In addition to the new artwork which forces focus on certain parts of the
text, the deliberate contrasts and consistencies in the bindings and the book
jacket design allow the reader to physically see which parts of the story are

47

Gray, 2016, 497
40

connected before they begin reading the text, i.e. that Volume 1/Book 3 and
Volume 4/Book 4 are Lanark’s narrative while Volume 2/Book 1 and Volume
3/Book 2 are Duncan Thaw’s narrative. This split and order allow Gray to
accomplish what he set out to do, as documented in Lanark; “I want Lanark to be
read in one order but eventually thought of in another.”48 Although former editions
of Lanark made readers read the novel in one order, the 2001 Canongate edition
lends a physical delineation that makes the reader think of the novel in a different
order. This is not to say that the 2001 edition is a more perfect edition of Lanark,
but rather that the physicality of the volumes allows for a different approach to
the text.
The latest printed edition of Lanark is the 2016 Canongate paperback
edition. This paperback has the same artwork from the first edition by Canongate
(Figure 3.14 and 3.15). However, there are some key differences in the coloring.
To begin, the drawing is in black and white rather than grey, although the artwork
is framed in a light grey. Additionally, the sun that the woman holds has no color
– in the original it is gold. The arrow that goes around the cover of the book has
red colored flames around it rather than gold ones, and LANARK is in red rather
than gold too. The arrow has nothing on the spine, but a red vertical stripe
containing the words “Alasdair Gray LANARK” and the Canongate logo runs
down the spine, across and obstructing the artwork. The back still says, “A LIFE
IN 4 BOOKS” but it is in red rather than black. The barcode for the book is on the
back and obscures the large man’s lower-half, making it difficult to discern that

48

Gray, 2016, 483
41

he is a man in the first place, as his face is androgynous, he has no muscle
definition, and the viewer can no longer see his genitalia. The insides of both
covers are bright red, mimicking the endpapers of the first edition, but inside
covers have quotes about the book, and the back inside cover has a self-portrait
by the author (whereas former editions did not). Nothing about this edition
particularly suggests that Gray was involved in the design of this newest edition,
and the attempt to ask the author about his involvement in this edition went
unanswered. This question leads back to the question of publishers, however,
which is useful.
Over the course of the discussion of these different editions of Lanark by
multiple publishers, a pattern has emerged. Two independent publishers
produced editions of Lanark, while one larger publishing firm produced a
paperback edition. The editions published by the independent publishers were
the 1981, 1985, 2001, and 2016 editions. Canongate produced the 1981, 2001,
and 2016 editions, and while each edition illustrates the author involvement and
revision of design, the 2001 edition is the best example of how Canongate gave
Gray the opportunity to create a new way to literally see his texts. Since
Canongate was Gray’s first publisher and has the production rights to Lanark, it
may seem like the reason they allowed this revision of design was because
Lanark played such an important role in their growth. However, the production of
the George Braziller Inc. 1985 edition proves this assumption to be false. George
Braziller Inc., another independent publisher, has a new book jacket and binding
obviously designed by Gray just four years after the first edition of Lanark was

42

released. The implication here is evident when the 1982 Granada edition is
brought into comparison. The Granada edition not only did not use the original
cover artwork, but it also did not commission a new piece of art for the cover –
instead, Granada Publishing pulled a frontispiece from the inside of the book,
chopped it in half, and pasted it on the cover. The cover of the 1982 Granada
edition makes it obvious that this larger publishing firm did not approach Gray for
the rights to his book jacket artwork, nor did they look for him to create a new
design. The George Braziller Inc. edition, however, did. The difference here
appears to be that the revision of the context of the novel was allowed and
perhaps encouraged by smaller, independent publishers (Canongate and George
Braziller Inc.), while the larger publishing firms did not.
All the editions of Lanark examined for this paper have been discussed at
this point, as well as a discussion of how each new cover provides a new insight
into the text of the novel and insight into the printing and publishing process of
smaller, independent publishing houses. There is one last copy of Lanark that
was examined for this paper, however, and its inclusion provides insight into the
problem of preservation of these unique books. The Thomas Cooper Library at
the University of South Carolina, or the main academic library at the University,
has a copy of Lanark. In fact, Thomas Cooper owns a first edition of Lanark, the
1981 Canongate hardback edition (an edition that now sells for upwards of
$1,500 on ABEbooks)49. It has the same black cloth binding, the same red
endpapers and flyleaves, and the same gold stamped title on the spine.
49

Gray, Alasdair, AbeBooks, 2017

43

Unfortunately, Thomas Cooper’s copy no longer has its book jacket – it was
removed by the library, although the front flap of the book jacket was cut and
literally pasted onto the inside back cover. The rest of the cover and its artwork
are gone. This literarlly removes a part of the story fo the reader and a point of
access – as discussed earlier, the 1981 edition book jacket is at once a portrait of
the main characters (Lanark and Duncan, Rima and Marjory) and the dual city of
Unthank and Glasgow. While it is impossible to escape understanding these
characters and places are related after reading the book, the book jacket artwork
makes it obvious that they are actually one and the same. The lack of book
jacket art makes it possible for a reader to walk away thinking these narratives,
people, and places are simply related or new iterations, but the artwork reveals
their oneness.
*******
Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald McCandless M.D.,
Scottish Public Health Officer is, in essence, a retelling of the Frankenstein story.
In Gray’s retelling, though, he sets himself up as the editor rather than the author,
thereby framing the story as a historical one. The story, set in Victorian Glasgow,
is narrated by Archibald McCandless but is about a medical scientist, Godwin
Baxter, and his creation, named Bella Baxter. Godwin tells McCandless that he
created Bella when he found a pregnant woman who had drowned herself in the
river; he created her by implanting the infant’s brain into the body of its drowned
mother. After introducing Bella to McCandless, Godwin decides he must take
Bella on a trip around the world to give her brain time to develop. The trip is

44

meant to be a civilized education, but proves to be problematic since Bella’s body
is that of a grown woman and still has the sexual desires of a grown woman.
Godwin returns to Glasgow with Bella but is downtrodden as he realizes that she
cannot and will not love him as anything more than creator (evidenced especially
to the reader through Bella’s referral to Godwin as “God” throughout the
narrative). McCandless, who has fallen in love with Bella, asks Bella to marry him
and Godwin agrees to the arrangement. Before they can wed, though, Bella
elopes with another man, Duncan Wedderburn. Bella and Wedderburn travel
around Europe together for a while but Bella eventually abandons him for her
own adventures and eventually returns home to Glasgow. Back in Glasgow,
Bella is a more independent, sexually liberated woman, but is confronted by her
backstory when her wedding to McCandless is interrupted by her former
husband, or her body’s former husband, General Blessington. In the ensuing
disagreement, Bella finally learns of Godwin’s experimentation but learns that her
former husband had suggested she have a clitorectomy for her extreme sexual
desires while having a mistress. Bella concludes that her previous life as Victoria
Blessington had indeed been miserable enough to drive her to suicide, even
when pregnant. Bella successfully avoids being coerced or abducted back to her
old life as Victoria Blessington and instead drives her former husband and his
accomplices from Godwin’s house, marries McCandless, and becomes a doctor.
After these events, McCandless’ narrative quickly wraps up in a neat manner,
which is to say he leaves no loose ends.

45

The book does not end with McCandless’ narrative, though. Instead, it is
followed by a letter from Victoria McCandless, MD, who states she was the wife
of Archibald McCandless but the events relayed within his book are completely
fantastical. She then gives her own brief narrative of her life in which she
recounts her childhood as Victoria, her marriage to General Blessington, as well
as why she left him and changed her identity to Bella Baxter. The novel finally
ends with historical notes from Alasdair Gray that give insight into different parts
of each narrative. However, the sum of the historical notes does not favor one
narrative over the other, so the reader is left to decide which narrative to believe.
Poor Things was first published by Bloomsbury in 1992. Bloomsbury was
founded in 1986 “on the principle of publishing books of the highest quality,”50
and was based solely out of London, England. The company quickly grew – in
1994 they expanded their operations to paperback books, and in 1998 they
extended their publishing house to the United State of America (founding
Bloomsbury USA). Today, Bloomsbury has branch companies in Sydney,
Australia and Delhi, India as well. Bloomsbury’s extension to paperback books in
under a decade shows just how fast the company and its power grew in the
publishing world. In order for a publishing house to produce both hardbacks and
paperbacks, it must have an immense amount of financial power, which
Bloomsbury had; in 1994, they earned £5.5 million when the company went
public51, which allowed them to extend their publishing power. However,
Bloomsbury produced Poor Things prior to this growth, and is still considered an
50
51

Bloomsbury, 2017
Bloomsbury, 2017
46

independent publisher, although that label means something different for
Bloomsbury today. In 1992 when Poor Things was first published, Bloomsbury
would have operated in much the same way that Canongate and George
Braziller Inc. did; today, Bloomsbury has not be subsumed by a larger
corporation, but has instead acquired and incorporated other smaller publishers
into its company.52 The point of this is to say that in 1992, Bloomsbury was more
similar to Canongate and George Braziller than it is today; for the purposes of
this paper, that means Bloomsbury and the relationship it had with Alasdair
Gray’s work will be discussed in relation to its publication of Poor Things and its
role as a small independent publisher in 1992.
While the bindings and book jackets of Lanark went through several
changes over the course of its printing, the bindings and book jackets of Poor
Things went through significantly less changes. The British first edition, printed in
1992, is bound in navy blue cloth with violet end papers and a yellow ribbon
marker, and the cover is stamped with a repeating tall, silver thistle motif (see
Figure 3.17). Both the front and back covers have “Work as if you live in the early
days of a better nation” stamped in silver along the top – this phrase has become
an integral part of Gray’s publications and is now incorporated into each of his
new works. For example, this phrase was used by Gray for the 2001 edition of
Lanark, as was mentioned earlier. The spine of the British first edition of Poor
Things is stamped in the same silver as the covers, and includes the title, the
author, a thistle design, and the publisher. The dust jacket of the British first

52

Bloomsbury, 2017
47

edition has Poor Things emblazoned in purple around the edges of a colorful
mural by Gray depicting a scene from the novel, specifically from Chapter 19,
“My Shortest Chapter.” The mural depicts Godwin Baxter sitting on a sofa in front
of a window, cradling Bella Baxter and Archibald McCandless on his lap in a
room strewn with scientific documents and models. The novel describes the
scene:
Then she sat on his knee, embraced him as far round the waist as her
arms could reach, rested her head upon his chest and seemed to fall
asleep. He too closed his eyes and his normal colour slowly returned.
Feeling relieved but jealous I watched them a while. Eventually I sat by
Bella, embraces her waist and rested my head on her shoulder. She was
not completely asleep, for she moved her body to let mine fit it more
easily. The three of us lay a long time like that.53
The book jacket mural depicts more than this scene describes, though. To begin
with, the book jacket is painted with bright colors; bright red curtains frame the
scene, Godwin Baxter wears a bright yellow vest, Bella wears a magenta dress,
and the surrounding room décor (such as the sofa and the rug) are varying
shades of bright green (Figure 3.16). The book jacket also includes elements
such as the rabbits Godwin Baxter experimented with at the beginning of the
novel, a skeleton standing behind the sofa with its skull obscured by the framing
curtains, and the head of a female sits on a table with the top of her head

53

Gray, 1992, 193
48

removed to reveal the brain within, which is black and grey, suggesting it is dead
even though the face of the female is flushed as if alive.
Artistic intervention is not confined to the outside of the book jacket – Gray
also contributed blurbs and reviews. The front inside flap of the dust jacket has
the blurbs for the common reader and the sophisticated reader under the labels
“Blurb for a popular paperback” and “Blurb for a high class hardback”, while the
back inside dust jacket flap has depreciating reviews from fictitious reviewers.
The level of detail in the binding and covering of Poor Things shows how
involved Gray was with the production of this first edition. These elements impact
the way readers approach the text, as the artwork may make them focus on
Chapter 19 as a pivotal point in the story, which it is. In Chapter 19, Bella has
discovered her body has a cesarean section scar and she asks Godwin about
and what happened to her baby, but he and McCandless skirt around the truth –
Bella does not learn what happened until General Blessington’s arrival. The
bright color scheme may make the reader view this scene and grotesque tale as
something other than horrific, which adds a layer of complication because story is
grotesque and horrific in many ways. Subsequent editions of Poor Things
remove elements of Gray’s design and artistic decisions without adding new
design decisions from the author, so it is not unreasonable to say that the British
first edition is the ideal edition pertaining to authorial intent.
An American edition was also printed in 1992, but the American edition
was produced by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich in the United States. Like Granada
Publishing, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich was difficult to research because it is

49

such a large conglomerate and has changed names, hands, and purpose many
times since it was first founded. For example, the company appears to have
started as Harcourt Brace and Company, but changed its name in the 1970s
when the company had a new president, William Jovanovich (thus becoming
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).54 During Jovanovich’s time as president, the
company was known as “a major publisher of textbooks, scientific books and
books for the legal and medical professions”55 and even owned theme parks and
an insurance business.56 Finally, as a later edition of Poor Things reveals,
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich merged with Houghton Mifflin to become Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt Inc. The point is that Harcourt Brace Jovanovich was not an
independent publisher in 1992, nor was it a small publishing company. Instead, it
was part of a much larger conglomerate company. For the American first edition,
this fact seems only somewhat relevant, but it is important when considering later
editions.
The American first edition followed much of Gray’s design direction and
was printed in the same year (1992), so at first glance looks incredibly similar to
the British first edition. Upon closer inspection, however, subtle differences
appear which may be the result of publishing company decisions rather that
artistic/authorial decisions. For instance, the color of the cloth binding on the
American first edition is blue, but quite a different color from the British first
edition (see Figure 3.17). Rather than a deep navy blue, the American first

54

Encyclopedia Britannica, William Jovanovich, 2001
Prial,1982
56 Fabrikant, 1987
55

50

edition is covered in a dark royal blue. While the difference in cloth color may
seem inconsequential, it does raise the question of whether or not Gray was as
involved in the production process of the American first edition as he was for the
British first edition. Other small differences between the American and British first
editions are that the American edition does not have a ribbon marker, and the
dust jacket does not include any of the blurbs that Gray wrote. Instead of a blurb
for the a high class hardback and a popular paperback, the front inside dust
jacket flap has an award for Poor Things listed at the top, with a blurb from the
publisher, written to connect this novel to the larger literary tradition: “With its
tantalizing reminders of Mary Shelley, Wilkie Collins, Arthur Conan Doyle, and
Lewis Carroll, this is an up-to-date nineteenth-century novel, informed by a
thoroughly twentieth-century sensibility.”57 In other words, the American blurb is
significantly less satirical than the blurbs published in the British first edition. The
back inside flap has a brief bio about Gray rather than the fictionalized reviews.
It is important to note that the Irvin Department of Rare Books and Special
Collections owns two copies of the first American edition, but they have binding
differences. One copy is as described above – it is bound with royal blue cloth,
stamped in silver, has violent end papers, and does not include Gray’s blurbs
from the British first edition (see figure 3.18). The other copy has the same royal
blue cloth for the binding and the same silver thistle stamp design. On the inside
of the book, however, the second copy has white endpapers and flyleaves with
text printed onto them (see figure 3.19). The book jacket must be removed to

57

Gray, American first edition, front flap
51

read what is printed on the front endpaper, which is an announcement of the
books prestige – “Winner of Britain’s prestigious Whitbread Award.”58 The front
flyleaf has the blurbs for “A High-Class Hardback” and “Blurb for the Common
Reader,” however they are truncated in comparison to the British first edition
versions. The verso side of the front flyleaf also has something printed on it, one
of the fictitious reviews from the British first edition. The back flyleaf of this
particular American first edition also has text printed on it, but rather than
borrowing from the contextual elements of the British first edition, this copy has a
self-portrait of Alasdair Gray on the recto side and real reviews on the verso side.
The reason for this is unknown, but can be speculated upon. It is possible
that the publisher Harcourt Brace Jovanovich was trying two different designs in
order to market their book in the best way they could. The review copy of Poor
Things and subsequent copies of the American first edition reveals which design
they went with. The other American first editions examined, the review copy and
a personal copy, matched all of the details first described – they have the royal
blue binding and violet endpapers (without text), and book jackets that have the
publisher’s blurb.
Like Lanark, Gray’s novel Poor Things became significant enough to
quickly warrant subsequent publishing, and was converted into paperback first by
Penguin Books in 1993, and then by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich in 1994 as one
of their Harvest editions. Obviously, notable aspects of the original design were
not used in the production of a paperback, simply because of the nature of
58

Gray, front endpaper of American first edition
52

paperback, which does not allow for two coinciding cover designs. Unfortunately,
the Penguin Books 1993 paperback edition is not owned by any of the libraries at
the University of South Carolina, and so could not be examined for this paper,
but it was described for a bibliography, and the description is applicable to this
paper. According to Phil Moores, a scholar who composed a bibliography of
Alasdair Gray’s works, the Penguin Books edition uses the original jacket design,
but it “has been reduced in size for the front cover. The back cover carries and
amended version of the original ‘Blurb for a Popular Paperback.’”59 The cover
design chosen for the Harvest edition is also the original artwork used for the
book jacket – it is possible the reasoning for this decision was that the book
jacket artwork was more recognizable than the binding design of thistle silver
stamps on blue background. Interestingly, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich used the
same layout as the dust jacket (including the size of the artwork), which restricted
their space for other information such as reviews or blurbs, as the book jacket
artwork wraps around the book (see Figure 3.20). On the hardback copies, the
dust jacket only has the title and the author around the border of the illustrated
scene on both the front and back – the paperback cover instead has a short blurb
at the top and reviews from The Boston Globe, Daily News (Los Angeles), and
The New York Times Book Review on the side. The blurb found on the Harvest
edition is completely different from the ones found on the British first edition as
well as the American first edition, suggesting that once again a design/production
choice was made by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich rather than the author, meaning

59

Moores, 2002, 209
53

Gray had less control over the design of his novel due to the size of the American
publisher.
The final edition of Poor Things examined for this paper was a paperback
from the Dalkey Archive Press, published in arrangement with Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt Publishing Company (previously Harcourt Brace Jovanovich). The
Dalkey Archive Press started in the 1980s as a part of The Review of
Contemporary Fiction61 and is based out of and supported by Illinois State
University. This is an important detail, because the Dalkey Archive Press’
connection to a state university meant the press must run as a nonprofit
organization, which impacts the financial backing that the press has. Regardless
of its earning status, the goal of the Dalkey Archive press was to “publish and
keep in print significant, challenging writing … that commercial publishers ignore
or abandon.”62 The Dalkey Archive Press has been known to publish obscure
authors or to actively search out the works of authors that have gone out of print,
but adhering to their goals has been difficult due to the funding they must find
and the oversight of a large state university. The Dalkey Archive Press is a very
different press from the others discussed in this paper as it is neither an
independent publisher nor a large corporate publisher. It operates as a small
press, but has the oversight of a larger press because of its relationship with
Illinois State University.

61
62

Barone, 1996, 223
Barone, 1996, 223
54

The particular copy examined is a second printing of the Dalkey Archive
edition, printed in 2009, the first Dalkey Archive edition being printed in 2001.
The binding of the Dalkey Archive edition is vastly different from any of the
copies previously examined. To begin with, the Dalkey Archive edition shrunk the
original cover artwork in order to make it fit on the front cover rather than allowing
the artwork to wrap around. In addition, the Dalkey Archive edition is the only one
examined that actually lists Alasdair Gray as the author of Poor Things, saying “A
novel by Alasdair Gray.” All other copies have simply listed the title and the
name, leaving the reader to assume Gray is the author, but allowing for the
possibility that he is simply the editor of the novel, as is stated within the
introduction to the story. The spine of the Dalkey edition is a lilac color with the
author and title listed again, and the back cover is white, with a lilac box to
highlight reviews of Poor Things. Like the Harvest edition, there are three
reviews, but the Dalkey edition reviews list the reviewers’ names alongside the
publications in which they wrote the review – Geoff Ryman from the New York
Time Book Review, Barbara Hardy from the Times Literary Supplement, and
Merle Rubin from the Los Angeles Times Book Review. The inclusion of
reviewers’ names hints at a desire on the publisher’s part to make this edition of
Poor Things seem desirable and credible. As was noted earlier in this paper,
publishers are concerned with the business side of printing and book production,
which explains why in successive editions more information about reviewers was
added in order to make sure Poor Things sold. Finally, the blurb for the novel on
the back cover of the Dalkey Archive edition is quite different from the blurbs on

55

any other copy examined, and starts off by stating, “One of Alasdair Gray’s most
brilliant creations, Poor Things is a postmodern revision of Frankenstein…”63 The
relationship between the Dalkey Archive Press and Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
Publishing Company (previously Harcourt Brace Jovanovich) is not entirely clear,
but the fact that the Dalkey Archive Press published this book in arrangement
with Houghton Mifflin Harcourt suggests that Houghton Mifflin Harcourt had a
stake in the production and marketing of this edition of Poor Things. This may
explain why the smaller press did not reach out to Gray for authorial artistic
revisions like George Braziller Inc. did with Lanark, or it is possible that by the
time Dalkey Archive had the opportunity to publish Poor Things it was too far
removed from the author to have the input he gave with Lanark. Whatever the
case, the Dalkey Archive Press edition reveals the complicated relationship small
presses have when they work with larger corporate publishing houses.
The various editions and copies of Poor Things alongside an
understanding of the history of the publishers who produced them reveals how
the production of Poor Things differed significantly from that of Lanark. Poor
Things was fully designed by Alasdair Gray when it was published through
Bloomsbury, an independent publisher. The book design was never able to go
through an author involved revision, though, because Bloomsbury made a deal
with Harcourt Brace Jovanovich for an American edition, and Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich has dominated the production of Poor Things since, even when
working with the smaller Dalkey Archives Press. On their own, the American first

63

Gray, Dalkey Archive edition, back cover
56

editions examined for this paper reveal the transformations Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich considered, but none of them seem like changes Gray would make
based off his previous design revisions. The later editions’ adherence to the
original artwork of Poor Things is admirable, but compared to the many editions
of Lanark reveals the lack of Gray’s participation which means that Gray did not
have the opportunity to create a new point of access for his readers. This is not
to say that visual and physical revision of the context of the book is necessary,
but the evolution of Lanark shows how Gray invested in that revision, so it is
possible that the publishing practices of large publishing corporations has
resulted in readers missing out on interesting authorial intervention.
The copies of Poor Things discussed so far reveal the ways in which
larger publishing companies make authorial contextual revision difficult, but there
is one more copy of Poor Things that should be mentioned. As with Lanark, the
University of South Carolina’s Thomas Cooper Library owns a copy of Poor
Things. In fact, as with Lanark, Thomas Cooper owns a British first edition of
Poor Things. It too is missing its book jacket. Unlike the copy of Lanark, though,
Thomas Cooper’s copy of Poor Things does not have part of the book jacket cut
out and pasted on the inside – all elements of the book jacket are gone. Once
again, this physical removal results in the reader missing a way of situating the narrative
as both the blurbs and the artwork of the book jacket are gone. The binding is still intact,
fortunately, but the missing cover removes part of the nuance of the story. The removal
reveals the dilemma of libraries – how do they preserve the physicality of all the parts of
the book when they must also provide the public access to these books?

57

Figure 3.1 Lanark 1981 Canongate front cover

58

Figure 3.2 Lanark 1981 Canongate back cover

59

Figure 3.3 Lanark 1981 Canongate binding

60

Figure 3.4 Lanark 1981 Canongate Book 4 frontispiece

61

Figure 3.5 1982 Granada paperback front cover

62

Figure 3.6 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 3 front cover

63

Figure 3.7 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 3 back cover

64

Figure 3.8 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 1 cover

65

Figure 3.9 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 2 cover

66

Figure 3.10 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 4 front cover

67

Figure 3.11 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Book 4 back cover

68

Figure 3.12 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Books 3 and 4 binding

69

Figure 3.13 Lanark 2001 Canongate, Books 1 and 2 binding

70

Figure 3.14 Lanark 2016 Canongate paperback front cover

71

Figure 3.15 Lanark 2016 Canongate paperback back cover

72

Figure 3.16 Poor Things Bloomsbury 1992, front cover

73

74
Figure 3.17 Poor Things bindings: British first edition (left) and American first edition (right)

75
Figure 3.18 Poor Things American first edition violet endpapers 1992

76
Figure 3.19 Poor Things American first edition white endpapers: 1992

Figure 3.20 Poor Things Harvest paperback edition: 1994
77

Figure 3.21 Poor Things 2009 Dalkey Archive Press

78

CHAPTER 4
THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES
The examination of two of Alasdair Gray’s novels and the variety of their designs
meant to show how the context and physicality of a book can signal a point of
focus for the reader, or may influence the ways in which they approach a text.
The discussion of the publishers of each edition meant to show how smaller,
independent publishers allowed more design and design revision from Gray over
the life of the book, thereby creating new ways for readers to access the text,
while larger publishing corporations did not seem to afford an opportunity for that
type of revision.
The point that was not fully addressed was the reason for mentioning the
copies of each book that were found in the academic library (Thomas Cooper) at
the University of South Carolina, but there was a reason for mentioning them.
The reason is that these several copies acquired for use by the student body
have had a crucial part of the context removed – the book jacket. The removal of
the book jackets removes a point of access for Gray’s novels – Gray’s novels,
often called postmodern, can be difficult to follow at times. The visuals of the
cover artwork act as a way of understanding confusing descriptions within the
text, while simultaneously complicating the action of the story.

79

Although this paper has explained why removing the book jacket is
problematic, academic libraries have a reason for removing book jackets (and it
should be noted that the books examined for this paper were left in their original
binding rather than being rebound with library buckram binding). Since academic
libraries serve academia and scholars, the basic role of academic libraries is to
“build broader and deeper collections and to arrange for users to access those
collections only on terms which ensure their long-term integrity”64 (emphasis
mine). At a time when academic libraries are facing budget constraints, high
competition for funding, and a larger student body “resulting in heavier use of
collections,”65 the long-term integrity of the materials in the collection is highly
important. Many academic libraries have preservation departments or programs
which are responsible for contracting and seeking out materials that meet
specific library binding standards, as well as in-house binding and repairs.66 The
budget and funding issues academic libraries currently face means they must
conserve resources, including resources that allow them to repair books.
Although academic libraries have moved away from their mid-century practice of
rebinding all the books in their collection with library buckram binding, academic
libraries are still interested in cutting down on the parts of the book they may
need to repair, inevitably resulting in the removal of the book jacket.
It is not reasonable to ask academic libraries to change their practices
when their purpose and mission is to make a breadth of knowledge accessible to

64

Brophy, 2005, 47
Elkington, 1999, 226
66 Elkington, 1999, 227
65

80

a large audience, which includes handling materials in a way that will prolong
their longevity while cutting down on costs. However, the preservation of the
material context is important for future study and research of book history, literary
history, printing history, publishing history, marketing history, and more.
Fortunately, there is a type of library that focuses on the preservation of the
material paratext in addition to the pages of text – Rare Books and Special
Collections libraries.
Rare Books and Special Collections libraries rose in prominence in the
late Nineteenth and early Twentieth Centuries and were at first connected to
universities much like academic libraries. The purpose of the Rare Books and
Special Collections libraries was to care for books that needed “special security,
care, and development,”67 but the books in these early libraries were not “rare”
exactly; early Rare Book and Special Collections libraries were concerned with
“the assembly and preservation of the books of the time.”68 Additionally, the “rare
books” part of Rare Book and Special Collections libraries is actually a misnomer
since the definition of “rare books” changes continuously because “books that
were previously considered common acquire new significance when new areas
of research…are practiced by the scholarly community.”69 The point is, Rare
Books and Special Collections libraries have from their beginning valued and
preserved contemporary books, and they have been concerned with the security
and care of all the physical aspects of the book, from the pages to the bindings.

67

Galbraith and Smith, 2012, 5
Galbraith and Smith, 2012, 2
69 Galbraith and Smith, 2012, 2
68

81

Special Collections libraries in the Twentieth and Twenty-First Century are still
concerned with acquiring contemporary books and they have the unique task of
preserving the entirety of the book as material object. Specifically, today many
Special Collections libraries are concerned with “modern fine printing, or the work
of contemporary authors” and these libraries understand the importance of “the
book as physical object and not just vehicle for text” which makes it necessary to
“take precautions that such parts of the physical object as dustjackets and
slipcases are retained.”70 Special Collections libraries, then, are perfectly situated
to acquire and preserve books like Alasdair Gray’s so they can “be used to show
the history of writing and printing”71 for a variety of future scholars.
The University of South Carolina is lucky to have a Rare Books and
Special Collections department, and to have one that has such extensive
collections. Many colleges and universities across the United States do not have
the scholarly luxury of direct access to a variety of rare and special materials,
from medieval manuscripts to first editions of James Joyce’s Ulysses. In an effort
to preserve and provide as much of the history of a book as possible, the Irvin
Department of Rare Books and Special Collections also acquires multiple
editions of books when feasible. The reason for this is to provide scholars with
multiple editions and iterations of a book in order to provide the fullest context of
the book, such as the movement between publishers or different marketing
styles. The Irvin Department’s Alasdair Gray collection sets an example of how
Special Collections should develop their collections – this study would not have
70
71

Cave, 1982, 19
Silver, 2012, viii
82

been possible if there had not been multiple editions of Gray’s works to examine.
There are other editions of both Lanark and Poor Things that the Irvin
Department does not own, however, and would have benefited the analysis of
these books as well as the relation of design and production to the publisher.
A great deal can be learned from the study of the context of Twentieth
Century books such as authorial intent, authorial revision, and publisher
relationships, but a great deal more can be discovered when there are multiple
editions and copies to compare. Thus, while a breadth of information is
necessary for university scholarly communities, the breadth philosophy should
apply to academic libraries rather than Special Collections libraries. Special
Collections libraries have the unique position of being able to focus on the depth
of their collections to aid new scholarship.

83

WORKS CITED
Barone, Dennis. "What's in a Name? the Dalkey Archive Press." Critique, vol. 37,
no. 3, Spring96, p. 222. EBSCOhost,
login.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
direct=true&db=f5h&AN=9606246468&site=eds-live.
Bernstein, Stephen. "Introducing Alasdair Gray." Alasdair Gray. Lewisburg, PA:
Bucknell UP, 1999. 17-34. Print.
Bloomsbury. "Corporate History - Corporate and Investor Relations Bloomsbury.com." Corporate History. Bloomsbury, 2017. Web. 03 Apr.
2017. <http://www.bloomsbury-ir.co.uk/html/about/a_history.html>.
Boles, Frank. “But a Thin Veil of Paper.” The American Archivist, vol. 73, no. 1,
2010, pp. 19–25., www.jstor.org/stable/27802713.
Brophy, Peter. The Academic Library. 2nd ed. London: Facet, 2006. Print.
Cameron, Kevin. "Unlikely Murals, Mostly." Vimeo. Hopscotch Films, Mar. 2011.
Web. 29 Mar. 2017. <https://vimeo.com/19433551>.
Canongate. "About Canongate." English. Canongate, 2017. Web. 03 Apr. 2017.
<http://www.canongate.tv/about-canongate>.
Cave, Roderick. Rare Book Librarianship. London: Clive Bingley, 1982. Print.

84

Cloonan, Michèle Valerie. “Bookbinding, Aesthetics, and Conservation.” Libraries
& Culture, vol. 30, no. 2, 1995, pp. 137–152., www.jstor.org/stable/25542744
Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. "Sir Walter Scott." Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 18 Nov. 2016. Web. 14 Apr. 2017.
Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. "William Jovanovich." Encyclopædia
Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 31 Dec. 2001. Web. 03 Apr.
2017.
Edwards, A. S. G. "The Circulation of English Verse in Manuscript After the
Advent of Print in England." Studia Neophilologica, vol. 83, no. 1, June
2011, p. 67. EBSCOhost,
login.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
direct=true&db=edb&AN=60900086&site=eds-live.
Elkington, Nancy. "Preservation and Collection Management: Ties That
Bind." Collection Management in Academic Libraries. Ed. Clare Jenkins
and Mary Morley. 2nd ed. Aldershot: Gower Limited, 1999. 225-56. Print.
Fabrikant, Geraldine. "Harcourt: A Vulnerable Giant." The New York Times,
1987. EBSCOhost,
login.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
direct=true&db=edsgbe&AN=edsgcl.176135518&site=eds-live.
Feather, J. (1988). A history of British publishing. New York, NY: Croom Helm.

85

Febvre, L. and Martin, H.J. The Coming of the Book: The Impact of Printing,
1450-1800. City, State: Verso. 2010.
Galbraith, Steven Kenneth, and Geoffrey D. Smith. Rare Book Librarianship: An
Introduction and Guide. Santa Barbara, Calf.: Libraries Unlimited, 2012.
Print.
George Braziller Inc. "History." George Braziller. George Braziller Inc., 2017.
Web. 02 Apr. 2017. <http://www.georgebraziller.com/history/>.
Gray, Alasdair. "Lanark: A Life in Four Books." AbeBooks. Canongate, GB, 01
Jan. 1981. Web. 27 Mar. 2017.
Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. Edinburgh: Canongate, 1981. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. New York: Granada, 1982. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. Edinburgh: Canongate, 1985. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in 4 Books. Edinburgh: Canongate, 2001. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. Edinburgh: Canongate, 2016. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. London: Bloomsbury
Pub., 1992. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. Proof Copy. London:
Bloomsbury Pub., 1992. Print.

86

Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1992. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. Review Copy. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. A Harvest Book. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1994. Print.
Gray, Alasdair. Poor Things: Episodes from the Early Life of Archibald
McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer. Dalkey Archive.
Chicago: Dalkey Archive Press, 2009. Print.
Kovac, M. and Squires, C. (2014). “Scotland and Slovenia: Making books in wee
lands.” LOGOS: The journal of the world book community, 25(4), 7-19.
GET DOI.
Milliot, Jim. "Harcourt Brace Now Harcourt Inc." Publishers Weekly, 5 Apr. 1999,
p. 11. Biography in Context,
link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/A54315939/BIC1?u=usclibs&xid=7b3f7d1c.
Accessed 2 Apr. 2017.

87

Moores, Phil. "An Alasdair Gray Bibliography." Alasdair Gray: Critical
Appreciations and a Bibliography. Boston Spa: British Library, 2002. 189236. Print.
Powell, David, and Emma Yan. "Records of Granada Publishing Ltd, Publishers,
St Albans, Hertfordshire, England." Archives Hub. The University of
Glasgow Archives, 2008. Web. 03 Apr. 2017.
<https://archiveshub.jisc.ac.uk/search/archives/76cdfec7-3db2-38f8-a8de29401f6269c4>.
Prial, Frank. “Harcourt Brace moving from the city.” The New York Times. 11,
Feb. 1982.
Rota, A. (1998). Apart from the text. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press.
Silver, Joel B. "Foreward." Rare Book Librarianship: An Introduction and Guide.
By Steven K. Galbraith and Geoffrey D. Smith. Santa Barbara, Calf.:
Libraries Unlimited, 2012. Vii-Xi. Print.
Steinberg, S. H. (1996). Five hundred years of printing. New Castle, DE: Oak
Knoll Press.
Weiss, Dudley A. "LBI at 50—Achievements and Principles." ["reprinted from
New Library Scene, April 1985"]. New Library Scene, vol. 19, no. 2, June
2000, pp. 10-15. EBSCOhost,
login.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
direct=true&db=llf&AN=502848726&site=eds-live

88

