School Librarians and Next Generation Advocacy:
Gaining Power and Influence Through the Development of Social Capital

A Dissertation presented to the Faculty of the Simmons College
School of Library and Information Science

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy
By
Charles R. O’Bryan

© 2017
Charles R. O’Bryan
All rights reserved

a.

Date 4' /2.4- I '20 1/

Katherine Wisser, Ph,D,

Ruth Small, Ph,D,

Camila Alire, Ph.D.

,,0\

Jm Pd/),
;0 /ltd>-

IJu::o...-

-I,M. ,,

i

Date

Date

i-II/-/7

0/ l'7jIZ








ProQuest Number: 10279792





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10279792
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

School Librarians and Next Generation Advocacy:
Gaining Power and Influence Through the Development of Social Capital

Charles R. O’Bryan
Chairperson : Melanie Kimball, Ph.D.

Simmons College School of Library and Information Science

Abstract

The positive impact of school libraries on student achievement is documented in a
robust body of literature. Despite this evidence, the number of certified school librarians
is declining nationally, and concerted advocacy efforts on the part of the American
Library Association, the American Association of School Libraries and individual teacher
librarians have been unsuccessful in reversing this trend. School librarians are being
challenged to justify the very existence of their programs.
This study explores the use of social capital to enhance the power and influence of
school librarians, and explores its potential to improve advocacy outcomes. The findings
fill a significant gap in the social capital literature by expanding its breadth to include the
field of Library and Information Science.
Narrative inquiry methodology was used to conduct semi-structured, in-depth
interviews of 29 school library system directors in New York State, with subsequent
coding and thematic analysis of interview transcripts. Additional surveys were

ii

administered to capture demographic information and to illuminate technical aspects of
social capital development, utilization, relevance, and value within school library systems
in New York State.
School library system directors identified social capital as an important tool in
maintaining funding, preserving staffing and programs, and in influencing decisionmakers, although many were unfamiliar with social capital theory. While directors
recognized barriers to social capital development on individual and system levels, the
majority promoted social capital utilization as a means of enhancing traditional advocacy
practices and provided evidence of its effectiveness. These findings confirm that teacherlibrarians and school library leaders are ideally positioned to harness the power of social
capital by forming relationships with decision-makers. By shifting the power paradigm of
K-12 education, teacher-librarians and school library leaders may ensure the long-term
sustainability of school libraries.

iii

Acknowledgements

A very special shout out is sent to colleagues at SLSA and to the many directors who
graciously made time to take part in this study. I owe a debt of gratitude for their generosity.
My heartfelt appreciation is offered to my committee and to all the Managerial
Leadership in the Information Profession faculty and staff at Simmons College. The program has
been inspirational, extremely fatiguing, and one of the most influential experiences of my
professional life to date.
Thank you to my fellow doctoral students. I have learned from you, struggled with you
and have been inspired by your personal sacrifices and hard work.
For the consolation, persistence, minor amounts of nagging, setting of totally unrealistic
goals (that we then achieved), and our “lock-step” insistence that we could do this and we would
get it done, I offer my deepest admiration and thanks to Karen Schneider.
Last, but of the utmost import, I thank my family. Laura, if you were anyone else in the
world, we would not have made it through this. Thank you!

While those listed above may have aided and supported the preparation of this
dissertation, the author alone is responsible for its execution, content and conclusions.

iv

Dedication

This dissertation and all that has led up to its completion are dedicated to the memory of
my mother, Jane Catherine O’Bryan. Jane, like her fifth child, achieved her higher education
relatively later in life and her example was my inspiration.

v

Table of Contents
Chapter 1 Introduction

1

Chapter 2 Literature Review

7

Chapter 3 Methodology

13

Chapter 4 Social Capital: A Director’s Perspective

27

Chapter 5 Administrative Barriers to Social Capital Development

48

Chapter 6 Teacher-librarian Barriers to Social Capital Development

64

Chapter 7 Teacher-librarian Development of Social Capital

76

Chapter 8 Conclusions and Recommendations

89

Bibliography

96

Appendices

110

Appendix A: SLSA Bylaws

110

Appendix B: School Library System Regulation 90.18

117

Appendix C: What is BOCES?

123

Appendix D: Straw vote for participation

125

Appendix E: SLSA endorsement of concept / participation

127

Appendix F: Invitational e-mail

128

Appendix G: Interview questions for directors

129

Appendix H: Consent form

132

Appendix I: Follow-up to interview

134

Appendix J: Survey questions

135

vi

Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION

The image of a knowledgeable librarian aiding a kindergartener in the painstaking
selection of her first chapter book one moment and explaining search engines to a twelfth grade
researcher the next is one that is embedded in the memories of many who have experienced K-12
education in the U.S. In the recent past, school librarians played an integral role as faculty in
even the most remote school districts. Today their numbers are dwindling and school libraries
are in peril. In 2007-2008 the number of school library media specialists in schools dropped by
1% nationally. By 2010-2011 there was a 4.3% reduction nationwide (American Library
Association, 2014). In New York City, the number of school libraries plummeted from nearly
1,500 in 2005 to fewer than 700 in 2014 (Morrison, 2015). Evidence from the study cohort
mirrors this trend, as displayed in the following table.

TABLE 1. Changes to Elementary Librarian Staffing (2012-2016)
CHANGE

2012 - 2013

2013 - 2014

2014 - 2015

2015 - 2016

n=15

n=16

n=19

n=20

Increase in Elementary
Librarian Staffing

0

0

0

0

Decrease in Elementary
Librarian Staffing

5

4

5

4

No Change

10

12

14

16

No Response

9

8

5

4

SAMPLE SIZE

1

Many of the directors surveyed reported having experienced cuts to library staff in their library
system over this four-year period. Five directors reported having experienced cuts in their library
system in one of the four years surveyed, 1 system experienced cuts in two of the four years
surveyed, and 4 systems experienced cuts in three of the four years surveyed.
The origins of this trend are manifold. School funding plays a key role in that elected
officials, school boards, educational administrators, taxpayers and families are forced to make
difficult decisions as a result of limited and ever shrinking budgets. The reduction in support for
libraries flies in the face of research that demonstrates the positive influence of libraries on
student achievement:

The bottom line is that school library programs and certified librarians positively impact
student achievement. The research is clear and compelling. The highest achieving
students come from schools with certified librarians and well-resourced school
library programs. Students who are the most at-risk—those in poverty, English language
learners, those with disabilities, and those struggling academically—benefit the most
from access to certified librarians and strong school library programs. School libraries are
the great equalizers in providing print and technology tools with a trained professional,
the certified librarian, to guide and teach students (Basic Education Funding Commission
Testimony, Heinsdorf, 2014).
Evidence of the benefits of librarianship in schools has been unsuccessful in reversing the
present trend in cutbacks. The Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) reports that some
districts in Illinois have massive, unadvertised shortages of teacher librarians (as cited in
VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012, p. 114). Although these teacher librarian lines or open positions
still exist, many districts are replacing certified library media specialist with clerks or aides, or
cutting library media specialists from their budgets altogether (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012;
2

Anderson, 2011). Whether these changes occur in Illinois or Pennsylvania, Alaska or Maine,
what is left in their wake is a facility with support staff, but lacking professional librarians and
library programs.
School librarians have promulgated a strong case in support of their impact upon student
achievement (Achterman, 2008; Krashen, 2004; Small, Snyder, & Parker, 2009; Smith, 2006;
Todd & Kuhlthau, 2004). The literature primarily focuses on raising awareness and extolling the
benefits of school library media centers staffed with teacher librarians (Rodney, Lance, &
Hamilton-Pennell, 2002; Rodney, Lance, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2003; Krashen, Syying, L., &
McQuillan, 2010). Librarians are not alone in their need to advocate on behalf of their programs.
The National Art Education Association (n.d.) purports that “Learning to draw and think
creatively helps prepare students for the future”; the National Association for Music Education
(n.d.) asserts, “Although it may not be part of the ‘job description,’ many music educators
actively engage themselves and others as advocates for music education on behalf of their
students, schools, and communities”; and according to the Society of Health and Physical
Educators (2015), “Physical education is an academic subject because states, school districts and
schools apply all of those requirements to physical education.” All of these non-core subject
areas, or “specials” have strong messages, organizations and advocacy strategies similar in scope
to those of school librarians. It is time for school librarians to develop a new strategy that will
help bolster their advocacy efforts.
The American Library Association (ALA) recognizes the importance of building
partnerships both within schools and with outside constituencies. Advocacy is defined by the
American Association of School Librarians (AASL) as the development of partnerships that will
turn “passive support into educated action” (AASL Advocacy Committee, 2016). Advocacy has

3

been recognized as a significant component of librarianship, perhaps even an expectation. In a
position paper on School Library Supervisors, AASL clearly states that advocating for library
programs and acting as a representative to government, private agencies, businesses and
professional organizations is part of the job description (AASL, Position Statement on the School
Library Supervisor, 2016a). Given these expectations and requirements, one would expect to find
a robust body of library literature, comprising decades of empirical studies, on advocacy in K-12
schools. This is not the case. The existing school librarianship advocacy literature is embodied
overwhelmingly in single practitioner experience or is derived from rhetoric extolling the
importance of advocacy to compel librarians to advocate (Ewbank & Kwon, 2015).
Reaching the AASL (2016b) goal of movement from passive support into educated action
may require an alternative strategy. The theory of social capital offers a promising alternative.
Social capital has long been invoked by entities such as the World Bank, which has used it as a
means to promote economic and societal development, and business consultants, who have
enlisted it for organizational development (Smith, 2009). According to Putnam (2000) social
capital refers to “social networks and the norms of reciprocity and trustworthiness that arise from
them” (p. 19), while Field (2003) notes that interaction “enables people to build communities”
(p. 1-2). Traditional advocacy methods are entrenched in the library and school library fields,
however the potential of and methods for developing social capital, relationships, and trust
between school librarians, district administration and outside community members is in the
nascent stages. This study focuses on the potential of social capital as a tool for strengthening the
power and influence of school librarians.
Despite the well documented positive impact of school libraries on student
achievement, the number of certified school librarians continues to decline. Concerted

4

advocacy efforts on the part of ALA, AASL and individual teacher librarians have been
unsuccessful in reversing this trend, and it is apparent that traditional efforts are
inadequate means of preserving teacher librarian staffing. A substantial conundrum
contributing to this situation is rooted in how school libraries are recognized, or not, at
the state level. New York State’s school librarians are well organized, encompassing a
leadership group of School Library System Directors as well as regional and state
chapters of the New York Library Association (NYLA). School librarians have ample
opportunities for leadership and relationship building within these professional groups.
They must now focus their efforts outwardly, beyond the customary or familiar
constituents. Factors such as a tax cap of 2% approved by the New York state legislature
that restrict the primary funding source for schools have forced librarians to look
externally in an effort to prove their value and advocate for staffing and budgetary needs
to decision-makers beyond the sphere of library leaders. The development of
relationships, alignment with power brokers, and generation of influence has never been
more important. This is the essence of social capital. Alignment with those who hold
power in school districts is essential, and it begins with the development of personal
relationships.
Conclusion
The majority of research studies on the development and use of social capital come from
outside Library and Information Science (LIS), in fields as diverse as computer science (Ahn,
2012; Hart, 2007; Pasek, More & Romer, 2009; Yejung, Jungi & Jungwoo, 2013), management
studies (Johnson, Schnatterly, Bolton & Tuggle, 2011; Spence, Schmidpeter & Habisch, 2003;
Stevenson & Radin, 2009), applied psychology (Carmeli, Ben-Hador, Waldman & Rupp, 2009),

5

sustainable organizations and communities (Chia, 2011), and economics and finance (Horton,
Millo, & Serafeim, 2012; Pénard & Poussing, 2010). Research examining the development of
social capital by school library system directors or teacher librarians and its associated use in
advancing agendas, allocating resources, and gaining institutional support is lacking. This study
explores the development and use of social capital by school library system directors and school
librarians, and its impact in terms of gaining power and influence. The findings fill a significant
gap in the social capital literature by expanding its breadth to include the field of library science.
Librarians seeking to gain insight into the development of social capital will find strategies and
exemplars to further their efforts. As AASL appraises its advocacy efforts, social capital research
may provide one more tool for librarians to actuate an effective advocacy agenda. It is the
author’s hope that the results of this study will persuade librarians and other education
professionals to harness the potential of social capital to compel decision-makers to support them
and ultimately improve outcomes for students.

6

Chapter 2
LITERATURE REVIEW

French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu provided the first systematic analysis of social
capital. He describes social capital as the actual or potential resources that are established over
time and reside in an individual’s personal networks. (Bourdieu, 1985) The relationships that
exist within one’s networks change the power structure that exists between different classes
(Bourdieu,1989). In order to explore the nature of social capital, he delineates between two
components: relationships and resources. Relationships are the social connections between two
parties. Resources refer to the quantity of assets. For Bourdieu, social capital development begins
with relationships, and access to resources and social networks emanate from them.
Coleman (1988) builds on Bourdieu’s definitions of social capital by describing some of
the mechanisms that generate social capital such as reciprocity, expectations and group
enforcement of norms, and access to information. Similarly, Durkheim (1984) notes that whereas
economic capital resides in financial institutions, human capital resides in the individual and
within relationships. Field (2003) espouses that relationships matter and that how we interact
with each other facilitates community building, commitments to each other and the creation of a
social fabric that provides a sense of belonging through the development of trust and tolerance
(pp. 1-2). The types of relationships described by these authors are based on an unspoken
agreement of reciprocity. There is no explicit expectation of giving and sharing but rather the

7

development of commitment and trust, and a willingness to include the other individual in one’s
personal or professional life.
Putnam (1995) first synthesizes his description of social capital from hundreds of
empirical studies as “features of social organization such as networks, norms, and social trust
that facilitate coordination and cooperation for mutual benefit” (p. 2). He also makes a
distinction between bonding (exclusive) and bridging (inclusive) social capital. Bonding social
capital occurs among homogeneous populations. It is often parochial and only benefits those
with internal access (Leonard, 2004; Seibert, Kramer & Laden, 2001). Granovetter (1973) notes
that the strength of these interpersonal ties is a product of time, the emotional intensity of the
relationship and the reciprocal services shared as a result of the tie (p. 1361). Bonding ties are
described as strong ties while those made through the use of bridging capital outside one’s own
social clique are described as weak (p. 1361). Ties are developed within an established group
that is intact and has its own identity. Bridging social capital refers to social capital that is
embedded in social networks and connects individuals from one group to another, thus providing
access to external assets and information (Adler and Kwon, 2002; Putnam, 2000).
Bourdieu and Wacquant (1992) further describe social cliques in terms of fields and
habitus. Social cliques rely upon relationships of mutuality and recognition. The concept of field
is based up established, often long-term relationships. Social cliques developed within specific
groups may be defined loosely as a field. These cliques often have well established local,
regional, state and national organizations. Group members assume leadership roles, participate
in professional development, and work together to enact change. Bourdieu’s habitus pertains to
the defining norms of that group—“actions, expectations, ways of doing things, manners of

8

operation, or the general gestalt of what makes this particular group distinctive” (Husu, 2013;
Bourdieu, 1989).
Putnam (1995) adds to the research on institutionalized relationships in his seminal work,
Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital. He describes a steady decline in social
involvement in groups such as PTAs, Women’s Clubs, and Fraternal organizations. He notes
that, “by almost every measure, Americans' direct engagement in politics and government has
fallen steadily and sharply” (Putnam, 1995, p. 3). On the other hand, during the 1970s and 1980s
organizations such as the Sierra Club and the National Organization of Women counted
hundreds of thousands of members, while the American Association of Retired Persons grew
exponentially from 400,000 members in 1960 to 33 million in 1993 (Putnam, 1995, p. 5).
What Putnam underscores is a radical shift. During this uneven period of membership
growth, face-to-face interactions that were the foundations and underpinnings of membership in
local organizations began to shift. Websites became more robust, technology ubiquitous and
social media sites gained in popularity. The growth of social networks such as LinkedIn, Twitter
and Facebook have changed how people interact. Many relationships are cultivated and sustained
virtually or may even dwell entirely online. The examination of social networks and their impact
on relationship building and social capital development, though beyond the scope of this study,
holds promise for future research.
Portes (1998) comments that although the majority of social capital research is framed
positively, there are at least four negative consequences of social capital. These include outsider
exclusion, group pressure, restricted freedom, and mainstream isolation. Outsider exclusion
refers to binding relationships that may exclude others from access. Individuals may find that
close relationships within a social network engender constant requests for loans, gifts, or access

9

to resources such that one feels pressured to acquiesce. Conformity to a particular social group
may drive entrepreneurial members to leave—a consequence of restricted freedom. The group’s
commonalities may actually put them in opposition to mainstream society or other working
groups with the consequence of introducing additional barriers instead of opportunities for
cooperation.
Portes’ description of the negative consequences of social capital moves the concept of
social capital from the individual to the group, and in so doing reveals some of the difficulties in
moving beyond bonding capital to bridging capital. Commonalities may actually prove
counterproductive if they interfere with the group’s ability to bridge to another group. In the case
of school librarians, for example, barriers to interaction with school administrators may be
artificially enacted. Martin (2003) notes that interpersonally related social cliques focus inward
upon their particular groups. Because a certain level of insularity occurs, boundaries between
external groups are more evident. It is critical for the teacher librarian to cross, or “bridge” illdefined “field” boundaries, as described by Bourdieu, in order to interact with individuals and
groups outside the library field.
Many school librarians are extremely successful at developing relationships, establishing
power bases and generating influence within the field of school librarianship. The resulting
structure and generalized way of thinking, manifested in the level of comfort encountered when
one librarian meets another, may have the negative consequence of precipitating insularity or
establishing barriers to outsiders. Librarians must reach out beyond their own professional
community. Failure to do so could put at risk the very career goals, options for advancement, and
capacity to serve others that are the very heart of the profession.

10

Without the ability to influence decision-making, the school librarian is at the whim of
those groups or individuals who determine policy, resource allocation, employment,
advancement and so forth in his or her school or district. Pfeffer (1992) defines power as “the
potential ability to influence behavior, to change the course of events, to overcome resistance,
and to get people to do things that they would not otherwise do” (p. 30). Pfeffer advises that
“…the study of power and influence, focusing on both structural sources of power and
interpersonal tactics such as communication strategies and influence skills, can help people
develop stronger positions and more allies and resources…” (Tjosvold & Wisse, 2009, p. 17).
Positions of strength are considered from a tactical perspective by French and Raven
(1959) and include: 1) Coercive power or the threat of punishment; 2) Reward power bringing
the promise of monetary or non-monetary compensation or both; 3) Legitimate power existing
within and drawing upon one’s right to influence; 4) Expert power following from an
individual’s superior knowledge; 5) Referent power which can be based on target’s
identifications with influencing agent; 6) Informational power flowing from the provision of
relevant facts and logical justification. Legitimate and expert power can be components of
positional power, or the power associated with one’s position on an organizational chart and the
methods used in decision-making (van den Brink & Steffen, 2011).
Many of the power dynamics highlighted above (coercive, legitimate, expert power) are
associated with issues of domination over that of free will, and as a result, some individuals are
reluctant to seek power, believing that they have no “right” to tell others what to do (Tjosvold &
Wisse, 2009, p. 18). Their philosophy of what constitutes a just world is violated by the notion
that success is based on political skill and power (Tjosvold & Wisse, 2009, p. 20). These
dynamics may be present in librarians’ relationships, or it may be as Pfeffer suggests, “personal

11

relations are viewed as being less ‘strategic’, or at least many people appear to view
interpersonal relationships as if they should be more honest and authentic than relations among
organizational actors” (as cited in Tjosvold & Wisse, 2009, p. 20).
Conclusion
Kanter (1979) argues, “One of the biggest problems managers confront is the ability to
actually get things done” (Tjosvold & Wisse, 2009, p. 22). “Getting things done”, influencing
others, securing resources, and cultivating relationships are attributes of a successful library
leader. The importance of building relationships both within one’s own field and across
specialties in order to achieve objectives is supported by the literature. Librarians maintain
professional standing and prominence when operating within their own field. In K-12 school
districts, however, librarians are not the individuals making critical decisions that directly impact
their work, and this has negative consequences for library staffing and programs. Building
relationships beyond the library walls is imperative if librarians are to gain crucial administrative
support and access to district resources.

12

Chapter 3
METHODOLOGY

Theoretical framework
The theoretical framework of social capital as described by Bourdieu (1985), Coleman
(1988) and Putnam (2000), was used to guide this research. School librarians may be able to
visualize Bourdieu’s concept of social capital as one encompassing relationships and resources.
Relationships are the social connections between two parties that allow claims to be made for
additional resources. Resources encompass the amount and quantity of assets. In other words,
social capital development begins with relationships. From these relationships access to
resources and social networks are gained. As important, or perhaps even more so for school
librarians, are Bourdieu’s concepts of field and habitus. The success of school librarians as a
group with a broad range of well-established local and indeed international sub-groups has
insulated them from the larger educational community. Within library science an entirely
separate language pertaining to functions, ways of thinking, and acting have generated a distinct
habitus. Improved communication with and influence over decisions and decision-makers in
their districts must compel librarians to insinuate themselves into the larger group of educators
and administrators. If school librarians seek to gain influence this demands action. They must
extend their sphere of influence beyond their own field and better assimilate into the larger
educational community. In refocusing beyond the library, prospects for relationship development
and social capital cultivation can occur and opportunities to exact influence will be revealed.

13

Coleman further refined Bourdieu’s definitions of social capital and speaks directly to the
many opportunities that come from social capital development. Coleman suggests that social
capital is productive, granting access to opportunities and achievement that would otherwise not
be possible. He makes it clear that social capital does not exist outside the structure of relations.
If the relationship ends, the amassed social capital is no longer accessible. Putnam’s work is
concentrated mainly from the organizational perspective. However, he does make a critical
distinction between bonding and bridging social capital that has implications for personal
relationship building. Bonding social capital occurs among populations with many of the same
characteristics, whereas bridging social capital empowers individuals to cross class and
economic boundaries.
For example, within the field of school librarianship I cultivated relationships through
membership in AASL, through service at the state level and particularly as a member of the
School Library System Association (SLSA). The relationships established and developed at all
levels led to additional service opportunities, access to resources that were previously
unavailable to me and allow me even today to pick up the phone and directly access school
library leaders. These relationships have been sustained over years and are as strong or stronger
as when I was a colleague in SLSA. In my current role as an academic library director I develop
bridging social capital through service on the President’s Executive Council, the Dean’s Council
and through outreach to campus decision-makers (President, CIO, CFO, Head of Building /
Grounds) during informal gatherings. These relationships have become increasingly important in
my work and have greatly influenced positive outcomes in support of library initiatives.
Research Objectives and Questions
The study’s research objectives are:

14

1. To assess SLSA Directors’ understanding of social capital development and use.
2. To identify barriers to relationship building and social capital development.
3. To identify opportunities for social capital development with potential to improve
advocacy outcomes.
By exploring the awareness of, utilization of, and barriers to the development of social
capital from the perspective of library system directors in New York State, the study sought to
identify challenges to and opportunities for school librarians and school library system directors
to enhance, augment or replace traditional methods of advocacy in their libraries. Interviews of
system directors were conducted, and predominant themes, categorized in the following
questions, comprised the interrogations.
(1) What types of relationships do School Library System Directors and school librarians
have within schools and school districts? Do School Library System Directors understand
the power of relationships, the development of social capital and the implications of its
use for gaining influence?
(2) In what ways do relationships help provide access to resources and / or information that
would not have been attainable otherwise? What impact do relationships have on
positional power, access to power, and the ability to influence? How important is it to
identify decision-makers in a district’s administrative hierarchy and to develop an
intentional and strategic plan for establishing relationships with those so identified?
(3) What types of professional relationships do school librarians develop outside schools and
school districts? Do external relationships provide increased access to resources and/or
information that one might not have had otherwise? Do external relationships impact
positively one’s power, access to power, and the ability to influence others?

15

Research Design
Purposive and snowball sampling were used to select subjects from the School Library
Systems Association (SLSA) Directors of New York State. The use of purposive, or intentional
targeted sampling was chosen as a result of established professional relationships with the
organization’s leadership following my four years of work as a system director. The utilization
of internal networks, communication at bi-annual meetings (Appendix A) and the endorsement
of SLSA leadership persuaded many of the directors to take part. These directors, sometimes
bearing the designation of coordinator, were positioned either within the Board of Cooperative
Education Services (BOCES), or in case of the five boroughs that encompass New York City, in
the New York City Department of Education. The first attempt at subject recruitment was not
nearly as successful as I had hoped. After several weeks, it became clear that no further
participation from directors was forthcoming. I then reached out to several key SLSA leaders
with whom I had worked on committees. These individuals supported the study by contacting
SLSA directors that they knew personally, a process known as snowball sampling. I had laid the
groundwork for director involvement in the study when I requested that a senior officer in SLSA
seek formal endorsement of the project at their semiannual director’s meeting. The proposal was
universally accepted, and this affirmation of their support for the research gave added leverage
when SLSA leaders personally contact other directors on my behalf.
A School Library System Director is required to hold a Public Teacher Certificate from
the New York State Education Department with the certification area of School Media Specialist
(Library), and a minimum of three years’ experience in the field. Director licensure is authorized
through the New York State Department of Education Regulation 90.18 (Appendix B).
Additionally, each director must have completed graduate work qualifying them as a school

16

administrator with a supervisor certificate. For the purposes of this study the appellation
“director” will be used, whereas depending upon the BOCES, the term “coordinator” is
sometimes interchangeable.
School Library System Directors serve the three distinct domains: 1) due to certification
requirements, they have worked as school librarians for at least three years prior to becoming
system directors; 2) they function in an executive leadership role and as providers of services and
professional development to their associated librarians and school districts; 3) with the exception
of New York City Directors, their offices are within New York’s Board of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES). This unique placement offers both perquisites and drawbacks.
For example, BOCES manages the director’s payroll and determines his or her salary,
determines the position or rank of the director within their organizational hierarchy and considers
them employees of BOCES (Appendix C). There is no direct reporting mechanism at the state
level; rather school library directors work for individual BOCES. This system introduces
complexity on the one hand, but on the other hand, it creates opportunity for relationshipdevelopment outside the realm of library services.
A straw poll vote (Appendix D) was conducted by SLSA senior leadership at their Fall
2015 SLSA meeting to determine interest in and willingness on the part of directors to
participate in the project. There was unanimous endorsement of the research concept and a
willingness to participate (Appendix E). Following IRB approval, an invitational e-mail was sent
to all 46 School Library Systems Association Directors (Appendix F). When the initial response
was insufficient for the study to proceed, SLSA leadership was enlisted once again for assistance
with recruitment, as explained in more detail above.

17

Methodology
The study sample consisted of library system directors in New York State. Demographic
and experience characteristics were collected via survey and are presented below. (Table 2;
Table 3)
Table 2. Demographic Characteristics
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
CHARACTERISTIC

N (%)*

Age (years)
25-34

2 (9.52)

35-44

5 (23.8)

45-54

5 (23.8)

55-64

6 (28.6)

65+

2 (9.52)

Male

4 (19.0)

Female

17 (81.0)

Sex

Education
MS/MA

1 (4.55)

MLS or MSIS

3 (13.6)

>1 Master’s Degree

18 (81.8)

The sample included 24 library system directors, for an overall response rate of 82.8%. The vast
majority of respondents were female (81.0%). The minimum education level among respondents
was a Master’s degree, however 81.8% of respondents held more than one Master’s level degree.

18

Table 3. Experience
EXPERIENCE
TYPE OF EXPERIENCE

N (%)*

Years as a Teacher Librarian or School Library
Media Specialist
<1

3 (13.0)

1 to 3

0 (0.00)

4 to 6

5 (21.7)

7 to 10

7 (30.4)

>10

8 (34.8)

Years as a School Library System Director or
Coordinator
<1

3 (13.0)

1 to 3

5 (21.7)

4 to 6

5 (21.7)

7 to 10

2 (8.70)

>10

8 (34.8)

Previous Employment as a Classroom Teacher
Yes

6 (26.1)

No

17 (73.9)

The vast majority of respondents had at least four years of experience as a teacher librarian or
school media specialist prior to their current occupation as school library system director or
coordinator. Nearly one third of directors had 7 to 10 years of experience (30.4%), and just over
one third of the sample had greater than 10 years of experience (34.8%). Three quarters of
respondents (73.9%) had previously been employed as a classroom teacher. About 40% of
respondents had worked as a school library system director or coordinator in the range of 1 to 6
years (21.7% for 1 to 3 years, and 21.7 % for 4 to 6 years, while the largest proportion of
respondents (34.8%) had served in this capacity for more than 10 years.
19

The survey was developed, administered, and evaluated in an effort to define the cohort,
and to illuminate their collective experience as both former school librarians and current, active,
system directors. This imparts credibility in that study participants have both first-hand
knowledge of roles, functions and responsibilities of school librarians and additionally have the
authority to speak from the perspective of library directors. The fact that they are presently
serving in the capacity of system directors provides currency and the inference that their
observations, comments, and conclusions are based on up to date experience in their field.
The study utilized narrative inquiry methodology for interviews. As a methodology,
“narrative inquiry is both the phenomenon under study and the methodology for its study.
Narrative inquiry is how we understand human experience” (Caine, Estefan, & Clandinin, 2013,
p. 584). Cresswell (2008) notes that narrative research is one of five qualitative research methods
in addition to case studies, ethnography, grounded theory, and phenomenological research (p.
13). Bell (2009) defines narrative as “a sequence of events that are connected in a meaningful
way…in order to make sense of the world or people’s experience in it. More than a list or
chronicle, a narrative adds up to “something…” (p. 8). As the participants revisit and string
together key sequences of events, tipping points may be identified. These tipping points signal
the start of a conversion, the setting in motion of a change or activation of a set of circumstances
that may well hold noteworthy short or long-term consequences.
As change is rarely straightforward or linear, Andrews, Squire and Tamboukou (2008)
assert “we frame our research in terms of narrative because we believe that by doing so we are
able to see different and sometimes contradictory layers of meaning, to bring them into useful
dialogue with each other, and to understand more about individual and social change” (p.1).
Narrative inquiry has the benefit of yielding richer and more holistic data than does, for example,

20

questionnaire–based inquiry. This qualitative method allows the investigator to use a series of
semi-structured questions to probe critical incidents, thus developing a clear picture of the
participant’s story.
The interviews conducted with the directors probed the development and use of social
capital among subjects. The semi-structured interview questions allowed the interviewer to
rephrase as necessary and to probe tangential areas of interest thus ensuring that significant areas
are fully explored (Klenke, 2008, p. 127). Individual participants shared their stories, personal
reflections and critical incidents that focused on social capital, how it was acquired, and when it
was utilized (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000; Hendry 2010; Josselson, 2003; Klenke, 2008;
Webster & Mertova, 2007). Following transcription of the individual interviews, the data was
analyzed using a thematic approach (Creswell, 2008; Boyatzis, 1998).
In this study, the critical incident technique focused on specific events or episodes related
to relationships and social capital. Polit and Hungler (1991) assert that the term “critical” means
that there is a “discernible impact on some outcome: it must make either a positive or negative
contribution to the accomplishment of some activity or interest” (p. 280). By having subjects
identify a critical incident as the focal point for their stories, they were able to focus on a
beginning, how the events developed, and to further identify both positive and negative
outcomes. By focusing on specific critical incidents, subjects were able to track changes in
relationships and follow their development over time. Directors rarely appreciated that the
nascent relationships and rapport established with individuals would develop over time, often
yielding unanticipated benefits.

21

Data Quality
The terms reliability and validity are essential concepts in quantitative research. Klenke
(2008) points to Guba (1981) who links quantitative traits of reliability and validity to the
qualitative criteria of “credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability” (p. 38).
Klenke (2008) describes credibility according to the believability of results, whether the findings
are transferrable to other settings, whether the results are dependable or interpretable to similar
findings by other researchers, and finally whether they can be confirmed or corroborated by
others.
Klenke (2008) argues that validity does not “lie in the facts of the story, rather, they are
constituted by its structure” (p. 37). Key components of validity and reliability are based on the
integrity of the research processes such as relationships developed between interviewer and
subject and the trustworthiness of the interview transcripts (Klenke, 2008). The development of
trust using this qualitative method has been shown to produce reliable data and valid results
(Webster & Mertova, 2007).
The researcher conducted two pilot tests of the interview instrument (Appendix G). The
instrument was developed using the research questions in the proposal and tested on doctoral
students from the Simmons College graduate school of library and information science. A second
pilot was conducted on a sample of twelve State University of New York library directors. Their
feedback was incorporated into revisions to the instrument.
Following instrument testing, semi-structured interviews were used to probe the
development of social capital and relationships among subjects. Individual participants shared
their stories, personal reflections and critical incidents that focused on social capital, how it was
acquired, and when it was utilized (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000; Hendry 2010; Josselson, 2003;

22

Klenke, 2008; Webster & Mertova, 2007). The semi-structured interview questions allowed the
interviewer to rephrase as necessary and to probe tangential areas of interest, resulting in detailed
examples (Klenke, 2008, p. 127). During the interviews, key sequences, events or tipping points
were identified. The identification of tipping points gave a point of reference for moments when
an encounter or situation prompted a new course of action or when an interviewee recognized an
insight into his or her use of social capital.
Interviews were conducted from June through August 2016. Questions were sent to
participants and informed consent (Appendix H) was obtained prior to performing interviews.
The provision of questions in advance encouraged reflection and forethought by participants.
Interviews were conducted via telephone and were digitally recorded. The recordings were then
transcribed into word documents. Following transcription, coding and thematic analysis was
accomplished through document review and with the assistance of qualitative software, Dedoose
(Dedoose.com).
Subjects were given multiple opportunities for document review. Following the initial
digital transcription interviewees were provided with a written copy of the transcription for
examination, editing and clarification (Appendix I). Any revisions put forth were incorporated
into the document, after which it was sent to the subjects for additional review. All efforts have
been made to ensure that the data collected accurately reflects the experiences and opinions of
the interviewees.
Data Analysis
Hand coding with a line-by-line analysis of the transcribed data established the level of
granularity for content analysis. From this analysis, the researcher identified themes and patterns.
The next step in the process was open coding. This method, as described by Corbin and Strauss,

23

is a series of systematic steps where data is sorted into coded categories with constant
comparison among categories (as cited in Cresswell, 2008, p. 184). The next step involved axial
coding, or making connections between categories and subcategories. Finally, the integration of
the previously developed categories was accomplished through selective coding (Klenke, 2008,
p. 190).
Follow-up Survey
To supplement the narrative inquiry, a survey (Appendix J) was administered to all
participants to collect background and demographic information about the directors and to
provide insight into specific technical aspects of social capital development and utilization. In
addition, the survey investigated barriers to the development and utilization of social capital
among both the directors and librarians within their library systems. This survey explored
demographic characteristics including age, sex and education level as well as experience and
professional affiliations. On a more technical level the survey questions documented patterns and
norms related to communication, interaction and access between library system directors and
administrators both within and outside the workplace context. For example, the surveys
identified examples of leadership activities related to the development of social capital. Directors
assessed the degree to which relationships with administrators positively impacted their access to
information, resources and opportunities. Survey data was then summarized and formatted into
tables and figures with summary comments.
Study Limitations
A limitation of both narrative inquiry and the use of survey tools is the reliance on selfreport. Verification is not possible. According to Klenke (2008), however, verification may not
be necessary. Due to the variability of language and meaning, transferability of findings rather

24

than generalizability is presumed. Transferability of findings lends itself to the recognition of
patterns and trends identified through the data and can be used to develop hypotheses in the
larger population (Hardy, Gregory, & Ramjeet, 2009). Both the qualitative and quantitative
aspects of the research are limited by the small sample size. However, given that there are 46
system directors in New York State, the overall response rate of nearly two-thirds of potential
subjects (63.0%) infers that the sample was representative of this group and provides important
insight. Additionally, interpretation of qualitative research in terms of coding and analysis of
data can be subject to bias. In an effort to mitigate bias on the part of the researcher, an
independent coder was enlisted to validate findings and discrepancies in interpretation were
resolved by consensus.
Because social capital inheres within a relationship between two individuals, the study
size and relative ease in identifiability of subjects was an initial hurdle. After verbal assurances
pertaining to privacy and confidentiality, subjects began to open up about their relationships and
the development of social capital. Semi-structured interview questions guided the process and
allowed for in-depth probing of the development and use of social capital by system directors.
Conclusion
The community of library system directors in New York State is small and tightly linked.
Concerns about identifiability and confidentiality among respondents may have contributed to
the diminished response rate for specific categories of questions on the quantitative survey. In
spite of measures taken to assure confidentiality of responses, it may be argued that potential
identifiability influenced responses to both the narrative inquiry and survey components of the
research. Additionally, due to the researcher’s personal knowledge of many of the research
subjects and experience having worked as both a school librarian and system director, constant

25

checking for bias was part of the interview and data analysis processes. Pre-conceived notions
and perspectives needed to give way to honest reporting, questioning and analysis. To ensure that
a subject’s thoughts were being accurately captured, transcripts were evaluated by subjects prior
to further analysis.

26

Chapter 4
SOCIAL CAPITAL: A DIRECTOR’S PERSPECTIVE

The primary focus of this study is the development and use of social capital by school
library system directors. Key findings are that directors understand what social capital is, and
they affirm its benefits and impact. With the exception of a single director, all respondents
recognized their own use of social capitol to varying degrees, yet when it came to the utilization
of social capital directors do not fully exploit its potential. Advocacy efforts in such impactful
areas as professional advancement, sustainability of staffing, and programmatic development
have not been a focus of social capital use for this cohort. These findings suggest that while
social capital is both understood and used on a limited basis by library leaders, there is untapped
potential for its employment.
Directors understand what social capital is, as reflected in the following representative
comment: “…I knew hands down what you were talking [about] and the importance of it
because that’s what I live. Sometimes social capital has to do with knowing that individual,
knowing the personality, knowing how they operate by having proximity, by having them open a
few doors.” Directors affirm the benefits of social capital: “One of the things I believe strongly
in with this position is we have to build up our social capital, that’s how we get things
accomplished, that’s how we get things done. It’s not very overtly quid pro quo. You’re not
going into it with that in mind. I think it works better when you don’t.”
The majority of subjects in this study were familiar with the concept of social capital
even if the terminology was unfamiliar. Directors agreed with the description posited by Portes
(1998) “social capital stands for the ability of actors to secure benefits by virtue of membership

27

in social networks or other social structures” (p. 6). Social capital as defined under the present
study relates to relationships between two individuals as opposed to those relationships
developed within groups in an organization (Kwon & Adler, 2014, p. 416). The identification of
barriers was not anticipated to be a significant part of the study’s findings, yet due, perhaps, to
the intimate nature of narrative inquiry and to the understanding that subjects were confiding in a
former library director, one who knows the challenges and opportunities inherent in their roles, a
degree of candor on their part was encouraged. Subjects were forthcoming in identifying barriers
to the development of social capital by those who report to them, and in their own situations. It
was anticipated that the study would shed light on the use of social capital from multiple
perspectives, for example that of school librarians, services’ providers, and administrators. All
subjects had experience in each of these roles, and they harvested encounters, events, and
incidents from each of these roles, not solely from their current perspective. Findings as a result
provide a broad look into both the opportunities for and barriers to social capital development for
key professionals, from the school- based librarian to the director of library systems.
Directors nearly unanimously affirmed the importance of relationship building and social
capital development.

It is all about relationships and it is about social capital and it is about people who can
speak well on your behalf or people than can protect you in terms of—no, he’s a hard
worker or whatever it may be…So I would say those relationships with people who have
seen me in action and have brought me along in terms of social capital and in job
advancement—hands down they have played a major role.

28

Much of what directors shared in terms of social capital development pertained to relationships
with others in their field. These included bonding experiences with other librarians and vendors
during conferences, and as an outgrowth of committee work pertaining directly to libraries.
Bridging social capital, that which is developed with individuals outside the realm of libraries,
included administrators, teachers and curriculum developers. Many examples of bonding social
capital began when individuals were essentially at a peer-to-peer level, or at a similar rank
organizationally. As the peer rose within the administrative hierarchy, system directors nurtured
these relationships and often realized benefits as an outgrowth of the other individual’s
successes.
Reciprocity was not an expectation for many directors. The folksy, “you scratch my back
and I’ll scratch yours” sentiment was not overt.

The social capital you develop doesn’t always have to be intentional, I don’t think. I think
being intentional about creating relationships and being hopeful that good things will
happen because of them is pretty important in schools, but you don’t always know what
you’re going to get into. You don’t know if you can gain access to an individual, you
don’t know if the relationship is going to grow beyond just the informal you’re my boss
and I’m the person that you supervise. Sometimes we don’t know that, but I think if you
don’t reach out to begin with and be intentional, then I think you’re missing out on lots of
opportunities. Some librarians do a tremendous job of that, while others don’t; I think
being intentional about it is not such a bad thing.

29

Adler and Kwon (2002) note that “social capital is a long-lived asset into which other
resources can be invested, with the expectation of a future (albeit uncertain) flow of benefits (p.
21). A director noted that one would be remiss to enter into relationships with the expectation of
returns. Individuals for whom social capital is part of their professional make up. and who use it
to greatest advantage, may be those willing to assist or offer support with no strings attached.
Several directors self-identified as the “giver” or font of resources for their librarians who had
initiated relationships with them. These directors had no expectation of getting back anything
from those who were offered resources, information or opportunities.
Social capitol need not be developed formally or through workplace interactions alone.
Shared meals, conference attendance, committee work for organizations, service on boards of
directors and simple social interactions may be the springboard to the establishment of
professional relationships. Socialization for school librarians often occurs at conference dinners
hosted by vendors. One director commented, “For me, building relationships has been integral
with the happy hour, the off campus—not part of the meeting, not part of something formal—
time that I invested.” Connections forged at these events leads to greater access to information
and indirect access to resources. Another director remarked, “One of the first times that I felt like
I fit in here was when we all went out on a Friday night and had a drink and just talked and
socialized. It is through those informal relationships that I built the formal relationships that
allow me to go down and talk with my colleagues and say hey, this is what’s going on and here’s
how you can help or how I think I can help you.”
The importance of face-to-face relationship development was highlighted throughout the
interviews. Interviewees commented that many of their librarians did not think strategically or
politically. They perceived that many librarians go to work, do what they consider to be their

30

jobs, react to the initiatives and directives of their administrators and do so without having any
input into decision-making. Most directors-some very passionately-asserted the importance of
developing social capital in order for librarians to proffer influence. Some avowed that this is the
highest priority for librarians.
Capital in general, when considered within a societal context, has two distinct elements
according to a theoretical framework put forth by Lin: “surplus value generated and pocketed by
the capitalists, and investment on the part of the capitalists with expected returns in a
marketplace” (Lin, 1999, p. 29). Refinement of this theory further reduces capital into human,
cultural and social spheres. Lin (1999) describes human capital as the enhancement of technical
skills and knowledge on the part of workers in exchange for financial gain. Cultural capital is the
procurement of prestigious symbols or positions of influence that are recognized by others as
powerful or aspirational (Bourdieu, 1990). De Souza Briggs (1997) defines social capital as
“resources stored in human relationships” (p. 112). He goes on to explain that “Social capital is
the stuff we all draw on all the time, through our connections to a system of human relationships,
to accomplish things that matter to us and solve everyday problems” (p. 112). Social capital
enhances access to resources, influential networks and information.

It started off as very one-sided when I worked at a BOCES, while she was one of the
district librarians. I was out there supporting and training her. Then when she stepped into
a leadership role, that’s when our relationship shifted. We began to say, “let’s work
together, let’s work collaboratively.” Over the years, it’s also turned into very much a
good friendship as well. If I’m in her town, I’ll call her and I’ll go out to dinner with her
and her husband. One time I even stayed at her house. So, it’s become a very close

31

positive friendship where my wife has gone out to dinner with her and her husband
without me! So, it’s become a good friendship.

Relationships hinge upon the establishment of some sort of connection with another
person. This initial connection may be class based, between individuals “who occupy similar
positions and who, being placed in similar conditions and subjected to similar conditionings,
have every likelihood of having similar dispositions and interests” (Bourdieu, 1985, p. 725). This
type of capital, often referred to as “bonding capital” assists in “getting by”, whereas “bridging
capital”, or the development of relationships among people unaffiliated by class, gender, race,
education or professional position is essential for “getting ahead” (Putnam, 2000, p. 23).
Bridging capital may be fostered by work on a shared project, or by assisting, supporting, or
providing information. It can be established through frequent positive interactions and evidence
of competence that engender familiarity, respect and trust.

In terms of how I developed social capital, it was basically giving—lots and lots of giving
and just using the skills that I have to develop things that I could then share out. I shared
freely, I shared about grants, I shared about website design, about cataloging practice,
about lessons, about anything. My sharing gave me enough social capital to become an
SLS director while further developing these relationships.

The development of social capital can help overcome barriers to communication.
Informal chats create opportunities that eventual lead to more substantive conversations and
collaborations. In terms of developing long-term relationships, one director remarked, In terms

32

of developing long-term relationships, one director remarked, “One of the other SLSA directors
and I have developed a very close relationship. We do a lot of things jointly, collaboratively and
our systems are very close so we work together a lot. When I first started, she had a very
different mindset. I worked hard to change that relationship and over the years we’ve become
friends. Our relationship is to the point now where both of us would call each other and if I need
something she’ll help me and vice versa.”
Collaboration may be defined “as meaning the cooperative way that two or more entities
work together toward a shared goal” (Frey, Lohmeier, Lee & Tollefson, 2006, p. 384). What
begins as a power-based, one-sided relationship with benefits flowing to the director or the more
powerful and influential individual may shift over time to that of a mutually beneficial working
relationship with shared goals. This progression may be charted using the Level of Collaboration
Survey. The survey asks for information on levels of interaction ranging from “no interaction,
networking, cooperation, coordination, and coalition to collaboration” (Frey et al., 2006, p. 387).
Although the importance of collaboration in school libraries has been emphasized in
Information Power, American Association of School Librarians and Association for Educational
Communications and Technology (AECT, 1998) and in Standards for the 21st-century learner,
American Association of School Libraries, (AASL, 2007), the topic of collaboration was
sparsely addressed in director interviews. When collaboration was mentioned it was in the
context of vendor, principal, or administrator relationships. SLSA directors seldom work directly
with classroom teachers. They are administrators, however many were librarian teachers prior to
assuming leadership positions and had personal experience with collaboration in the classroom.
One director recalled her collaborative classroom experience, “So that’s had really long term
implications and I didn’t realize going into it that it would lead to, but it’s developed into

33

collaborating for three or four years and just doing really amazing things, and it’s just going in
all kinds of different places that have just grown and grown. I thought it was going to be a quick
little task, but it turned out to be a really big opportunity.”
With an increasing need for innovative instructional practices that address the
complexities of an information society, understanding how to effectively develop the role of
school librarians as collaborators and instructional partners with teachers is critical.
Collaboration between teachers and librarians is recommended in professional guidelines for
school librarians and is identified as a key factor in improving student academic achievement
(American Association of School Librarians, 2007; American Association of School Librarians
& Association for Educational Communications and Technology, 1998). These professional
guidelines are supported by a number of studies identifying higher student achievement in
schools where collaboration between teachers and librarians occurs (Lance, 1994, 2001, 2002;
Lance, Hamilton-Pennell & Rodney, 1999; Lance, Rodney & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000, 2001,
2002, 2005; Lance & Russell, 2004; Lance, Wellburn & Hamilton-Pennell, 1997). “True”
collaboration involves “co-planning, co-implementation, and co-evaluation” (Callison, 1997, p.
37). In these types of collaborative endeavors, teachers and librarians integrate subject content
with library instruction to provide students with a more comprehensive learning experience.
Library instruction includes teaching students how to find information, conduct research and
write reports, and use information ethically and responsibly for personal, academic, and other
purposes (American Association of School Librarians, 2007; American Association of School
Librarians & Association of Educational Communications and Technology, 1998; Callison,
1999, 2003).

34

For many librarians, the path to collaboration is fraught with stumbling blocks. Directors
shared that initial contact with future collaborators often did not go well. They were greeted with
hostility, indifference, or complete disregard. However, these difficulties did not prove to be an
insurmountable barrier to collaboration. Directors offered multiple examples of their creative
strategies for overcoming barriers. One director’s experience was still fresh in her mind.

I also had to use social capital when I was developing library programs. I was in two
separate high schools spending five years in one and four years in another before
becoming a director. The way that social capital worked for me was a different kind of
sharing versus finding people who are open and accessible and wanting help. I connected
with people willing to take a chance that I could help them more than hinder them. You
give them resources; educational strategies and you give them a solid class. Then, they
share that out with the people in their department, sometimes they have teaching teams,
sometimes they have their own professional community that’s part of the school and they
start looking good because of what you are doing.

Another director offered the following insight:

In each school, I had to do that from scratch at the beginning. I would take three people,
work with them closely, expand more, try and bring in two or three people the next year.
You keep providing and sharing and helping and making it about the interest of the
students; that grows your library program because the library grows by use. If you’re
encouraging use and developing knowledge and showing that you are accessible and that

35

you have the skills to help them do their job better, then that’s how social capital gets
used at the school level.

Although collaborative work with school faculty is significant, meaningful and necessary
for library program success, there are others—booksellers, automation specialists, and software
engineers, who are all integral to library operations. Once a relationship has been established
with any of these individuals, they often play a long-term role within a librarian’s realm. Many
of these service providers may move from one company to another, assume leadership roles, or
change to a similar type of business within the larger library supplier industry, yet they remain
accessible.

Sometimes I think the lines are kind of blurry because there are certain people that we
have relationships with because they provide a service. Sometimes, there comes a
moment when that relationship gets a little blurred because now I’m getting something
from them or having some sort of interaction that doesn’t have anything to do with
actually paying for services.

It would be difficult to imagine librarians doing their job today without the benefit of
connections with a broad array of vendors whose materials, hardware, software, data bases,
books and so on support the work of the library. Although these types of vendors are not
librarians, they are essential to a librarian’s success. At times their work is indistinguishable from
that of a librarian. These types of external connections are but one type of opportunity for school
librarians to develop bridging social capital.

36

Several system directors noted that they participate in another type of bridging work
through their contribution to leadership team meetings at their BOCES. This service has afforded
them influence on members of the broader group (Chrobot-Mason, Gerbasi and Cullen-Lester
(2016, p. 299). Librarians assuming leadership positions require a shift from a self-centric
viewpoint to a broader perspective that encompasses team development and an institutional
focus. “Successful leaders move beyond developing a strong identification with one’s own
values and priorities (‘me’) to developing strong identification with the values and priorities of
the team or organization as a whole (‘we’) (Chrobot-Mason, Gerbasi and Cullen-Lester (2016, p.
300). This type of leadership aligns the library’s programs and initiatives with those of the larger
organization. Cracking the glass ceiling that is the leadership team at BOCES is challenging.
Library systems have been relegated to BOCES through an arrangement with the State Education
department and the librarian’s place there is seldom understood by upper-level BOCES’
superintendents and other managers. Library directors tend to operate fairly independently. Yet
they are still beholden to BOCES for payroll, budgets, space and oversight. Decision-making in
the organization rests largely in the realm of several individuals at the top of the hierarchy.

I finished up my administrative degree after I got my job here and as part of my
internship I was working with a district superintendent and also with the building
principal. Having the opportunity to work with my district superintendent, I asked if I
could start taking a role in the leadership team meetings that we have. That group is
comprised of the executive leadership team as well as some of the other individuals, other
directors or coordinators at BOCES. Before, I wouldn’t have been considered as part of
it, but now I’m on that team. I thought of this as having long term long range implications

37

because although that internship ended quite a while ago, I’m still part of the leadership
team, I’m still part of the regular communication, I’m still able to communicate with
everyone and be a part of those meetings. I think it elevated my position from just being
the library person to being a part of the leadership team here at BOCES.

Social capital was generally viewed as a renewable resource rather than a finite resource.
“Social capital takes us beyond assets—it takes us from thinking ‘distribution’ to thinking
‘relationship’” (Hans, 2014, p. 62). Social capital does not necessarily diminish over time unless
the underpinnings of the relationships on which it was built deteriorate. Relationship building
and the fostering of social capital are long-term investments. They appear to be more robust and
renewable than might be suspected. Interviewees reported that even when a relationship is no
longer active it can be reinvigorated through a call, email or a chance encounter at a conference
or social event. It is clear that directors understand what social capital is, and have developed it
in their professional lives. They also grasp that benefits can be derived from gaining social
capital, and using it.
The use of a director’s social capital emerged as nuanced and complex. During
interviews, there were 108 positive comments from directors on the importance, development
and types of relationships associated with the development of social capital. The majority of
directors recognized the potential positive impact of relationship building on the realization of
desired results in areas such as staffing, resources and programming. Rostila (2011) describes
these as “gains” or “ordinary resources—money, information, material resources, knowledge,
favors, etc.—that are originally owned by an individual but become available to another
individual through the social relationship between these two” (p. 310). Directors undoubtedly

38

can and do accomplish many goals without the benefit of influential relationships with
administrators. Without exception however, attribution of and benefit from relationship building
was noted by all participants. The positive long-term implications of social capital development
were clearly promulgated by the directors. They painted a picture of relationships that developed
over time and yielded unexpected benefits. These benefits bridged the gamut from the
professional to the personal, and some span decades in longevity. The depth and strength of
long-term relationships is based upon a series of attributes with credibility as the foundation.
Credibility implies trustworthiness, expertise, and dynamism (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 37).
The importance of these long-term relationships was emphasized by directors, as in the
following, “It seems that the individuals who have long-term impacts on our lives are scarce, few
and far between. Because to weather the test of time and to go through all the career changes and
to have serendipity of meeting again and stuff like that, it really doesn’t happen that often. Those
connections I made, they’ve only gotten stronger.”
Another interviewee expressed a great deal of surprise when revealing the following
anecdote:

One of the most insightful comments that one of them [school librarians] tossed to me
was the following. You don’t really know that you have social or political capital until
you spend it.” When you develop relationships it’s only when you act on it and
something good happens or some good opportunity or you have access to things then you
go, “Hah, I wonder why I suddenly have access to these things that I didn’t have before.”
But up until that point, you may not even know that as a result of the relationships you’re
building, that you’re actually developing any kind of capital.

39

As illustrated in Table 4, directors recognized that social capital gained them access to
information, resources, and opportunities to varying degrees.
Table 4. Impact of Social Capital
IMPACT OF SOCIAL CAPITAL
Degree of Positive Impact of

Relationships with Administrators

Type of Access

N (%)

Access to
Information
No Impact

3 (14.3)

Little Impact

4 (19.0)

Moderate Impact

8 (38.1)

Significant
Impact

2 (9.52)

Major Impact

4 (19.0)

Access to
Resources
No Impact

3 (14.3)

Little Impact

7 (33.3)

Moderate Impact

6 (28.6)

Significant
Impact

3 (14.3)

Major Impact

2 (9.52)

Access to
Opportunities
No Impact

3 (14.3)

Little Impact

6 (28.6)

Moderate Impact

7 (33.3)

Significant
Impact

2 (9.52)

Major Impact

3 (14.3)

40

Only three directors (representing 14.3% of the sample) expressed that they felt relationships
with administrators had no positive impact on access to information, resources or opportunities.
With regard to access to information, the largest proportion of respondents stated that their
relationships with administrators had moderately impacted access to information (38.1%), while
about 10% said relationships had significantly impacted their access to information, and nearly
20% said relationships had majorly impacted their access to information. Regarding access to
resources and opportunities, the majority of respondents stated that relationships with
administrators had little or a moderate amount of impact (61.9%). Fewer than 10% of
respondents stated that relationships with administrators had majorly impacted their access to
resources, and about 14.3% stated that relationships had majorly impacted their access to
opportunities. These results suggest that while directors see access to information as a direct
outcome of relationships with administrators, the positive impact of relationships in terms of
access to resources and opportunities is seen as less clear. The positive outcome may be less
clearly attributable to a relationship or relationships, but rather due to a confluence of
circumstances.

It is all about relationships and it is about social capital and it is about people who can
speak well on your behalf or people than can protect you in terms of--no, he’s a hard
worker or whatever it may be. And that’s the game of life in terms of what social capital
is and getting along. So, I would say those relationships with people who have seen me in
action and have brought me along in terms of social capital and in job advancement-hands down they have played a major role.

41

Directors reported that social capital has been of significant import in the context of
human resource management and in particular, personal employment opportunities.

I got the position, through social capital, through a work ethic, through past practice,
through proving myself over and over again. I never took days off because it was a thrill
to be there. Those relationships developed by greeting individuals in the morning, being a
team player, having the willingness to bend but not break, things of that nature. It is just
about using social skills that hopefully you were raised with, that you then apply to a
work setting; it does provide a benefit. This woman plucked me and boom! I became
director of libraries under her and again she keeps climbing through the ranks.

Some school districts focus on internal promotion, utilizing leadership development to foster the
potential of their current employees. One way that directors highlighted the benefits of having
social capitol was in the context of mentoring relationships.

She is just one of those people that I can always count on. She’s very supportive of me
with mentoring advice. When I needed a little help in terms of how to negotiate my
salary, how do I do this, how do I do that, she’s very good with all of that kind of stuff.
She’s also a good friend. So, she is that kind of person that -- and she actually mentioned
to me that down the line if there was every anything that opened in her district, if there
was anything I was ever interested in she’d always love to have me come work with her
again. It is that kind of relationship.

42

Directors noted that what had begun as mentoring relationships had at times
metamorphosed into personal relationships based on friendship.

Infrequently, we bump into each other or get together for lunch or whatever, more in a
social manner. I’m actually going to talk to her about doing some professional
development for my librarians. And I know because we have this relationship, I know she
would be happy to do that, assuming that she can get permission from her BOCES to
come and do it. But I know that she’s someone who I can call on for her area of expertise
and that she would be happy to come in and share what she knows. I know I could
certainly contact her.

Another director commented on one of their long-term and valued relationships.

Our deputy superintendent is a friend of mine now. We actually did our graduate degrees
together; she was a coordinator for instructional services and she’s now our deputy
superintendent. It’s been almost 25 years. I go to her a lot and get her support for many
different things. Will you talk to so and so about this or can I say you support that, and
that type of thing, but it’s a friendship that was built out of two and a half years of going
to school together twice a week.

It was recognized by many directors that it takes concerted time and effort to develop social
capital, as reflected in many of the findings illustrated above. Directors were queried as to
whether social capital, once used, was somehow diminished. It was posited that if this were the

43

case, perhaps efforts focused on developing relationships may not be the most effective means of
making change or forwarding their goals. This was not the case. A small minority, less than 10%,
related a perceived reduction of social capital after they had called it into use. The majority
reported that their “balance” of social capital remained the same after they used it, with no
depreciation. Still others reported amplification, “I don’t feel like my social capital is diminished
once spent; I feel like I build more. What I love about it is that I can take that experience and
share it with others so that if we need to work in our districts, it transfers to other places. So, I
definitely feel like it built more.”
Directors use social capital, whether as a finite or renewable resource. It was reported to
have at least a moderate impact on access to information and resources, and in some instances a
major impact. An unanticipated finding of the study was how restricted its use was, given its
potential for substantial benefit. The third major finding of the study was the limited use of social
capital for far-reaching or impactful gains. As described previously, directors know what social
capital is and they understand its benefits, yet when it came to using social capital, its impact was
primarily for outwardly inconsequential entities such as supplies and meeting space. In the shortterm, few leveraged their relationships for high impact projects. In the long-term, much of the
external or bridging social capital realized was used on a personal level to acquire leadership
opportunities, career advancement, mentoring and for some, lasting friendships. Directors use
social capital in a variety of ways and with diverse objectives in mind, among them the
attainment or safeguarding of financial and human resources, space, and equipment. As Coleman
(1988) notes, “social capital is productive, making possible the achievement of certain ends that
in its absence would not be possible” (p. S98). Yet a majority of directors volunteered that they
do not leverage their social capitol for high profile, high cost, or high impact projects. Instead,

44

they exploit their stored capitol for low risk, low gain, less consequential or perhaps even
ostensibly trivial matters such as procuring supplies or obtaining space for conferences and
professional development activities.

The mostly frequent way that I’ve used my social capital is to reserve space for
professional development because we don’t have any space here. Actually, we never
have, we’ve always been dependent on outside organizations or schools, and schools are
so difficult because there are so many competing events. I think I really use my social
capital to book free space for different events that we’ve held or professional workshops
that we’ve given.

Not all directors limited their use of social capital to outwardly inconsequential benefit. A
number of directors used social capital to promote high impact initiatives. An example of a selfstarting librarian who garnered social capital for a large-scale project is illustrated below.

I’ve written two major grants to date that got funded; one was $500,000, the other
$300,000. In both cases the principal only gets to write one of those for the city so they
can’t just submit a smorgasbord. I had to get them to spend their capital on the library
program, to take a chance on renovating the facility to meet students’ needs because it
was antiquated.

45

The above exemplifies of how librarians can have significant impact by garnering the benefit of
social capital. Its potential is far reaching, and need not be relegated to use for relatively
inconsequential or low impact returns.
Conclusion
Directors understand what social capital is. Although some of the language associated
with social capital theory is not commonly used by directors, the core concepts of relationship
building and social capital development are part of the lived-experiences of directors. Directors
also affirmed the benefits of social capital. Librarians and directors can come to the attention of
and gain access to district leaders and other decision-makers through high-impact initiatives and
through involvement in cross-curriculum projects. There is an impact from social capital. Over
50% of directors indicated that social capital had a moderate to major impact on their access to
information, resources and opportunities. Directors nearly unanimously affirmed the importance
of relationship building and social capital development. They recognized it as a means of
achieving access to information, resources and opportunities. They have not used social capital
to its full advantage. This is an area of investigation ripe with potential. If librarians and service
directors were able to harness the full potential of social capital, how would they do so? What
are the impediments to using it fully? What obstacles can be anticipated, and effectively
maneuvered around or removed? What hurdles or barriers can librarians eliminate, and how can
they go about doing so? The next chapter will delve into some of these questions.

46

Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE BARRIERS TO SOCIAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT

Directors’ understanding of social capital’s use and importance and the advantages of
relationship building was clearly communicated during the interviews. Barriers to the
development of social capital were also recognized and examples of how these barriers present,
whether they are institutional, personal, or a combination of both, and potential ways to
circumvent these impediments is the focus of this chapter. Barriers to accessing decision-makers
was cited often as an obstacle to developing social capital, as was the hierarchical nature of
schools, turnover rates among those in positions of power, and limited understanding on the part
of decision-makers of the role and scope of practice of today’s teacher librarians within the
learning community. Key findings related to administrative barriers include: power disparities
resulting from the hierarchical structure of K-12 education and school administrators’
perceptions and lack of academic preparation in understanding the importance of library
programs and their impact on student achievement.
Circumstances that pose as potential barriers to the establishment and nurturing of social
capital and that block relationship building among librarians and those who run the educational
institutions in which they work are multilayered. On a fundamental level administrators form
opinions about librarians and their role within a school based on perceptions, as actual day-to –
day operations do not often involve direct contact between them. The educational preparation of
school administrators rarely exposes them to information or experiences that familiarize them
with the contributions that libraries make to the success of schools. Barriers will be addressed in

47

relation to access, power and hierarchy, and finally in terms of perceptions and academic
preparation of administrators.
Librarians may be thwarted from reaching school administrators for many reasons, from
time constraints to physical barriers such as working in separate buildings, to issues of
approachability. If one cannot reach out to an administrator, one cannot gain influence. Issues of
access were cited by directors as a barrier to the development of social capital, as illustrated in
Table 5.
TABLE 5: Access to Administrators
ACCESS TO ADMINISTRATORS
Degree of Access

N (%)

Building Level
Administrators
Open Door

1 (4.76)

Easy

6 (28.6)

Neutral

6 (28.6)

Difficult

5 (23.8)

Top-Down

3 (14.3)

District Level
Administrators
Open Door

1 (4.76)

Easy

6 (28.6)

Neutral

5 (23.8)

Difficult

6 (28.6)

Top-Down

3 (14.3)

Board of Education
Members
Open Door

0 (0.00)

Easy

1 (4.76)

Neutral

8 (38.1)

48

Difficult

6 (28.6)

Top-Down

5 (23.8)

When asked to evaluate the degree to which they had access to administrators and board of
education members, only one director responded that there was an open-door access policy with
building level and district level administration. Directors reported easier access to building and
district level administration than to board of education members. Indeed, five directors stated
that access to board members was only in a top-down direction, and six directors described
accessing board members as difficult. As shown in Figure 5, within the hierarchy of building
level administration, district level administration and board of education, access to members of
these groups was reportedly increasingly difficult when moving up the ladder.
Large districts, which may encompass multiple schools, pose a navigational challenge
when a librarian seeks consultation and relationship-building opportunities. The sheer volume of
work for a principal and superintendent grows in magnitude when districts move beyond 3-5,000
students. A working knowledge of the organizational chart with clear identification of key
decision-makers and their contact information is useful for librarians interested in maximizing
their access to administrators. One director, in commenting on administrator access issues
remarked, “We have a lot of schools where there is one librarian that serves multiple schools in
the same building so there’s sometimes the smoke screen of--the other principal said we can’t-the other principal said we can. Or it could be I need to talk to five principals and they won’t
give me time and I can’t get all five in one location so I have to do it one at a time.”
Issues pertaining to access seemed to be exacerbated by the size of a district. Multiple
buildings, an abundance of assistant principals and others in the leadership team, as well as an
established hierarchy challenges those seeking upper-level access.

49

In large suburban districts, there could be ten APs in a district. Yes, one could have some
sort of relationship with them but you don’t really have a relationship with the principal.
Maybe you’ll see them once a year at special events. As to relationships with the
superintendent—forget about it. Maybe you’ll get the opportunity to do a presentation
once a year, maybe not. Can you build a relationship that way? I don’t think so. And
you’re not going to go hang out at the bar with those people. I don’t know how you
develop those relationships. There are so many barriers for school librarians to do that.

Another director commented on the barriers faced by those practicing as librarians in places like
Syracuse, Buffalo and New York City.

In a system such as ours where we have few opportunities to speak to principals on a
scheduled basis, it is very one shot and again it might only be a few out of the thousands
working in New York City. There are barriers from the administrative side, there are
barriers from the way the program is structured, there are barriers from how you are or
are not credentialed, and there are self-confidence barriers that keep librarians from
public speaking. I probably have to dig into that a little bit because it’s all well and good
to say yes, yes, yes you need to develop these relationships, but some of the barriers are
pretty tough for people to overcome.

A very real concern to many library directors was the workload of their school administrative
team. One director illustrated this point with the following, “…time for administrators is

50

another critical barrier. Admin has to deal with staff, students, parents, community members,
State Ed and any number of other issues involving tenure and APPRs. They have so many tasks
now that the administration is responsible for that the library and its staff become a very low
priority as long as no major issues arise.”
We see that access to decision-makers was a fundamental hindrance for librarians and
directors in reaching out to decision-makers. The development of strategies to overcome these
very real impediments, and research into how this can be accomplished, is a subject for further
study.
Another key finding is that power disparities resulting from the hierarchical structure of
K-12 education impede the development of social capital. French and Raven (1959) have studied
the changes and effects that different types of power produce (p. 150). They describe five styles
of power that could be important in gaining an understanding of the power dynamic between
administrators and librarians. “These five bases of power are: (1) reward power, (2) coercive
power, (3) legitimate power, (4) referent power, (5) expert power” (p. 156). In the context of a
work environment rewards may be used as a substitute for inciting action if an administrator is
more inclined to this mode of power. Coercion may result in punishment if desired actions do not
occur. Legitimate power stems from one’s place within the organizational chart as a function of
the inherent authority presumed in a particular position. Referent power is ascribed to one’s
relationships. This power stems from affiliation with an individual wherein compliance is a
function of wanting to please and be like the other. Knowledge or expertise in a discipline is also
recognized as powerful in itself.

51

If one was to adopt French and Raven’s framework for describing power in the realm of
librarian/administrator interactions, interviewees sited legitimate power and referent power most
often when describing challenges faced by librarians, as elucidated in the following comments.

In New York City, school-based librarians are reluctant to talk to the principals. I don’t
(know) what the root of that is, I don’t know if there was a history of oh you aren’t
allowed to talk to your principal, I don’t know if it’s oh, teachers have to go through the
union to talk to the principals, I don’t know what the cause is, but what I can say is in
other states it was rare when you came across a number of librarians or percentage wise
that said they never talked to the principal. It was extremely rare.

Power differentials also influence how librarians view the give and take inherent in
relationships. The very concept of being indebted warranted comment by more than one director.
Many librarians operate under the model of Servant Leadership (Greenleaf, 1977). The servant
leader “is servant first to make sure that other people’s highest priority needs are being served”
(p. 22). This model places the needs of others front and center. Relying upon social capital for
getting things done seemed to confound some school librarians. One director remarked, “So,
when I do use it for one of the bigger things I always try to balance it off with something else
because I don’t like the idea of people owing me something.”
In some schools or districts power is shared up and down the chain of command. While
others use various forms of reward / punishment in an effort to get their jobs done. Layers of
bureaucracy, hierarchical management styles and the use of the chain of command in large
districts can all but eliminate opportunities for teacher librarians to contact or interact with the

52

administrators. Although in small schools and districts access to administrators may be presumed
to be easier to achieve, intimidation, educational disparities, power differentials and attitudes can
still play an important role in limiting access. Communication with stakeholders and those in
positions of power can be intimidating and stressful. A director observed, “Other barriers to
administrative relationship building include social skills. I’m not sure what the term would be for
this, but people who are intimidated by people who have a higher rank in the organization than
they do, maybe more certifications than they do, maybe more education than they do, and they
feel lesser than them--and it kind of clips their wings.”
The educational literature describes self-silencing in schools, however the library
literature is lacking in this area. Kass writes, “However, it is reasonable to assume that the
hierarchical position between a principal and teachers can induce self-silencing patterns among
women teachers” (Kass, 2015 p. 488). Kass delves into the impact self-silencing has on goal
attainment by referencing Bandura’s work. “Unless people believe they can produce desired
effects by their actions, they have little incentive to act or to persevere in the face of difficulties”
(Bandura, 2006, p. 55). This belief in one’s ability to achieve desired effects through action
refers to efficacy. “People must have a strong belief in their efficacy to sustain the perseverant
effort needed to succeed” (Bandura, 2006, p. 56).

The principal is your master at this point in time in terms of how the hierarchical
structure is set up. You need to talk to that person so they understand your scheduling
conflicts, that you leave the library open all day. You have to communicate things
because you are part of the bigger picture, part of the bigger wheel of how a school
operates. Again, you can’t work in silence; it’s incredibly important.

53

Directors commented that turnover rates among school administrators was a key barrier
to social capital development. Directors’ perception of turnover at the executive level in schools
is very high, however national principal data do not necessarily support these views. Goldring
and Taie (2014) report “of the 114,330 school principals (public and private) who were
principals during the 2011–12 school year, 78 percent remained at the same school during the
following school year” (p. 2). If principals were the only administrative staffing concern in
districts then these data would not be an issue. Yet because of the aging population of
administrators, turnover also includes superintendents, assistant principals, business officials and
key administrative support staff. Any transition in roles or personnel requires a new round of
social capital and relationship building. Without exception, directors commented on very high
principal turnover, high superintendent turnover and ongoing changes in programs and priorities
as a result. Evidence from the director interviews pointed to the importance of establishing
relationships with both new and established school leaders and in taking the time to onboard
leaders with advocacy related to the connection between strong library programs and student
success.
The following individual comments are representative of the larger group of system
directors, “In the four years that I’ve been here I’ve had five supervisors and each time you have
to create new relationships. Developing those relationships again and again and again is difficult.
You just don’t know whom you’re going to get either.” A director shared, “One of the key
challenges is a high administrative churn in a district or in a region since those relationships have
to be continually rebuilt because the capital that you or I would get with those people, who have
power, exists between those people. If a new administrator comes in, that all has to be rebuilt.”

54

While another director remarked, “One of the big problems is there is always an administrative
churn so those relationships have to be continuously redeveloped. Yes, you can carry those over
and they help you in different areas, but as for your every day job, you need help with the person
right above you or the person two steps above you, in the business office in your district. The
superintendent in another district, they’ll help you in other ways, but they won’t necessarily help
you in your job.”
An aspect of relationship building highlighted in this study was the importance of
establishing trust between individuals. With the high rate of administrative turnover in many
schools and districts, the processes of trust building remained a constant challenge for school
librarians.

You put your finger on one of the key points that people are bringing up, that there is so
much movement within organizations and so much churn of administration; you worked
really hard to create those relationships, to have programs together, establish trust and
then people leave. The strategic development of social capital within your district as
leadership changes—that’s really hard. It’s something that I don’t want to go through
again and again, but guess what, I think you really have to otherwise you’re just another
face in the crowd, another face in the photo. You’re not important.

High administrative turnover and the need to re-develop relationships often resulted in
librarian fatigue. Directors reported that many of their librarians made the choice to stay out of
sight, declining to invest the time and effort needed to develop relationships with an everchanging pool of administrators. They argued that their efforts really didn't matter since the

55

principal would be gone in a year or two anyway. One director was fairly strident, “Librarians
just get so frustrated with administrative turnover. Ugh, I have to develop a relationship with
this person, a new person? And another one next year and maybe two the next year? It gets
fatiguing, but that’s just what you have to do.”
We no longer live in an era when administrators spend a career in a single school district.
Librarians expressed frustration with the perpetual challenges of creating and nurturing
relationships and social capital with school administrators. Their concerns are legitimate, yet the
benefits secured through building these relationships may well outweigh the costs. An additional
key finding is school administrators’ very perceptions and lack of academic preparation in
understanding the importance of library programs and their impact on student achievement may
limit their investment in library programs. The literature consistently demonstrates that the
academic preparation of school administrators and their socialization once credentialed do not
serve to foster an understanding of or appreciation for the impact of libraries on student
achievement (Hartzell, 2002a; Kaplan, 2008). Journals and professional publications read by
school administrators while they are themselves in school, and after they serve in their
professional capacity, do not rectify this oversight.
The education, training, previous experience within schools, administrative certification
and academic preparation of most school administrators leads them to an inherently teachercentric point of view. Furthermore, the occupational socialization for many school administrators
includes a pathway undertaken in the 1960s-1970s when school libraries were an entirely
different entity than they are today. The implications of these factors are profound. Library
system directors unanimously concurred that many of their principals and superintendents are
naive to the scope of library operations and programs, have limited understanding of what

56

librarians do on a daily basis or in general, and do not know what to do with their librarians and
the library. Some even questioned whether leaders were aware that their librarians exist. Oberg
(2006) reflects, “in the worst-case scenario, the principal believes that libraries are basically
warehouses, that teacher-librarians are fussy introverts whose most import role is selecting and
circulating materials, and that teacher-librarians are not leaders or proactive educators but service
providers who merely respond to teacher or student requests” (p. 2). These excerpts are a mere
sample of an overwhelming number of comments from directors that echoed similar sentiments.

I think that it’s the culture. I think they don’t know we exist, they don’t understand, it’s
systemic and goes to the understanding of what a librarian does and what a library offers.
I think they think of it as a room of books and not what can my librarian provide for me.
Their administrators might not prioritize the library or make them feel sort of sidelined or
whatever. In so many instances, K-12 is still very traditional where the administrators
think about libraries just in terms of books and librarians as people that are kind of
minding the shop and just checking books in and out and doing that kind of stuff. We
need to help them to see and get a vision for something bigger and broader.

One director commented, “I would say some administrators are better than others at being
aware of what’s going on in their building. I think some have no clue what’s going on in their
building. The good ones do have an awareness of what goes on, but I would say the bad ones
they have no clue what goes on in their building. Like I said, nobody knows what a librarian
does, nobody knows what a system director does and most of the time I’m left alone to just do
my job.” Another director remarked, “I presented to the district superintendents at their meeting.

57

I was really shocked to find out how many of them did not know much about their libraries; they
didn’t even realize the resources they had in their library or what their librarian was really
doing.”
Almost without exception, library directors reported that school and district-level
administrators assume leadership roles with very little if any exposure to how a dynamic
librarian and a collaborative program can impact student achievement. The School Library
Systems Association recognizes that administrator preparation programs are not incorporating
the findings of school library impact studies into their curricula. Hartzell’s (2002b) presentation
at the White House Conference on School Libraries reflects this assertion in that “aspiring
administrators are not made aware of the library’s potential and don’t recognize themselves as
important players in maximizing the librarian’s potential to contribute to school quality” (p. 3).

We all know through graduate programs, (that) principals and other administrators do not
know the role of the library. We have it written in our plan of service about advocacy.
Why? Because no one knows what the hell we do. It’s not an issue just with K-12;
obviously, college has the same thing. You have highly educated individuals who do not
know what we do, which is amazing to me at this present time.

Librarians and administrators do not read the same journals and each profession uses
distinct jargon or language. Oberg (2006, p.2) suggests, “teacher-librarians also tend to be
invisible because of their low profile in the educational literature” (Oberg, 2006, p. 2). Librarians
would have greater impact by transitioning from writing about collaboration and the impact of

58

their programs in isolation to linking programs to broader outcomes of student performance,
retention and degree completion. Results speak.
School library impact research is relatively abundant, however according to Kachel
(2016) “we have not ‘sold’ the reasons for maintaining quality school library programs in ways
that solve their (administrators) problems or address their priorities” (p. 53). The data on the
importance of librarians and their effects on student achievement need to be translated and
applied to meet local needs and foster local solutions. Hartzell (2002) notes that principals’
perceptions of their school librarians are influenced by two factors, (1) “occupational invisibility
of most school library media specialists, and (2) the occupational socialization of school
principals” (p. 95). The author hypothesizes that “occupational invisibility” on the part of school
librarians may be a function of their largely service or supportive rolls in advancing the work of
other teachers and the fact that they may be relatively isolated and lacking in librarian
colleagues, as it is rare that more than one librarian is employed per school. Occupational
socialization occurs through a principal’s early experiences from childhood with libraries and
librarians, continues through their working career, then their impressions are reconciled through
their interactions (Hartzell, 2002, p. 95). If a school librarian does not become “visible” to a
principal at some time during their careers, then that principal’s impression of school librarians
and school libraries may not be favorable.
“Teacher-librarians are strategically positioned to be influential members of school
leadership teams” (Zmuda & Harada, 2008, p. 5). In familiarizing themselves with the issues that
face school administrators and focusing their efforts on proving how their discipline can
influence these issues, librarians earn credibility. Instead of being included within the larger
academic framework in schools, library programming is generally categorized as a “special”

59

along with music, art, physical education and other non-core programs. This classification sets
up a dynamic of competition among disciplines that are viewed as non- essential when fiduciary
considerations are paramount.

There is so much misinformation out there about librarians. People are always surprised
at how far-reaching our job is and that it is not just checking out books, it’s not just
talking to kids about what they like to read, it’s much more diverse and instructional. I
think of those types of things as what happens in a public library, whereas the part about
cultivating lifelong learners in terms of knowing how to manage information and use
information is the heart of what we do.

Today, there is very little, if any room for programs or expenses that are considered to be
marginal or frivolous in K-12 schools today. Tax caps on budgets, spiraling costs due to the
implementation of Common Core and associated testing, and contractual obligations of school
districts for such expenses as employee benefits do not allow funding for programs that are
deemed incidental or insignificant. The guiding principles from Information Power need to be
brought to the forefront of what teacher-librarians do in schools. Cooper and Bray (2011) point
out “four key roles of the school library media specialist: teacher, instructional partner,
information specialist, and program administrator. Not one of these four roles could be described
as inconsequential. The perception of librarians and libraries as superfluous, expendable or
ancillary should be remedied. School librarians need to become “visible.” On the surface, school
libraries are expensive. Their impact needs to be front and center when justifications for keeping
librarians, space and programs come into play. Their impact needs to be recognized by academic

60

faculty in higher education and taught to potential school administrators prior to their assuming
building or district level leadership roles. “Lack of principal knowledge regarding the role of the
library media specialist in teaching and learning prevents the library program from developing to
its full potential” (Church, 2008, p. 2).
Conclusion
Barriers to the development of social capital are multifactorial and systemic. Breaking
down these many barriers to administrative relationships and social capital development are
fraught with many challenges. The hierarchical structure of K-12 schools is entrenched in our
educational system. Gaining access to administrators can be challenging. Many, if not most
school administrators lack exposure to the role libraries play in academic success both by their
own academic and professional preparation and the predominant career path for school
administration. Libraries and librarians can be isolated both physically and by virtue of job
description. Strategies that engage decision-makers and highlight the impact of libraries on
student achievement require a proactive approach on behalf of librarians. Recognizing that
administrative outreach and social capital development is confounded by considerable barriers, it
is still worth the considerable effort it takes. Because social capital and the benefits derived
thereof are relationship based, every time an administrator departs, a new relationship must be
developed. This perpetual state of affairs is challenging, endless in scope and extremely fatiguing
for teacher librarians. Yet the upside of change in leadership is that not all administrators are
supportive of school librarians and library programs. Turnover can offer the opportunity for new
direction in a school or district and afford the chance for a teacher librarian to be heard. Most
system directors articulated that school administrators were generally unschooled in
understanding the importance of library programs and their impact on student achievement.

61

Thus, school librarians must educate both incoming and current administrators about the
contributions they make to the overarching goals of student success.

62

Chapter 6
TEACHER-LIBRARIAN BARRIERS TO SOCIAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT

Early studies investigating the impact of school library media programs on academic
achievement fail to assess the contributions of individual librarians to the overall success of a
given program. These studies tend to focus more on programmatic pieces of a school library
media program without emphasizing the role of the librarian. These early studies do not offer
insight into how school librarians overcome the power disparities in the schools, the high
administrative turnover or the school administrator’s lack of understanding of their potential
impact on student achievement. Lance (2002) points out that many studies simply identify that a
professionally trained and credentialed library media specialist is involved (p.2). More recent
studies investigate the role of the librarian in successful programs, whether they serve as part of a
planning and teaching team with a classroom teacher, teach information literacy or provide oneto-one tutoring for students in need (Lance, 2002, p. 2).
A growing body of literature offers insights into how the effective and proactive librarian
can contribute to academic success in a school. The literature is lacking, however, in what makes
a librarian ineffective. “Interestingly, with the volumes of research dictating what it means to be
a good teacher [or good teacher-librarian], it is almost impossible to identify a body of literature
addressing the issue of bad teaching” (Foote, Vermette, Wisniewski, Agnello & Pagano, 2000).
Key findings from the director interviews, related to teacher-librarian barriers include: negative
actions and behaviors of library professionals (i.e. hostility, incompetence, adversarial
posturing), and lack of assertiveness or” working under the radar.”

63

According to NYS education law 3012-c, Guidance on New York State’s Annual
Professional Performance Review (New York State Education Department, 2016), for Teachers
and Principals, teachers, including librarians, are evaluated on the basis of standardized rubrics
known by the acronym HEDI. Each is graded as (1) highly effective, (2) effective, (3)
developing, (4) ineffective. The rating categories include (a) growth or other comparable
measures, (b) locally selected measures of growth or achievement, and (c) other measures of
effectiveness. The results from an un-tenured librarian’s APPR are used as an evaluation tool.
Decisions about tenure or even continued employment are influenced by this method of review.
For librarians with tenure “developing” or “ineffective” designations are intended to invoke
remediation plans and guide professional development.
A key finding of the study was that negative actions and behaviors of library
professionals (i.e. hostility, incompetence, adversarial posturing) was not a widespread concern.
Library system directors did not report an inordinate number of ineffective librarians. Yet all
reported having faced challenges with a small number of librarians who consistently performed
below expectations. One director mentioned, “She had one of those librarians that wore her hair
up in a bun and read books all day and didn’t do much with the kids. She just called the kids all
kinds of names and I was just horrified by the way this lady acted. Luckily the lady eventually
went on to retire, but it took a long time.”
Of interest in the context of this study, an ineffective librarian appeared to lack strength
in relationship building in addition to other shortfalls in performance. A number of themes
emerged to help explain the behaviors and actions that created barriers to the development of
social capital. Categories directors used to describe the ineffective librarian included the
exhibition of negative stereotypical behaviors, outright hostility, incompetence, adversarial

64

posturing, not doing their job, and lack of assertiveness. A director remarked on these manners,
“The other issue I would say is that some people are just really negative, defensive, really
hostile, or for lack of a better word—they are really lazy.” These behaviors significantly
impacted workplace climate, even though they fell short of justifying actions such as a 3020-a
hearing and dismissal. While another director commented on some of their librarian’s
relationships with their administrators, “I think there are so many adversarial relationships
between the librarians and the administration because the librarians are always feeling like, “Oh,
they don’t get me, they don’t know what I do, and they don’t know how busy I am.”
A 3020-a hearing is a component of the process for removing a tenured teacher or teacher
librarian from their position. Charges under 3020-a might include immoral character,
incompetence, conduct unbecoming, insubordination, sexual harassment, lack of certification,
misconduct, neglect of duty and corporal punishment (New York State Education Department,
2013). These processes are legal proceedings and must be followed to the letter of the law in
order to meet standards of justice and fairness. Alternatives to these proceedings are often
undertaken in an effort to simply bide time and await the eventual retirement or resignation of
ineffective librarians. Decidedly less than ideal, this approach is nonetheless common. In
commenting on a particularly difficult librarian, one director remarked, “In my first year, my
principal said to me that the previous librarian was just awful.” The principal said, “I don’t
know any nicer way to say it but she was terrible. I don’t care what you do in the library, I just
don’t want to hear about it.”
Negotiating a teacher dismissal is a lengthy process that can take a district an average of
3-years along with extensive legal fees. The entire process is extremely scripted and guided by
New York State Education Law Section 3020-a Disciplinary procedures and penalties. The

65

American Enterprise Institute, a public policy think tank states that under 3020-a, “incompetent
teaching, in and of itself is not ground for dismissal” (Stevens, 2014). Their research shows that
from 1997 to 2007, “61% of the New York City teachers convicted through due process hearings
of incompetent teaching, excessive absence, verbal abuse, and / or corporal punishment were
returned to the classroom.” “Proof that there is no possibility of rehabilitating a teacher is a
necessary condition for dismissal” (Stevens, 2014). Thus, for many districts, they choose the
plan of waiting as their solution for improving workplace climate, decreasing levels of hostility,
mitigating incompetence, or for remediating those not doing their jobs. Raver and Nishii (2010)
comment that no matter what the label, “these constructs encompass behaviors that create a
hostile, intimidating, or offensive work environment” (p. 237).
Another key finding exposes a potential barrier to social capital development that stems
from a lack of assertiveness on the part of some librarians, or a propensity to “work under the
radar.” Personality traits were commented on as potential barriers to the development of social
capital. Directors speculated that there appears to be a preponderance of individuals on the
introversion spectrum in library science. Although there does not appear to be literature to
support this supposition, and the perception may stem from stereotyping, it bears consideration.
For many introverts, collaboration, public speaking, public presenting and other advocacy and
outreach activities may prove challenging. The perception that directors hold about introversion
and the resultant stereotype of school librarians as introverts was mentioned multiple times by
directors.

There are a lot of introverts that go into librarianship. If you’re an introvert librarian, you
have got to kind of stretch that a little. It’s just what you have to do because

66

administrators are really important. And then in some cases it’s personality, where
they’re just so uncomfortable putting themselves out there. That’s probably one of the
internal barriers that you have to cross that at some point because you have to—but how
do you teach assertiveness?

One cannot deduce, without data to support the supposition, that library science attracts a
disproportionate subset of introverts to its ranks. Being introverted, however, can put off an
individual school librarian from confidently reaching out to those with power or influence and
thus prevents them from establishing beneficial relationships. It does not follow that one cannot
develop relationships with constituents; rather that collaboration, public speaking, public
presentations and other advocacy and outreach activities may prove challenging for them.

I also find that the majority of people who go into this profession tend to be a little on the
introverted side. If you are introverted and you enjoy that isolation that the library
provides, my guess is that it’s going to be hard to promote yourself, promote your
programs, and invite the principal in. Some people are very good at doing that and then
other people really struggle. Some of it is personality. I guess there are certain personality
types that are more attracted to the library role, the more introverted, shy individuals.

Outward facing behaviors required for collaborative work, for promoting the library and
for gaining influence may be difficult and require incremental steps for those not naturally
predisposed to promoting themselves or their work in the public sphere. These can be learned
behaviors. Because school libraries are service-based, they are naturally people-centric with

67

high degrees of interactivity with students, custodians, principals, superintendents, parents,
teachers and other outside constituents. Gaining comfort in interactions beyond the usual library
constituents is the next step.

I think sometimes people wait for the principal to notice them; school librarian is a
position where you really can’t be a wallflower. You have to constantly be that in-yourface, ever present presence that is there every day in some capacity. I think it also comes
a lot easier if you’re a little bit of a people person. Some people are brilliant, but they are
not a people person and it’s going to be hard.

Books have been and probably always will remain an important aspect of school library
programs. Yet today’s exemplary school library programs involve so much more than being a
repository for printed material, serving a readership advisory role and managing circulation and
collections. Today’s librarians are measured by their contributions to student achievement,
student success, and their impact upon retention, timely graduation, college and career readiness.
Wagner and Kegan (2006) call for a dual attention when it comes to change: “we need to
sharpen our vision outward, seeing more deeply into the organizations we are trying to improve.
We also need to sharpen our vision inward, seeing more deeply into ourselves, and the way we
must change, as well” (p. 51). Programmatic alignment with organizational strategic initiatives
links teacher librarians with their administrators while looking inward focuses the teacherlibrarian on what they personally need to change to accomplish this alignment. Cohan (2009)
calls for the use of reflection as an ongoing and integral part of the pedagogical process (p. 33).
This honest and oftentimes difficult process allows for thoughtful evaluation of one’s motives,

68

actions and hoped for outcomes. Moments of reflection can also be used to evaluate the impact
of library programs on academic achievement and alignment with institutional priorities.
“Teacher-librarians need to use evidence strategically to manage the school library, plan,
implement and evaluate their teaching and library programs, and raise awareness of their
potential impact on student learning and literacy (Hughes, 2014, p. 39).
“Complaisance,” “comfort zone,” “what I was trained to do,” “I’m too old to learn new
ways of doing things,” and “I didn’t sign on for this” were phrases used by system directors to
describe the feedback they received from librarians who resisted change. Some adapted a
minimalist approach to their jobs, eliciting comments from teachers and administrators such as
“Oh, she’s just the librarian, just leave her alone. She’s doing books and stuff.” Directors
reported that they have a surprising number of librarians who are reluctant and even defensive
when approached with new responsibilities or expanded roles such as those promulgated in the
2016 School Libraries Work! professional publication. These include such innovations as a shift
from library to learning commons, inclusion of makerspaces, knowledge creation, co-teaching,
and incorporating social media’s influence into the discussion on information access (Scholastic,
Inc., 2015, p.1).
Many school librarians have complex and competing demands on their time, and their
workloads are vast. This limits their ability to interface with decision-makers or set long
priorities. In elementary schools for example, a librarian may teach 5-8 classes per day to
multiple age levels, oversee the detention room, and manage the after-school programs. A
Kentucky study found that “media specialists with assigned teaching duties and the lack of
flexible scheduling in elementary libraries have the most difficulty with engaging in
collaborative planning and instructional activities (Houston, 2008, p. 15). Their teaching load

69

may be further exacerbated by the need to align classes with both the Common Core and New
York Learning Standards, while attempting to keep abreast of APPR, tenure and other building
or district-level initiatives. One director commented, “I think that the issue is that librarians are
so stressed with having to teach so many classes. Some of them go between two buildings with
the elementary and high school and it’s just more of a time issue. They just don’t have time to
respond.”
Structural issues such as the number of classes taught and service to multiple-buildings
are issues that can be mitigated through honest and open communication with one’s principal.
Principals, in general, care about quality teaching and what is best for students. Most also care
deeply about staff needs and work diligently to serve and meet the needs of their staff. It is
critical for effective librarians to overcome any hesitancy or discomfort they have with
promoting their successes and advocating for their needs to administrators. The ineffective
librarian who resists change, is inflexible, is unwilling to adapt or actively undermines
innovation will also have his hour of reckoning.

It drives me nuts when I see a librarian who sits in a library all day and doesn’t build their
social capital, doesn’t go out there and talk with teachers, doesn’t talk with their
administrators, doesn’t provide reports of some variety to say hey, this is what’s going
on. These are the classes I’m doing collaborative projects with. For me it’s just huge and
I don’t understand why anyone wouldn’t do that.

“Money is too short, accountability is too demanding, and student achievement is too
important to accept an ineffective school library media program” (Kaplan, 2008, p. 20). One

70

director commented, “How do I go and talk to your principal and tell him that he needs a
librarian when he doesn’t? Because he doesn’t need you; if you’re sitting there behind the
circulation desk, he certainly doesn’t need that.”
New York State schools are financially stretched due to myriad issues, among them tax
caps, increasing retirement and benefit costs and in some cases declining enrollment. Cuts to
libraries are common despite abundant research documenting their importance in student
achievement. There are serious implications in cutting librarian staffing or closing school
libraries. “Short-term savings are obliterated by long-term consequences of denying students
equitable access to education resources and instruction provided by the school’s information
literacy specialists and technologists—school librarians” (ISTE, 2010, p. 2). If the programs
offered through the school library are not aligned with the goals and initiatives of the school and
district leaders, then problems will arise.
Interviews revealed that many librarians sought to work “under the radar” meaning that
they did their jobs, but preferred to not be noticed by their administrators. This symbiotic type of
relationship wherein administrators ignore the library if nothing goes wrong, and librarians play
their part by maintaining the status quo is a setup for downsizing when budgets grow tight.
Today’s school librarians are in the middle of a paradigm shift as a result of what Keith Fiels of
the American Library Association (ALA) describes as the mentality of “the library as a passive
warehouse” (McLester, 2013, p. 60). “The time is now and the need is urgent to demonstrate the
relationship of state-certified school librarians leading effective school library programs with
student learning and success” (AASL, 2014, p. 4). One director summarized, “If you don’t have
social skills or if you don’t have people supporting you or liking you because you have never

71

developed social capital, you know what you have? Not much. People don’t care about you or
what you do so you become obsolete. You become a nonentity. That’s what happens.”
Conclusion
Relationship building is a complex process. Administrators who are embedded in a
hierarchical decision-making paradigm, high turnover rates among decision-makers, and their
general lack of knowledge on how to maximize the skills of librarians and build successful
library programs that impact student achievement are significant hurdles. Librarians can feel
powerless in overcoming them, yet many of their colleagues have successfully circumnavigated
these roadblocks. An unexpected finding of the study, identified almost universally by directors,
was the negative impact of behaviors exhibited by a minority of librarians. If library directors,
who are librarians themselves, perceive fellow librarians as ineffective, lacking in cooperation,
isolated, or engaging in counterproductive behaviors, then it is likely that school administrators
are observing the same dynamic. Several directors maintained that negative behavior on the part
of a librarian had adverse consequences with school administrators for years after the offending
individual had left the school. Hostility and adversarial posturing are not productive traits when
it comes to relationship building. It is vital to emphasize that the findings are not representative
of the great majority of teacher librarian professionals, and are rather illustrative of a very small,
albeit notable minority.
Directors postulated that their librarians tended to lie on a spectrum, from a very few who
were incompetent or hostile, the majority who were very competent, engaged and involved in
their schools, and a few who went over and above in serving at state and national leadership
levels within professional organizations. These overachievers were the ones held up as models,
and were described as outgoing, effusive, and involved in everything at the local through the

72

national levels. They publish in journals, blog, create podcasts and are adept at the integration of
technology in teaching, and are well respected and supported by their administrators. Librarians
may benefit from a form of introspection, to consider the impact of their actions, or lack thereof,
on the dynamics of their relationships with those in positions of influence. It is within the
purview of the individual librarian to make changes to address counterproductive, damaging or
ineffective comportment. Negative actions and behaviors of library professionals can be
mitigated or eliminated and replaced by more positive attributes that better position the librarian
for relationship building efforts. Overcoming sometimes subtle ways of acting and thinking may
require in-depth work with other colleagues and peers. In addition, librarians can replace passive
behaviors with active engagement, trade a library-centric attitude for one of inclusion and
outreach, and transform relationships as a result.

73

Chapter 7
TEACHER-LIBRARIAN DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

Although barriers to relationship building are many and diverse, and include challenges
posed by administrators and librarians alike, the study revealed ways in which directors and
librarians have overcome hurdles to advance librarianship. We have seen that the study
uncovered hierarchical structure, turnover, and lack of knowledge as contributors to
administrative social capital development challenges. Hostility, adversarial posturing and
“working under the radar” were identified as obstacles attributed to teacher librarians. Although
overcoming these barriers is a challenge, a variety of stratagems for the development of social
capital in spite of these potential roadblocks were identified in the study. There were three
overarching spheres wherein teacher-librarians and school library system directors exhibited
success in the development of social capital: (1) in making use of personal expertise, (2) in
nurturing advocates, and (3) in being open to opportunity.
Maximization of personal expertise includes the use of technology, effective collection
management, marketing of self and programs, and positioning one’s role as essential to the
success of others. An example of the use of expertise involves teacher-librarians who have
reshaped, reformed and revamped a traditional consumption-of-knowledge-based library to
reposition it as a knowledge space or Learning Commons (Loertscher & Marcoux, 2015, p. 8).
This transformation requires a shift from collection management to knowledge creation. Physical
space is utilized differently through configurable furnishings and bookshelves, physical
collections move from a place of prominance to a supportive role, and a robust internet
environment gains distinction, supporting makerspaces with 3-D printers, tablets, laptop
74

computers and Bring Your Own Devices (BYOD) (Loertscher & Marcoux, 2015, p. 10).
Expertise in technology integration and troubleshooting can move the librarian from end-user
into a more vital, leadership capacity.
Gaining expertise in technology also offers an opportunity to view the act of reading
through multiple lenses. E-readers, e-books, and digital audio books offer leadership
opportunities to a teacher-librarian. Devices include built-in dictionaries and thesauri to facilitate
reading comprehension. Early librarian adopters often see other teachers embracing these types
of devices and modalities following successful library projects (Moen, 2015, p. 21).
Additionally, teacher-librarians have embraced Web 2.0 technologies that “invite all Internet
users to share, collaborate, and contribute in the process of website development, podcasting, and
collaborative authoring to name just a few (Lingaiah, Murugan, & Dhanavandan, 2013, p. 159).
Although Web 2.0 technology takes place on the unfettered, unfiltered Internet, steps can be
taken to protect students within the safety of a school or district’s firewalls. The use of social
media in K-12 schools has been fraught with challenges of identity protection, parental approval,
the openness or lack thereof of networks and school district policies on use, all of which can be
addressed under the leadership of the librarian. These technologies are tools for sharing
information and for working collaboratively within classrooms or across continents and oceans.
A director remarked, “We have created a technology and inquiry project but focusing on social
studies. It’s very nice because we know the model works. We tweaked it. We did a lot of surveys
and a lot of assessments and asked the teachers and librarians lots of questions and they gave us
some very good feedback on what we should change and what we should definitely keep and
everything like that.” Another commenting on one of their librarian exemplars, “She has done
such a fantastic job advocating for her library program. Last year she co-wrote a grant with

75

another librarian at another one of our new immigrant students’ school and they created a
makerspace. They got a 3D printer, mine craft, Legos--everything to go with it. It’s just been
phenomenal. I’ll get regular emails from this principal telling me that her librarian is
indispensable.”
Cultivation of champions who advocate for librarians and library programs comes in
many forms. The study gave examples of how librarians developed advocates through the use of
social capital. Hackman (2012) writes “I think of advocacy as an investment we make when we
intentionally and strategically educate and engage individuals and organizations so they in turn
will support our work” (p. 11). The combined use of social capital, leveraging relationships and
empowering library champions as advocates will help move the message of the library’s work
beyond the library and even the school walls. “Committed and respected advocates are needed to
share a vision of how to leverage the school library program as an integral and effective tool that
achieves the school’s mission” (Kachel, 2016, p. 55). The best approach for advancing school
library advocacy is not known. In spite of over forty years of literature indicating that top-notch
school librarians and strong school library programs have an impact on student achievement
(Gaver, 1961; Lance, Rodney & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000; Small, Snyder & Parker, 2009; Todd,
Kuhlthau & OELMA, 2004), “positions continue to be eliminated across the United States”
(Ewbank, 2011, p. 42). Even with this overwhelming body of evidence, librarians and library
programs continue to be cut. Advocacy efforts need to be ongoing, comprehensive and
productive to stem the tide. Ewbank (2011) reports that following a search of the literature, there
did not appear to be any studies about school librarians’ “advocacy behaviors, advocacy needs,
perceived obstacles to advocacy, or importance of advocacy to the future of the profession (p.

76

42). Until empirical studies help establish best practices for advocacy efforts, a direct approach
of cultivating relationships and informing decision-makers appears prudent.

The benefit is, once the principal becomes educated about libraries, once the principal
sees what you’re doing—I tell these librarians—they gain access to the power of the
purse. Principals have the ability to make a position full-time in the building. They have
the ability when they receive grant money, and I tell my librarians poverty is a
commodity, there are always title dollars, there are always grant monies where they could
add staffing; I say this is how we build librarians. I tell them as well, “Guys, we are in the
service oriented business. We have a clientele whether it’s teachers or students and we
serve them. Whether it’s access to computers, whether it’s providing literature, we are
serving someone to some degree in terms of a need.” And I say, “That’s how you have to
see it. You have to have your doors open, you have to have smiles on your faces, you
have to be welcoming, you have to let people know that you have two master’s degrees
and that you’re certified in other subjects, that you understand curriculum and pedagogy,
that you’re an educated soul. No one is going to know these things if your door is closed
and you’re not seeing people or doing things.”

Advocates may also be nurtured outside the circle of colleagues and administrators.
Although research in library and information science has predominantly investigated social
media as a marketing resource, a small subset has begun to consider its community-building
capabilities (Young & Rossman, 2015, p. 21). Individuals who are not familiar with library
programs and initiatives can become educated through social media outlets and become

77

acculturated into advocacy roles. Community building through social networking platforms such
as Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram exposes the library to a wide audience of potential library
champions, supporters and promoters.
When the library acquisitions new material, the use of social media is an excellent way to
announce it to students and staff. Kerr (2011) identifies expertise in and use of social networking
as a mainstay of the school librarian’s advocacy arsenal. Although she is speaking of advocacy in
the article, there are many strategies identified by Kerr that could apply to marketing what a
teacher librarian is and what their library program does. Examples include promoting and
encouraging reading for both pleasure and information; engaging in collaborative leadership;
building personal learning networks and professional communities of practice, and fostering a
cycle of continuous improvement through good assessment practices (Kerr, 2011, p. 69). Each
can be used to market the library by reaching constituants who might otherwise remain ignorant
of what goes on in a school library.

I’ve never been a big proponent of advocacy because if you can’t see what I’m doing
then I’m really not doing a good job. It doesn’t matter what I say, you have to see what I
do and people have to tell you what I did. We see the rock stars out there and they’re
usually not introverts. They’re the one percent. I think sometimes the discussion from the
introverts is that oh they’re tooting their own horn but they’re getting out there and that’s
the way they are getting recognized—and they are getting recognized and they get lots of
press and support for their program.

78

Gaining the support of others is part of an “on-going process of building partnerships so
others will act for and with you, turning passive support into educated action for the library
program” (American Association of School Librarians, 2016). Library supporters can do much of
the yeoman’s work of getting the word out about programs, collaboration, and the need for
resources and staffing. Friends’ groups connect to individuals in the school, district and
community through their social networks and can play an important role as library advocates.
Haycock and Stenström (2016) write that when it comes to advocacy efforts by teacherlibrarians, it is not the evidence or the volume of the message that is the problem. “It is not the
presence of school libraries that affect student achievement; rather it is the presence and specific
behaviors of a qualified teacher-librarian” (Haycock & Stenström, 2016, p. 132). “People
looking in from the outside do not necessarily appreciate (that) the success of the program is a
result of the expertise of the teacher-librarian to lead, make connections, and share their
knowledge, skills, and attitudes with the school’s learning community” (Kerr, 2011, p. 70). A
thoughtful and careful delineation must be made between the librarian and the program, although
both need to be seen as “essential” by students, teachers, administrators and community
members.
To the student, a library may offer a comfortable, safe, non-judgmental space where she
can access information about interests outside school, complete group projects, delve into
academic coursework or simply study. Parents may align with their students’ views or seek
justification for library funding on the basis of other expectations of what constitutes worth and
value. Budgetary and program justification require more than circulation and gate count
numbers. Assessment of learning and program impact are important metrics that assist

79

administrators and boards of education and help guide their decisions. Kramer and Diekman
(2010) assert “for the library media specialist, documenting assessment results provides a
compelling case for the value of the school library program so when issues of funding and
accountability arise and decision-makers have to identify priorities for staff and budget, teacherlibrarians can produce student-focused data to support their requests” (p. 29). These data can
then be used as the basis for advocacy and marketing materials disseminated to the varied and
diverse library constituents and supporters.
Being open to opportunities was cited as another mainstay in developing social capital.
Opportunities may present as the simple endeavor of taking a chance in reaching out to an
administrator on a personal level. Librarians need to develop a personal connection with
administrators and others in order to promote good working relationships. What starts as a casual
commentary can lead to a better understanding of that person, and give insight into what they
value. This, in turn, can lead to more substantive connections. Many strong working
relationships started with a shared interest, with one party reaching out to make a basic
connection, person to person.
On a very basic level, social capital can commence from the straightforward act of
making a personal connection with an administrator. “Relationships built upon a foundation of
communication yield powerful results. At the core of effective communication are trusting
relationships that strike a chord on both personal and professional levels” (Lubelfeld, Bullis &
Filippi, 2016, p. 46). The recognition and communication of mutual interests between a school
librarian and administrators may be an initial step in forging a relationship. Credibility, trust,
honesty, empathy and establishing a rapport built upon commonalities all provide a basis for

80

relationships (Gallos, 2008; Green, 2006; Kouzes & Posner, 2007; Rothwell & Kazanas, 2008;
Summers, Lohr & O’Neil, 2002).

I want to say that I think when you find a passion then you find someone else that has a
connection to that passion, it’s very easy to build a relationship. One route for making
connections might be in identifying the principal’s passions, what sports do they do, what
sports teams do they follow, what hobbies do they have. It’s just a sly way of building
social capital if you say, “Hey, how did that team do?” Or to just engage somebody in a
conversation that doesn’t necessarily involve the library.

One of the directors remarked, “When it comes to getting what you want and
advocating for your program, it’s a lot easier to do it when a person is a friend, they
respect you, they think you’re a leader and they ask you to be part of the leadership team.
You need to be a partner rather than an adversary.” Through the identification of shared
aims and purposes, the librarian makes a connection with an administrator. Once
established, this association can be expanded. Understanding the goals and aims of those
in leadership positions helps the school librarian align library programs with district
initiatives. Anderson (2012) conflates relationships and leadership, “Leadership is a
relationship. Being able to establish relationships and open the doorway to better
opportunities is not something that lies at the top of management” (Anderson, 2012, p.
15-16). Gaining influence intentionally helps librarians to be effective in their jobs and
successful in attaining their goals.

81

Being open to opportunities also involves being willing to explore multiple channels such
as presentations, curriculum work, committee membership and just saying when an opening is
presented.

If your principal comes to you with something when you are brand new, you don’t say
no, you find a way to make it happen. If it’s something unrealistic, that’s when you
phrase it in such a way to your principal, “I can do that but I’m doing this other thing. I
can’t give all the attention to you.” You have to decide where to prioritize while stroking
the principal’s ego a little bit, but then also showing that you are a team player. Put in the
back of your head that you always have a solution for what you want done, what you can
help guide them or lead them to.

The following table presents study findings that illustrate how library directors
promulgate their work by taking on leadership roles or presenting to an audience that includes
administrators, as well as the percentage who have developed a strategic advocacy plan. (See
Table 6)
TABLE 6: Directors’ Leadership Opportunities
Directors’ Leadership Opportunities
TYPE OF LEADERSHIP

N (%)

Presented at Meetings Where Administrators
Were Present
Yes

14 (70.0)

No

6 (30.0)

82

Occupy Leadership Roles Outside of SLS
Director Capacity
Yes

16 (80.0)

No

4 (20.0)

Created an Advocacy Plan
Yes

5 (23.8)

No

16 (76.2)

The majority of directors reported that they had presented at meetings where administrators were
present (70.0%), and that they occupy leadership roles outside of their SLS director capacity
(80.0%). Advocacy plans are strategies that demonstrate the importance of library services (i.e.
impacting student achievement) for the purpose of ensuring adequate resourcing and staffing. In
spite of AASL efforts to promote advocacy for the purpose of gaining support within schools and
districts, three quarters of directors (76.2%) had not created an advocacy plan.
Seizing opportunities when they arise play an important role in how librarians are
perceived by their building or district level administrators. School library system directors seem
to understand this and to present at meetings where administrators are present. In so doing, they
have direct access to inform, request and celebrate with those within their chain of command and
perhaps other administrators from other schools and districts. By doing a solid job presenting,
they help all librarians in making an impression on district leaders.
Oftentimes as a direct result of these presentations, as well as having others in the district
to speak for them, librarians will be invited to serve on curriculum, building-level or even
district-level committees or working groups. This type of work serves to lift the profile of the

83

librarian as book-person and places them firmly on footing with any other academic leader in the
district.
Missing what librarians do is a coherent, concise and yet comprehensive advocacy plan.
Why is this important? The opportunities above are moments when a librarian can begin to or
expand upon the development of their social capital. As these relationships develop, the librarian
can then begin to advocate for their budgets, positions and programs. With a concise advocacy
plan, pieces of what they are needing can be used effectively when in contact with district
leadership.
Aggregation of behaviors that work well and can be considered essential to social capital
development can be fostered by taking a comprehensive approach to the task. This was the fourth
arena that came to the fore in the study.

One of the things that I’ve tried to do since coming to my current position is to be in the
right place at the right time. So, I go to lots of meetings, even if it’s not necessarily one
that I need to attend. We have meetings with our elementary principals from our district,
meetings with our secondary principals from our district and then there are curriculum
folks from our district. I go to those regularly just to know what’s going on.

One director commented, “Although many of my librarians believe they have good relationships,
I think they need to work on making themselves indispensable and seen as essential. The ones
that have been successful at that are doing a fantastic job. I get glowing emails from their
principals for absolutely no reason at all, just wanting to let me know about something that they

84

did.” While yet another director insisted, “Just stop telling them you’re essential, just be
essential.”

I’ve tried to build the voices of my librarians by inviting them to be on committees and to
have more input into the professional development I’m offering them. I’ve also been
trying to help them to see themselves as teacher-leaders in their schools and in their
districts. It’s hard because a lot of them don’t see themselves that way. They are in their
libraries, in isolation and they don’t really see the impact that they might have if they
were allowed to move beyond their current roles.

Conclusion
A comprehensive approach to understanding of the impact that teacher-librarians and
their programs have on student achievement is necessary in order to sustain funding and staffing
support today. Everhart and Logan (2005) in writing about the 2004 Student Learning through
Ohio School Libraries Study (Todd, Kuhlthau & OELMA, 2004) assert teacher-librarians “need
to connect the findings to our own evidence-based practice, a term that means the systematic
process of documenting how a school library media specialist makes a difference in student
learning” (p. 52). Findings from state and national studies are important, however what a
teacher-librarian does to make a difference in her own school may provide administrators with
crucial evidence necessary to support and sustain positions and programs. Evidence-based
practice must be incorporated teacher-librarian’s work with a move toward assessment rather
than anecdotal reporting of program successes. Todd (2015) reminds us of the “central focus of
evidence-based practice, school librarians’ evidence of their practice, and the urgent need to

85

build a compelling and diverse portfolio of local evidence deeply linked to the learning agenda
of the school” (p. 10). In taking this approach, the school librarian will move their practice from
anecdotal to empirical while making the case for the essentiality of her role.

86

Chapter 8
CONCLUSIONS
This study explored the awareness of, utilization of, and barriers to the development of
social capital from the perspective of library system directors in New York State. Its findings are
limited by a narrow sample size and the instruments used to conduct the research. The study
focused on school libraries, yet its findings need not be circumscribed. Many of the findings of
the study have implications for broader inquiry. The research identified challenges to and
opportunities for school librarians and school library system directors to enhance, augment or
replace traditional methods of advocacy in their libraries. If librarians are to garner resources and
gain influence, they must overcome obstacles that relegate them to the fringes and keep them
segregated from decision-makers. Determinations about school libraries need to “integrate
evidence for practice, evidence in practice and evidence of practice” (Todd, 2015, p. 9). This
evidence must come from librarians who understand the impact of decisions on the ground.
Librarians must act as advocates by channeling the power of social capital.
Creating a culture of mutual trust, fostering open and honest communication, setting a
goal of intentionality in relationship building and moving the library from an isolated position
within a school and district to an integrated one requires flexibility in thinking and acting on the
part of the librarian. It may involve altering expectations about the professional role of the
librarian, a departure from what is comfortable, a “setting aside the underdog mentality and the
belief that ‘this isn’t what I became a librarian for’” (Foote, 2015, p. 27). Because school
libraries are often described as the heart of the school, teacher librarians are well-positioned to
work with all teachers, curriculum developers and administrators and often have more
87

information about what is happening in their school or district than anyone else. They can use
this access as an untapped resource. Librarians may cast themselves in a new light, that of a
“connector.” “The role school and district teacher librarians play as ‘connectors’ is significant to
a school district’s ability to meet 21st century demands for enhanced student learning” (VanTuyle
& Watkins, 2012, p. 111). Through these connections, information can be easily disseminated
from teachers to administrators, from administrators to the teaching staff, and from the librarian
to all decision-makers in the district.
The impact of quality school librarians and strong library programs on student
achievement is well documented (Baughman, 2002; Lance & Loertscher, 2002; Lance, Welborn
& Hamilton-Pennell, 1997; Small, Snyder & Parker, 2009; Todd & Heinstrom, 2006; Todd &
Kuhlthau, 2004). Teacher-librarians and school library leaders are ideally positioned to garner
the power of social capital. They are uniquely situated to build bridges to a large constituencyparents, principals, the community at large, superintendents and boards of education. The
development and utilization of social capital may be the next step in the evolution of the school
librarian as strategic advocacy takes on a central role in the future of libraries within schools.
Interviewees had all served as school librarians prior to assuming leadership positions as
system directors, and were able to offer perspectives from both roles. They identified barriers
that librarians and directors face while attempting to build social capital. They also recognized
the power of social capital to support goals such as sustained library financing, programmatic
development and librarian positions. These issues are not unique to school libraries, and the
study may rouse researchers in special, academic and public libraries to investigate the impact of
social capital development in their spheres.

88

Do school library system directors understand the power of relationships, the
development of social capital and the implications of its use for gaining influence? Power and
influence were not common terms or concepts for the directors participating in this study. They
fully understood the implications of power as a result of one’s position within the district
hierarchy, yet it seemed that few fully adopted any strategies for gaining power or influence.
In what ways do relationships help provide access to information, resources and
opportunities that would not have been attainable otherwise? Most directors reported that they
reaped benefits and leveraged social capital for low impact, low risk gains such as obtaining
space or supplies in the short term. Some recognized that social capital led to the development of
mentorships that profoundly influenced both their personal and professional lives and in some
cases lasted for the length of their careers. The subjects recognized and used social capital
skillfully in the realm of professional advancement, personal relationship building and
mentoring, yet appeared to underrate, undervalue, or underutilize its capacity for achieving
substantial or consequential advantage beyond this. A potential area of inquiry is to explore why
this is the case. What is holding librarians back from making the “big ask,” from “pushing the
envelope,” or from using their hard-earned social capital for far reaching, consequential gains?
In general, directors did not consider positional power beyond that of improving access to
decision-makers. The impact of influence was mainly cited as having played a role in career
advancement and gaining board positions and committee appointments. Directors were cognizant
of who held key decision-making positions both in districts and in BOCES. Very few of the
interviewees, however, pursued a strategic plan to target these individuals with the goal of
gaining influence or resources. Their approach was more often that of pursuing casual

89

interactions over time with the supposition that these interactions would lead to more substantive
and meaningful interconnection.
When asked about external spheres of influence and the types of relationships that school
librarians and directors develop outside of schools and school districts, vendor relationships were
primarily referenced. The development of additional external relationships represents an
untapped resource. Policy makers, school boards, parents, and legislators all have influence in
school districts. This is an arena rife with potential for librarians to gain influence. While
directors did not immediately identify as significant any resources or increased access directly
attributable to social capital in the realm of external relationships, upon reflection they identified
examples of gains in access to resources and opportunities as a result of these relationships.
Do external relationships impact positively one’s power, access to power, and the ability
to influence others? The findings showed that directors identified gains in power and access to
individuals who possess power through relationship building. Their ability to garner influence
was more nuanced and less readily substantiated.
Recommendations
You may never know what results come of
your action, but if you do nothing there will
be no result.
(Attributed to Mahatma Gandhi, Attenborough, 2001))
Relationships, social capital, and influence are all critical elements associated with
advocacy efforts (UNICEF, 2017). In an effort to be more intentional about developing
relationships, I have created a very basic Social Capital Logic Model. It may be adapted, expand
upon, and augmented with actionable details.
90

Social Capital Logic Model
(1) Identify decision-makers
•

Building Level: principal, assistant principal, department chairs, curriculum
coordinator, administrative assistant

•

District Level: superintendent, assistant superintendent for curriculum and
instruction, business and finance officials, building and grounds supervisor,
administrative assistant(s), Board of Education

•

Community: parents, PTO / PTA, Rotarians, other philanthropic groups, Friends
of the Library, other libraries and librarians, community members

(2) Assess existing connections
•

Strong: frequent contact, substantive communication, trust and respect

•

Weak: infrequent contact, nothing beyond hello, limited trust developed

•

Non-existent: can recognize name on organization chart only
91

(3) Target individuals
•

Select individual and establish an action plan: social capital inheres between two
individuals; efforts to develop relationships must focus on one-to-one work

•

Map efforts (discretely): using software or hand draw the “solar system” that has
you at the center and all decision-makers somewhere in orbit around you; connect
the dots between you and them indicating strength of relationships.

•

Assess efforts and impact upon the development of social capital, at a minimum
on a quarterly basis. Create a rubric for assessing your progress toward
relationship building, identifying social capital developed

•

quantify outcomes and changes as a result.

(4) Be open to opportunity! Just say “yes.”
•

Intentional targeting of individuals who are the key decision-makers in your
building, district and community moves you from doing minimal to no social
capital building and getting limited results, to beginning to gain some control of
circumstances and decisions made that effect your position, staffing levels,
budgets and programming. This study revealed that by being open to impromptu
conversations, accepting social invitations, stepping out of one’s comfort zone by
making presentations, serving on committees, or implementing initiatives, you
never know what doors may be opened today, tomorrow or in the future.

Areas for future inquiry that came to light as a result of conducting this research are
plentiful. Is it probable that school librarians, due in part to their traditional position within the
architecture and hierarchy of schools, have become too insular and complacent? Is this the result
of the relative isolation of school libraries and teacher librarians within a school (in conflict with

92

librarians’ perceptions of the library as the very heart of the school)? How can schools of library
and information studies form partnerships with schools of education to influence future school
leaders? How can school librarians gain access to and influence over decision-makers? How
can they become the decision-makers? How can librarians and library programs become better
aligned with district strategies? What pathways exist for school librarians to become district
administrators? Librarians appear to be well positioned within the context of bonding social
capital; how can school librarians develop bridges beyond their own fields and what might the
implications be for these types of actions?
School administration is not a typical career path for librarians. Most principals and
superintendents rise from the ranks of classroom teachers. Perhaps it is time more librarians
considered careers in school administration. Their education, training and skill sets uniquely
position them to consider this option, and occupying an administrative role would help librarians
gain a foothold in decision-making circles. Alternatively, teacher-librarians can harness the
power of social capital to influence decisions and gain a seat at the table.
Power comes in many forms. Influence need not be hierarchical. “The evidence of the
importance of relationship building with strategic actors within each library’s decision-making
context is now becoming apparent” (Haycock & Stenström, 2016, p. 139). Librarians who build
relationships will gain access to decision-makers and influence the course of their own future.
Librarians who harness social capital have the potential to shift the power paradigm in K-12
education.

93

Bibliography
Achterman, D. (2008). Haves, halves, and have-nots: School libraries and student achievement
in California. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
http://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc9800/m2/1/high_res_d/dissertation.pdf
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of
Management Review, 27(1), 17-40. doi:10.5465/AMR.2002.5922314
Ahn, J. (2012). Teenagers’ experiences with social network sites: Relationships to bridging and
bonding social capital. Information Society, 28(2), 99-109.
doi:10.1080/01972243.2011.649394
American Association of School Librarians. (2007). Standards for the 21st-century learner.
Retrieved from:
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/aasl/guidelinesandstandards/learningstandards/standar
ds.cfm
American Association of School Librarians. (2014). AASL National Research Forum. Causality:
School libraries and student success (CLASS). Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/researchandstatistics/CLASSWhite
PaperFINAL.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2016a). Position Statement on the School Library
Supervisor: http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/supervisor
American Association of School Librarians. (2016b). What is advocacy? Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/definitions
American Association of School Librarians & Association for Educational Communications and
Technology. (1998). Information power: Building partnerships for learning. Chicago, IL:

94

American Library Association.
American Library Association. (2014). State of America’s Libraries Report 2014: School
Libraries. Number of school librarians declines relative to other teachers. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/news/state-americas-libraries-report-2014/school-libraries
Anderson, C. (2011). Moving the library agenda forward: Librarians collaborating with the chief
library administrator to cultivate campus constituencies. Journal of Library
Administration, 51(2), 179-188. doi:10.1080/01930826.2011.540548
Anderson, D. (2012). Is building relationships the key to leadership? Performance Improvement,
51(2), 15-21.
Andrews, M., Squire, C., & Tamboukou, M. (Eds.). (2013). Doing narrative research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Attenborough, R. (2001). The words of Gandhi. New York, NY: William Morrow and Company.
Bandura, A. (2006). Going global with social cognitive theory: From prospect to pay dirt.
Applied Psychology: New Frontiers and Rewarding Careers, 53-79.
Baughman, J. (2002). School libraries and MCAS scores, (preliminary edition). Boston:
Graduate School of Library and Information Science Simmons College. Retrieved from
web.simmons.edu/~baughman/mcas-school-libraries/Baughman%20Paper.pdf
Bell, S. (2009). DES daughters: Embodied knowledge and the transformation of women’s health
politics. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1985). The social space and the genesis of the group. Theory and Society, 14(6),
723–744.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory, 7(1), 14-25.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). The logic of practice. Cambridge, MA: Polity.

95

Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992). An introduction to reflexive sociology. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Boyatzis, R. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code
development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Caine, V., Estefan, A., & Clandinin, D. (2013). A return to methodological commitment:
Reflections on narrative inquiry. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 57(6),
574-586. doi:10.1080/00313831.2013.798833
Callison, D. (1997). Expanding collaboration for literacy promotion in public and school
libraries. Journal of Youth Services, 11, 37-48.
Callison, D. (1999). Keywords in instruction: Collaboration. School Library Media Activities
Monthly, 15(7), 37−39 (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. EDEJ608483).
Callison, D. (2003). Key words, concepts and methods for information age instruction: A guide to
teaching information inquiry. Baltimore, MD: LMS Associates.
Carmeli, A., Ben-Hador, B., Waldman, D. A., & Rupp, D. E. (2009). How leaders cultivate
social capital and nurture employee vigor: Implications for job performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 94(6), 1553-1561.
Chia, J. (2011). Communicating, connecting and developing social capital for sustainable
organisations and their communities. Australasian Journal of Regional Studies, 17(3),
330-351.
Chrobot-Mason, D., Gerbasi, A., & Cullen-Lester, K. L. (2016). Predicting leadership
relationships: The importance of collective identity. The Leadership Quarterly, 27(2),
298-311.

96

Church, A. (2008). The instructional role of the library media specialist as perceived by
elementary school principals. School Library Media Research, (11), 1-28.
Clandinin, D., & Connelly, F. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in qualitative
research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cohan, M. (2009). Bad apple: The social production and subsequent reeducation of a bad
teacher. Change, 41(6), 32-36.
Coleman J. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of
Sociology 94: S95-121.
Cooper, O., & Bray, M. (2011). School library media specialist-teacher collaboration:
Characteristics, challenges, opportunities. Techtrends: Linking Research & Practice to
Improve Learning, 55(4), 48-55. doi:10.1007/s11528-011-0511-y
Creswell, J. (2008). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative
and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill Prentice Hall.
Dedoose: Great Research Made Easy (Version 5.2.0) [Software]. (2014). Manhattan
Beach, CA: SocioCultural Research Consultants, LLC. Retrieved from
www.dedoose.com.
De Souza Briggs, X. (1997). Social capital and the cities: Advice to change agents. National
Civic Review, 86(2), 111-117.
Durkheim E. (1984). The division of labor in society. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Everhart, N., & Logan, D. (2005). Building the effective school library media center using the
student learning through Ohio school libraries research study. Knowledge Quest, 34(2),
51-54.
Ewbank, A. (2011). Advocacy for the school library media profession: Results of a U.S. national

97

survey. School Libraries Worldwide, 37(2), 41–58.
Ewbank, A. D., & Kwon, J. Y. (2015). School library advocacy literature in the United States:
An exploratory content analysis. Library and Information Science Research, (37), 236243. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2015.04.005
Field, J. (2003). Social Capital. London, England: Routledge.
Foote, C. (2015). The librarian-principal relationship. Teacher Librarian, (4), 27.
Foote, C., Vermette, P., Wisniewski, S., Agnello, A., & Pagano, C. (2000). The characteristics of
bad high school teachers reveal avoidable behaviors for new teachers. Education, 121(1),
128-134.
French, J. R., Jr., & Raven, B. (1959). The bases of social power. In D. Cartwright (Ed.), Studies
in social power (pp. 150-167). Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research.
Frey, B. B., Lohmeier, J. H., Lee, S. W., & Tollefson, N. (2006). Measuring collaboration among
grant partners. American Journal of Evaluation, 27(3), 383-392. doi:
10.1177/1098214006290356
Gallos, J.V. (2008). Business leadership: A Jossey-Bass reader. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gaver, M., V. (1961). Effectiveness of centralized library service in elementary schools (phase
I). The Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, (3), 245-256.
Goldring, R., & Taie, S. (2014). Principal attrition and mobility: Results from the 2012-13
principal follow-up survey. First look. NCES 2014-064. National Center for Education
Statistics. Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2014064rev
Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6), 1360–
1380. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776392
Green, C.H. (2006). Create trust, gain a client. Consulting to Management, 17(2), 27–36.

98

Greenleaf, R. K. (1977). Servant leadership. New York, NY: Paulist Press.
Guba, E. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquiries. Educational
Communication & Technology, 29(2), 75. doi:10.1007/BF02766777
Hackman, L. (2012). Love is not enough: Advocacy, influence and the development of archives.
Journal of The Society of Archivists, 33(1), 9-21. doi:10.1080/00379816.2012.666116
Hans, V. B. (2014). Social capital for holistic development: Issues and challenges in India. Nitte
Management Review, 8(1), 59-67.
Hardy, S., Gregory, S., & Ramjeet, J. (2009). An exploration of intent for narrative methods of
inquiry. Nurse Researcher, 16(4), 7-19.
Hart, G. (2007). Social capital: a fresh vision for public libraries in South Africa? South African
Journal of Library & Information Science, 73(1), 14-24.
Hartzell, G. (2002a). The principal's perceptions of school librarians and teacher librarians.
School Libraries Worldwide, 8(1), 92-110.
Hartzell, G. (2002b). White House conference on school libraries: What’s it take?
http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED472595 (Retrieved October 2016).
Haycock, K., & Stenström, C. (2016). Reviewing the research and evidence: towards best
practices for garnering support for school libraries. School Libraries Worldwide, 22(1),
127-142.
Heinsdorf, C. (2014). Testimony for the Alliance for Philadelphia Public Schools: Basic
Education Funding Commission. Retrieved from
www.schoollibraryadvocacy.org/.../bef_testimony-apps-11-14-14.doc
Hendry, P. (2010). Narrative as inquiry. Journal of Educational Research, 103(2), 72-80.

99

Horton, J., Millo, Y., & Serafeim, G. (2012). Resources or power? Implications of social
networks on compensation and firm performance. Journal of Business Finance &
Accounting, 39(3/4), 399-426. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5957.2011.02276.x
Houston, C. (2008). Getting to proficiency and beyond: Kentucky library media centers' progress
on state standards and the relationship of library media program variables to student
achievement. LIBRES: Library & Information Science Research Electronic Journal,
18(1), 1-18.
Hughes, H. (2014). School libraries, teacher-librarians and student outcomes: Presenting and
using the evidence. School Libraries Worldwide, 20(1), 29.
Husu, H. (2013). Bourdieu and social movements: Considering identity movements in terms of
field, capital and habitus. Social Movement Studies, 12(3), 264-279.
doi:10.1080/14742837.2012.704174
Illinois State Board of Education. (2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008).
Educator supply and demand report in Illinois. Springfield, IL: Illinois State Board of
Education. Retrieved from http://www.isbe.net/research/htmls/supply_and_demand.htm
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE). (2010). The role of school librarians
in promoting the use of educational technologies. Retrieved from
http://www.iste.org/docs/pdfs/the-role-of-school-librarians-in-promoting-the-use-ofeducational-technologies_9-10.pdf?sfvrsn=2
Johnson, S., Schnatterly, K., Bolton, J., & Tuggle, C. (2011). Antecedents of new director social
capital. Journal of Management Studies, 48(8), 1782-1803. doi:10.1111/j.14676486.2011.01020.
Josselson, R. (2003). Introduction. In R. Josselson, A. Lieblich, & D. McAdams (Eds.), Up close

100

and personal: The teaching and learning of narrative research (pp. 3- 12). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Kachel, D. (2016). School library champions. Teacher Librarian, 43(4), 55-57.
Kanter, R. M. (1979). Power failure in management circuits. Classics of organization theory,
342-351.
Kaplan, A. G. (2008). Is your school librarian highly qualified? Education Digest, 73(7), 17-20.
Kass, E. (2015). I was always the good girl: The twofold silencing of teachers as a force
fostering a low sense of professional self-efficacy, Gender and Education, 27(5), 487504. DOI: 10.1080/09540253.2015.1045456
Kerr, E. (2011). Engaging the decision-makers and the influencers. Teacher Librarian, 38(3), 6971.
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing.
Kouzes, J.M., & Posner, B.Z. (2007). Leadership challenge. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley &
Sons.
Kramer, P. K., & Diekman, L. (2010). Evidence = Assessment = Advocacy. Teacher Librarian,
37(3), 27-30.
Krashen, S. (2004). The power of reading. Westport, Connecticut: Libraries Unlimited.
Krashen, S., Syying, L., & McQuillan, J. (2010). An Analysis of the PIRLS (2006) Data: Can the
school library reduce the effect of poverty on reading achievement? CSLA Journal,
34(1), 26-28.
Kwon, S. & Adler, P. (2014). Social capital: Maturation of a field of research. Academy of
Management Review, 39(4), 412-422. doi:10.5465/amr.2014.0210

101

Lance, K. C. (1994). The impact of school library media centers on academic achievement.
School Library Media Quarterly, 22(3), 167–172).
Lance, K. C. (2001). Proof of the power: Quality library media programs affect academic
achievement. Retrieved November 19, 2008, from
http://www.infotoday.com/MMSchools/sep01/lance.htm
Lance, K. C. (2002a). Impact of School Library Media Programs on Academic Achievement.
Teacher Librarian, 29(3), 29.
Lance, K. C. (2002b). What research tells us about the importance of school libraries. White
House Conference on School Libraries. Washington, DC: Institute of Museum and
Library Services. Retrieved November 19, 2007, from
http://www.imls.gov/news/events/whitehouse_2.shtm#kcl
Lance, K. C., Hamilton-Pennell, C., & Rodney, M. J. (1999). Information powered: The school
librarian as an agent of academic achievement in Alaska. Executive summary. Retrieved
November 19, 2008, from http://www.library.state.ak.us/pdf/anc/infoemxs.pdf
Lance, K. C. & Loertscher, D.V. (2002). Powering achievement: School library media programs
make a difference: The evidence mounts (2nd ed.). San Jose, CA: Hi Willow Research
Publishing.
Lance, K.C., Rodney, M.J., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2000). How school librarians help kids
achieve standards: The second Colorado study. San Jose, CA: Hi Willow Research and
Publishing.
Lance, K. C., Rodney, M. J., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2001). Good schools have school library
media specialists: Oregon SLMSs collaborate to improve academic achievement. Salem,
OR: Oregon Educational Media Association.

102

Lance, K. C., Rodney, M. J., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2002). How school libraries improve
outcomes for children: The New Mexico study. Salt Lake City, UT: Hi Willow.
Lance, K. C., Rodney, M. J., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2005). Powerful libraries make powerful
learners: The Illinois study. Canton, IL: Illinois School Library Media Association.
Retrieved November 19, 2008, from http://www.islma.org/pdf/ILStudy2.pdf
Lance, K. C., & Russell, B. (2004). Scientifically based research on school libraries and
academic achievement: What is it? How much do we have? How can we do it better.
Knowledge Quest, 32(5), 13−17.
Lance, K. C., Welborn, L., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (1997). Impact of school library media
centers on academic achievement. Hi Willow: Castle Rock, CO.
Leonard, M. (2004). Bonding and bridging social capital: Reflections from Belfast. Sociology,
(5). 927.
Lin, N. (1999). Building a network theory of social capital. Connections, 22(1), 28-51.
Lingaiah, V., Murugan, K., & Dhanavandan, S. (2013). Next generation library services using
social networking tools in academic libraries. International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer Science, 4(11), 158-161.
Loertscher, D., & Marcoux, E. (2015). Learning commons progress report. Teacher Librarian,
42(3), 8-11.
Lubelfeld, M., Bullis, B., & Filippi, J. (2016). I hear what you're saying ... and I respect you!
AASA Journal of Scholarship & Practice, (2), 44
Martin, J. (2003). What is field theory? American Journal of Sociology, 109(1), pp. 1–49.
McLester, S. (2013). Transitions to digital media: are school libraries on the way out? District
Administration, (3), 57-61.

103

Moen, M. (2015). An evolving role: the job of the school library media specialist is undoubtedly
changing--making collaboration more important than ever. Reading Today, (4), 20-21.
Morrison, O. (2015, March, 17). Number of libraries dwindles in N.Y.C. schools: City’s number
fell by more than half. Education Week. Retrieved from
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2015/03/18/number-of-libraries-dwindle-in-nycschools.html
National Art Education Association. (n.d.). The visual arts: So much more than what you see.
Retrieved from http://www.arteducators.org/advocacy/ARTS_ED_e-FLYER_3.pdf
National Association for Music Education. (n.d.). Position Statements: Advocacy and the Music
Educator. Retrieved from http://www.nafme.org/about/position-statements/advocacyand-the-music-educator-position-statement/advocacy-and-the-music-educator/
New York State Education Department. (2013). TEACH: Tenure user manual. Retrieved from
http://www.highered.nysed.gov/tcert/pdf/teachteachertenureguide.pdf
New York State Education Department. (2016). Guidance on New York State’s annual
professional performance review for teachers and principals to implement education law
3012-c and the commissioner’s regulations. Retrieved from
https://www.engageny.org/resource/guidance-on-new-york-s-annual-professionalperformance-review-law-and-regulations
New York State School Board Association. (2017). BOCES Fact Sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.nyssba.org/about-nyssba/boces-fact-sheet/
Oberg, D. (2006). Developing the respect and support of school administrators. Teacher
Librarian, 33(3), 13.

104

Pasek, J., More, E., & Romer, D. (2009). Realizing the social internet? Online social networking
meets offline civic engagement. Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 6(3/4),
197-215.
Pénard, T., & Poussing, N. (2010). Internet use and social capital: the strength of virtual ties.
Journal of Economic Issues, 44(3), 569-595. doi:10.2753/JEI0021-3624440301
Pfeffer, J. (1992). Managing with power: Politics and influence in organizations. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard Business Press.
Polit, D., & Hungler, B. (1991). Nursing research principles and methods. Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania: J.B. Lippincott.
Portes, A. (1998). Social capital: Its origins and applications in modern sociology. Annual
Review of Sociology, 1.
Putnam, R. (1995). Bowling alone: America's declining social capital. Journal of Democracy, 6,
65-78
Putnam, R. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New
York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Raver, J. L., & Nishii, L. H. (2010). Once, twice, or three times as harmful? Ethnic harassment,
gender harassment, and generalized workplace harassment. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 95(2), 236-254.
Rodney, M., Lance, K., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2002). Make the connection: Quality school
library media programs impact academic achievement in Iowa. Bettendorf, IA: Iowa
Area Education Agencies. Retrieved from
http://www.iowaaeaonline.org/pages/uploaded_files/Make%20The%20Connection.pdf

105

Rodney, M., Lance, K., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2003). The impact of Michigan school libraries
on academic achievement: Kids who have libraries succeed. Lansing, MI: Library of
Michigan. Retrieved from http://wayback.archiveit.org/418/20150104053005/http://www.michigan.gov/documents/hal_lm_schllibstudy03
_76626_7.pdf
Rostila, M. (2011). The facets of social capital. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour,
41(3), 308-326.
Rothwell, W.J., & Kazanas, H.C. (2008). Mastering the instructional design process: A
systematic approach (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Scholastic, Inc. (2015) School Libraries Work! A Compendium of Research Supporting the
Effectiveness of School Libraries (2016 Edition).
Seibert, S., Kramer, M., & Laden, R. (2001). A social capital theory of career success. Academy
of Management Journal, 44(2), 219. doi:10.2307/3069452
Small, R., Snyder, J., & Parker, K. (2009). The impact of New York’s school libraries on student
achievement and motivation: Phase I. American Association of School Librarians.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/aasl/slmr/volume12/small-snyder-parker
Smith, E. (2006). Student learning through Wisconsin school library media centers: Library
media specialist survey report. Austin, TX: EGS Research and Consulting. Retrieved
from http://dpi.wi.gov/sites/default/files/imce/imt/pdf/finallmssurvey06.pdf
Smith, M. (2009). Social capital: The encyclopedia of informal education. Retrieved from
http://infed.org/mobi/social-capital/

106

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (2015). Position statement: Physical education is an
academic subject. Retrieved from
http://www.shapeamerica.org/advocacy/positionstatements/pe/
Spence, L., Schmidpeter, R., & Habisch, A. (2003). Assessing social capital: Small and medium
sized enterprises in Germany and the U.K. Journal of Business Ethics, 47(1), 17-29.
Stevens, K. (2014). Tenured teacher dismissal in New York: Education Law § 3020-a:
Disciplinary procedures and penalties. October 2. Retrieved from
http://www.aei.org/publication/tenured-teacher-dismissal-in-new-york/
Stevenson, W., & Radin, R. (2009). Social capital and social influence on the board of directors.
Journal of Management Studies, 46(1), 16-44. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2008.00800.x
Summers, L., Lohr, L., & O’Neil, C. (2002). Building instructional design credibility through
communication competency. Tech Trends, 46(1), 26–32.
Todd, R. J. (2015). Evidence-based practice and school libraries: Interconnections of evidence,
advocacy, and actions. Knowledge Quest, 43(3), 8-15.
Todd, R., & Heinstrom, J. (2006). Report of phase two of Delaware school library survey:
Student learning through Delaware school libraries. New Brunswick, NJ: Center for
International Scholarship in School Libraries, Rutgers University. Retrieved from
http://www2.lib.udel.edu/taskforce/study/phasetwo.pdf
Todd, R., & Kuhlthau, C. (2004). Student learning through Ohio school libraries: Background,
methodology and report of findings. Columbus, OH: OELMA. Retrieved from
http://www.oelma.org/career-resources/ohio-research-study/2-uncategorised/30-projectoverview
Todd, R., Kuhlthau, C., & OELMA (2004). Student learning through Ohio school libraries.

107

Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265043672_Student_Learning_Through_Ohio_
School_Libraries_Part_1_How_Effective_School_Libraries_Help_Students
Tjosvold, D., & Wisse, B. (Eds.). (2009). Power and interdependence in organizations.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). (2017). Advocacy toolkit: A guide to influencing
decisions that improve children’s lives. Retrieved from
https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/files/Advocacy_Toolkit.pdf
van den Brink, R., & Steffen, F. (2012). Axiomatizations of a positional power score and
measure for hierarchies. Public Choice, (3/4). 757.
VanTuyle, V., & Watkins, S. (2012). Teacher librarians as connectors to the school CEO. School
Libraries Worldwide, 18(1), 111-122.
Wagner, T., & Kegan, R. (2006). Change leadership: A practical guide to transforming our
schools. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Webster, L., & Mertova, P. (2007). Using narrative inquiry as a research method: An
introduction to using critical event narrative analysis in research on learning and
teaching. London, England: Routledge.
Yejung, L., Jungi, P., & Jungwoo, L. (2013). Role of leadership competencies and team social
capital in IT services. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 53(4), 1-11.
Young, S., & Rossmann, D. (2015). Building library community through social media.
Information Technology & Libraries, 34(1), 20-37.
Zmuda, A., & Harada, V. (2008). Librarians as learning specialists: Moving from the margins to
the mainstream of school leadership. Teacher Librarian, 36(1), 15-20.

108

Appendices
Appendix A: SLSA Bylaws

School Library Systems Association of New York State Bylaws
Article I. Designation
Section 1. Status
The School Library Systems Association (SLSA) of New York State is an incorporated,
nonprofit organization with 501(c)(3) status.
Section 2. Membership
SLSA is comprised of School Library Systems (SLS) throughout the state. Each School
Library System (SLS) Director, from a SLS in good standing, shall be a voting
representative of the member system. Membership also entitles the SLS Director access
to the SLSA listserv, the password protected portion of the SLSA website and all meeting
documents and other pertinent information.
Section 3. Standing
A SLS will be a member in good standing if the membership dues or purchase order are
received by October 31st or have been waived by the Executive Board.
Section 4. Term of membership
Membership is from November 1-October 31.
Article II. Officers
Section 1. Eligibility
Voting members of SLSA are eligible to be officers. The President and the PresidentElect shall not be from the same region whenever possible.
Section 2. Terms of Office and Time of Election
The terms of office begin at the annual meeting as defined in Article V, Section 2.
Annual Meeting and shall be as follows:
President – One year, automatically succeeds to office.
President-Elect - One year, elected annually.
Vice President for Advocacy – Two years, elected odd numbered years.
Secretary – Two years, elected even numbered years.
Treasurer – Two years, elected odd numbered years.
Immediate Past President – One year.
Section 3. Vacancy in Office
In the event of a vacancy in the office of President, the President-Elect shall complete
the unexpired portion of the President’s term before automatically succeeding to the full
year as President. A vacancy in the office of President-Elect shall be filled by a special
election in accordance with Article IV. Election of Officers. Vacancies in other offices
Page 1 of 6
7
/dyeomans

109

shall be filled by the Executive Board, except for the office of Immediate Past President,
which shall remain vacant.
Section 4. Emergency Action
Emergency decisions requiring immediate action may be made by the President, the
President-Elect, the Secretary and the Treasurer, acting as a Committee. The Executive
Board shall be advised immediately of such decisions.
Section 5. Duties of Officers
The officers shall perform the duties pertaining to their respective offices including the
duties specified in these bylaws and such other duties as may be approved by the
Executive Board.
President
The President is the official spokesperson for the organization. He/she will
articulate and endeavor to fulfill the vision, mission and goals as defined by the
membership and the Executive Board.
The President shall work closely with the President-Elect preparing documents
which articulate the vision, mission and goals of the organization.
The President shall endeavor to develop a collective sense on issues of concern
and be alert to opportunities which lead to organizational consensus.
The President shall prepare agendas, preside at all meetings of the organization
and the Executive Board, appoint the chairperson of all committees and carry out
the directives of the organization. Tentative agendas shall be distributed no later
than one month prior to any meeting.
President-Elect
In the absence of the President, the President-Elect shall preside at all meetings
of the organization and the Executive Board, succeed to the Presidency in the
event a vacancy occurs, and complete the unexpired portion of the President’s
term.
The President-Elect shall work closely with the President preparing documents
which articulate the vision, mission and goals of the organization.
The President-Elect shall make arrangements for meeting rooms and
refreshments for all meetings, schedule any guest speakers or programs, when
appropriate, and coordinate all ongoing committees.
Vice President for Advocacy
The Vice President for Advocacy shall serve as a SLSA representative and if
possible, as an at-large voting member on the New York Library Association
(NYLA) Legislative Committee. In addition, the Vice President for Advocacy shall
Page 2 of 6
7
/dyeomans

110

keep the general membership informed of advocacy issues and assist with
legislative position papers.
Secretary
The Secretary shall maintain the correspondence and records of the
organization, keep and distribute minutes of all meetings to the general
membership for General Membership and Executive Board meetings no later
than one month after the meeting(s).
Treasurer
The Treasurer shall keep financial records of the organization, deposit all funds
in the account of the organization, and disperse funds when authorized by the
Executive Board.
The Treasurer shall submit written reports at each scheduled meeting, at the end
of the fiscal year and also at the request of the President.
The Treasurer shall provide a general invoice on the SLSA web site for SLS
annual membership dues and any other dues by September 1.
Immediate Past President
The Immediate Past President shall serve as Parliamentarian and ensure that
all articles of the SLSA bylaws are enforced.
Regional Representatives
Each regional representative is responsible for representing all the SLS Directors
in his/her region and for facilitating two-way communication between the
organization and the region.
ARTICLE III. Executive Board
Section 1. Executive Board
The Executive Board shall consist of the following members:
President
President-Elect
Immediate Past President
Secretary
Treasurer
Vice President for Advocacy
Regional Representatives from nine regions

(voting member)
(voting member)
(voting member)
(voting member)
(voting member)
(voting member)
(voting members)

Section 2. Regional Representative Selection
The SLS Directors from each of the nine regions shall elect one voting representative.
Selection shall take place prior to the annual meeting of the organization beginning with
the following three-year schedule:
Page 3 of 6
7
/dyeomans

111

2012
Metro
Capital District
South Central

2013
Western
Central New York
Rochester

2014
Long Island
North Country
Southeastern

Terms of office for representatives shall be three years rotating from above schedule
with terms beginning immediately following the close of the annual meeting. The
regional representative term dates may be rolled over as they expire and do not require
a vote by the membership. If a regional representative is elected to an Executive Board
position, the region will select a new representative to fill the remaining term. In the
event that a regional representative is unable to attend an Executive Board meeting
another SLS Director, from their region, may attend in their place.
Section 3. Meetings
The Executive Board shall meet at least four times a year, one meeting of which shall
be held adjacent to (or shortly before) the annual meeting. Meetings of the Executive
Board may be held on call by the President or on petition of four (4) or more Executive
Board members. The Executive Board may conduct business by electronic
teleconferencing that allows all persons participating in the meeting from different
locations to hear each other at the same time. Participation by such means shall
constitute presence in person at the meeting. Voting during an electronic meeting shall
be conducted by alphabetical roll call. Action taken by mail or by electronic means shall
be part of the minutes of the next regular meeting of the Executive Board.
Section 4. Absences by Executive Board Members
If an elected member of the Executive Board is absent from two consecutive Executive
Board meetings without valid explanation, the position shall be declared vacant by the
Executive Board. In the case of regional representatives, the region represented selects
a new representative to fill the remaining term. The Executive Board will elect
representatives for non-regional positions that have been declared vacant, as outlined
in ARTICLE II, Section 3. Vacancy in Office.
ARTICLE IV. Election of Officers
Section 1. Eligibility for Nomination
Nominees must be Directors of SLS in good standing.
Section 2. Procedures for Election
A slate of nominees for President-Elect, Vice President for Advocacy, Secretary and
Treasurer will be drawn up and distributed by the nominating committee two months
prior to the annual meeting. At that time and within five working days, names of
additional candidates may be submitted to the nominating committee for consideration.
Within five working days of receiving the final slate of candidates, the Secretary shall
send by U.S. mail, fax, or email a ballot to each voting SLS Director.
Page 4 of 6
7
/dyeomans

112

The SLS Director shall mark the ballot and return it to the Secretary by U.S. Mail, fax or
as an attached document in an email no later than three working days prior to the
annual meeting. The results of the election shall be announced at the annual meeting.
Section 3. Special Election in event of Vacancy in Office of President-Elect
If the office of President-Elect becomes vacant, the nominating committee shall
convene to nominate a new President-Elect prior to the next general membership
meeting.
ARTICLE V. Meetings
Section 1. General Membership Meetings
At least two meetings of the general membership shall be held each year, one of which
shall be the annual meeting. Meetings may be held in conjunction with the NYLA Annual
Conference, the SSL (Section of School Librarians) Annual Conference and the SLSA
Spring Institute.
Section 2.
Annual Meeting
The annual meeting shall be held in conjunction with at the NYLA Annual Conference.
ARTICLE VI. Special Committees and Appointments
Section 1. Establishment of Special Committees and Appointments
Special committees and appointment positions may be established by the Executive
Board as needed. Duties of such committees shall be determined by the Executive
Board. The chairperson of each committee shall be named by the Association President
or elected by committee members.
Section 2. Committee Membership and Appointments
Committee and appointed members may volunteer or be appointed by the Chair of the
Committee and only members of this organization are eligible for committee
membership. The Association President shall be an ex-officio member of all committees
except the nominating committee.
Section 3. Committee Chairpersons and Appointment Responsibilities
Committee chairpersons and appointed representatives shall perform the duties as
charged including notifying all members of meeting dates and submitting a written report
to all members within three weeks after each meeting.
Section 4. Nominating Committee
At the annual meeting, the Chair of the nominating committee shall be appointed by the
School Library Systems Association President. The committee shall consist of the
President-Elect and at least two other members chosen by the membership during this
annual meeting. The nominating committee shall serve for the following year. Other
members who hold an elected position are ineligible to serve on the nominating
committee.
Page 5 of 6
7
/dyeomans

113

ARTICLE VII.

Amendment of the Bylaws

These bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds vote of those members present at a general
membership meeting, after consideration by the Executive Board and after written notice to the
membership at least 30 days prior to the general membership meeting.
Adopted:
Amended:
Amended:
Amended:
Amended:
Amended:
Amended:

October 27, 1999
November 5, 2003
June 9, 2004
April 27, 2006
April 29, 2009
April 29, 2010
November 2, 2011

Page 6 of 6
7
/dyeomans

114

Appendix B: School Library System Regulation
§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

Library Development
NYCRR TITLE 8 - EDUCATION
§90.18 School library systems (amended, effective January 8, 2009)
(a) Definitions.
(1) The term school library system as used in this section means:
(i) an organization of school districts and nonpublic schools cooperating with a
board of cooperative educational services (BOCES) to provide library
coordination and/or services to member school library media centers under a
school library system plan of service approved by the commissioner; or
(ii) the city school district of New York City, Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse or
Yonkers, which has responsibility for the development of public school library
media centers in accordance with the standards established in Part 91 of this
Title in its individual schools, and which provides library media coordination
and/or services to such schools and to nonpublic school library media centers
under a school library system plan of service approved by the commissioner.
(2) Nonpublic school library media center means a collection of informational materials
located in an area in the school devoted to library media service for the students and faculty
and under the supervision of a designated member of the school staff.
(3) Member of a school library system means a school district or nonpublic school
enumerated in a school library system plan of service approved by the commissioner.
(4) Participant in a school library system means a school library media center in a
member of a school library system.
(5) For the purpose of determining eligibility for State aid to a school library system
pursuant to section 284 of the Education Law, enrollment means the total number of pupils
enrolled in the schools in a school library system service area on the first day of October of
the base year as defined in section 3602 (l)(b) of the Education Law.
(6) Certified school library media specialist means a licensed teacher of library in the
city school district of the city of New York, a licensed school library media specialist in the
city school district of the city of Buffalo, or the holder of a school media specialist (library)
certificate, or a predecessor of such certificate, in all other school districts and BOCES.
(7) Coordinator of a school library system means a certified school library media
specialist with a minimum of three years employment as a school library media specialist
and possessing a valid school administrator and supervisor (S.A.S.) certificate or a valid
school building leader (S.B.L.) certificate in accordance with part 80-3.10 of this Title.
(b) Governance.

http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 1 of 6

115

§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

(1) The board of cooperative educational services or the board of education of the city school
district shall be the governing board of the school library system. In the case of a school
library system serving a combination of BOCES and/or city school districts, one BOCES or
city school district shall be designated as the official administrative agency. Each such board
shall appoint members to the first school library system council, including nonpublic school
representation, shall act as fiscal agent, and shall submit the plan of service to the
commissioner for approval.
(2) School library system council.
(i) each school library system shall have a school library system council, which
shall meet at least four times a year. Such school library system council shall be
composed of at least nine members, and shall include representatives of the
members in the school library system and other representatives of providers
and users of library services in the school library system. The plan of service
shall specify the method of appointment of the school library system council.
The school library system council members shall serve three-year terms, and
shall be appointed in a manner as to provide that, as nearly as possible, onethird of the members of the council shall be appointed each year. A vacancy on
the school library system council shall be filled by the governing board for the
duration of the term of the individual whose seat on the council is to be filled.
Members shall serve without compensation.
(ii) The governing board and the council shall be responsible for development of
the plan of service. Upon approval by the council, the governing board shall
submit the plan to the commissioner for approval. After approval by the
commissioner, it shall be the responsibility of the governing board and the
council to monitor the implementation of the plan of service.
(c) Plan of service.
(1) Content. A BOCES or board of education of an eligible city school district or combination
of BOCES and/or eligible city school districts seeking funding as a school library system shall
submit to the commissioner a plan of service approved by the school library system council
in the form prescribed by him or her. The plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(i) identification of all school districts and nonpublic schools, both members and
non-members, and their school library media centers, within the service area of
the school library system;
(ii) statement of the policies and procedures to be used for selection of the
school library system council members, indicating how such policies and
procedures assure that the council is broadly representative of the providers
and users of school library media services;
(iii) the means to be established for locating and accessing library media
materials by all the participants through a machine-readable catalog which will
be consistent with standards for regional bibliographic data bases set forth in
section 90.19 of this Part;
(iv) procedures for accepting, verifying and responding to the requests for
http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 2 of 6

116

§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

interlibrary loan, and a description of the delivery system for sharing library
media materials;
(v) identification of the staffing patterns that will support the system, including
the advisory services to be available to its members;
(vi) the means by which the school library system will assure compatibility in
its computerized and other technical operations with those of other library
systems of the State as specified in section 90.19(e) of this Part;
(vii) identification of special client group needs, and the means for meeting
them;
(viii) the means by which the school library system will assure continuing needs
assessment and program development, including staff development needs, and
the appropriate activities to meet those needs;
(ix) the plan for cooperative collection development implementation;
(x) procedures for promoting awareness of resources and services among
system members and participants;
(xi) procedures for encouraging communication among members and
participants regarding effective practices and cooperative projects;
(xii) procedures for an annual evaluation by participants of programs and
services, for an annual report to members and other appropriate groups on
system programs and activities, and a description of how the results of the
annual evaluation will be used to plan future programs and services;
(xiii) procedures for evaluating the appropriateness of cooperating with other
library systems to provide more effective and efficient delivery of services to
the members and participants in both systems; and
(xiv) a description of the responsibilities of the communications coordinators
representing the member public school districts and nonpublic schools.
(2) Criteria for approval.
(i) No plan of service of a school library system shall be approved unless there
is evidence that the plan was developed collaboratively with the administrators
and school library media specialists of the schools in the area to be served.
(ii) No plan of service shall be approved unless it provides a method by which
members of the school library system are obligated to permit the interlibrary
loan of books and materials to other members of the school library system and
to members of other systems with which the school library system has
reciprocal interlibrary loan agreements, except for materials not loaned within a
participating district or school.
(3) Revision. The plan of service of each school library system shall be effective for a period
of five years. Subsequent revisions thereof shall be filed no later than April 30 for
implementation in the school year beginning the following July 1. Plans and revisions shall

http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 3 of 6

117

§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

be approved by the council, the governing board and the commissioner.
(d) System staffing. Each school library system shall employ a full time coordinator of the
school library system. School library systems, or combinations thereof, with the enrollment
of 200,000 students or more, shall employ at least an additional 0.5 full time equivalent
certified school library media specialist for each additional 100,000 students, or major
fraction thereof, to assist the coordinator in designated school library system activities. At
least one full-time clerical staff member shall be assigned to each coordinator. Other
professional and support staff members shall be employed as necessary to execute school
library system functions. The adequacy of the staff in relation to the plan of service activities
shall be determined by the commissioner.
(e) Functions of the system coordinator. The school library system coordinator will be
responsible for the following aspects of the school library system, including, but not limited
to:
(1) creation, updating and maintenance of a union catalog in appropriate format;
(2) establishment and use of interlibrary loan procedures, including delivery and policy;
(3) development and implementation of a cooperative collection development plan;
(4) planning of professional staff development and other continuing education activities;
(5) ongoing communications with the communications coordinators, with the school library
system council, and with other school or community personnel or agencies;
(6) development of a specialized collection of selection and verification tools for use by
system members;
(7) planning periodic meetings between the school library system council and
communications coordinators;
(8) serving as advisor to member school library media staff, school districts and nonpublic
schools on program development and improvement and assisting with development and
updating of members' plans developed pursuant to paragraph (f)(4) of this section;
(9) serving as liaison to appropriate State Education Department offices concerning system
and member needs and other matters;
(10) development of cooperative activities with other school library systems, public library
systems and the reference and research library resources system;
(11) conducting periodic technical assistance visits to members and participants;
(12) planning and conducting procedures for data gathering and reporting; and
(13) preparing annually a budget application, on forms prescribed by the commissioner, to
be approved by the school library system council and governing board, and such budget
shall be filed with the department no later than April 30 of each year for approval and
release of State aid in the next school year.
(f) Membership. (1) All school districts and nonpublic schools located within a BOCES
supervisory district which has established a school library system shall be eligible for
http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 4 of 6

118

§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

membership in such school library system, provided that each such member shall designate
a certified school library media specialist as the communications coordinator to the school
library system. The communications coordinator shall implement the procedures to be
followed in the district, within the general guidelines and procedures determined by the
school library system, regarding data collection for union lists, cooperative collection
development, other system requirements, intra-district and inter-district loan requests, and
necessary reports. The communications coordinator shall keep other school library media
specialists and staff of the members informed of school library system policies, procedures,
activities, and services. Time to perform communications coordinator duties shall be
provided by the member district or nonpublic school. The communications coordinator shall
have an outside telephone line, telefacsimile, computer with internet access and e-mail, and
access to photoduplication facilities.
(2) Within school library systems established by the city school districts of Buffalo, New York
City, Rochester, Syracuse and Yonkers, a certified school library media specialist shall be
designated as communications coordinator to the school library system from each zone,
representative area, or other internal subdivision of the city school district used for school
organization as designated in the plan of service. Nonpublic school members shall designate
a representative to serve as communications coordinator between such nonpublic school
members and the school library system.
(3) Each member school district and nonpublic school of a school library system shall permit
the interlibrary loan of books and other library materials to other members of the school
library system or members of other systems with which the school library system has
reciprocal agreements, except for materials not otherwise loaned by such member.
(4) Member plan. At least once during the five-year period of each plan of service, each
school district and nonpublic school member, and in New York City any internal subdivision of
the city school district used for school organization, shall file with the system a plan which
shows how district and building library resources and programs meet the needs of students
and teachers and describes the ways in which it proposes to make effective use of the
system. Such plan shall include:
(i) a description of existing library resources and services in a format
established by the school library system;
(ii) procedures for prompt and efficient communication among school library
media specialists and reporting to other members of the school community
regarding system policies, procedures and services;
(iii) provisions for periodic reporting, at least annually, to the governing body of
the school district or nonpublic school and to the administration, regarding
participation of the member in system services;
(iv) assurance by the member and its participants that adequate qualified staff
is available to organize and administer the library media program and fulfill
system responsibilities.
(5) Each member and each participant shall have a minimum library collection as follows:
under 200 pupils, 1,000 volumes;
http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 5 of 6

119

§90.18 School library systems:Regulations of the Commissioner of Educ…ies, Library Systems, Trustees and Librarians:New York State Library

2/2/17, 3(44 PM

200-500 pupils, 3,000 volumes;
501-1,000 pupils, 5,000 volumes;
over 1,000 pupils, 8,000 volumes.
Approval may be granted by the commissioner for a variance from the requirements of this
paragraph upon receipt of adequate assurance that a plan of acquisitions will eliminate the
deficiency.
(6) Each school library system member shall provide school library system personnel access
to the bibliographic records of its school library media centers for purposes of creating and
maintaining a school library system union catalog.
(g) Reports. By September 30th of each year, each school library system shall transmit to
the department an annual report for the year ending on June 30th of the previous school
year, in such form as shall be prescribed by the commissioner, and such other progress
reports as may be required by the commissioner. Such annual report shall include an
evaluation by participants and shall be approved by the department.
Section statutory authority: Education Law, § 284, § 3602
Statutory authority: Education Law, §§ 207-208, 215, 253-268, 271-273, 273-a, 282, 283,
284, 285; L. 1978, ch. 787, L 1993 Ch 260, §§ 1, 3
Last reviewed: March 15, 2010

http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm

Page 6 of 6

120

Appendix C: What is BOCES?
New York State School Boards Association

2/2/17, 3(53 PM

BOCES Fact Sheet
New York State Boces Listsing (PDF)
Everything You Wanted To Know About BOCES
(but didn’t know who to ask)
What is BOCES?
BOCES stands for Board of Cooperative Educational Services. BOCES are public organizations that were created by the New York
State Legislature in 1948 to provide shared educational programs and services to school districts.
How do the BOCES programs work?
BOCES services are created when two or more school districts determine they have similar needs that can be met by a shared
program. BOCES help school districts save money by providing opportunities to pool resources and share costs.
Sharing is an economical way for districts to provide programs and services that they might not be able to afford otherwise. It is usually
more efficient and less costly to operate one central service than it is to have separate programs in each school district. However,
BOCES services are often customized, offering districts the flexibility to meet their individual needs.
How is BOCES governed?
Each BOCES is governed by a board of education that is made up of representatives from component school districts. They are elected
by component boards of education. BOCES board members are responsible for curricular, financial and other policy decisions, just as
they are at the local level.
I know BOCES provides special education programs and career/technical programs, but does BOCES offer other services?
BOCES provides many different types of programs, although Special Education and Career and Technical Education are usually the
largest programs. Other services available through BOCES fall into the categories of Technology, Professional Development, Adult
Education and Management Services. The numbers and types of services offered change continuously as component districts’ needs
and requests evolve.
Who decides which BOCES services to purchase?
Local boards of education review their district’s needs each year and make decisions about BOCES services. Because districts’ needs
change every year, decisions about BOCES services may also change every year. The decision about whether to participate in each
BOCES service is based on the unique needs of each district. If a district doesn’t need a BOCES service, it doesn’t request it and does
not pay for it.
Why do school districts participate in BOCES services?
Because BOCES services are shared by two or more school districts, they generally cost much less than if districts provided the
services on their own. Districts pool their resources and share the savings.
How are BOCES services paid for?
BOCES have no taxing authority. An administrative charge is assessed in proportion to each component district’s size, but most
BOCES revenue is from the fees charged component districts for the BOCES services they have chosen to use. BOCES expenses are
incorporated into each district’s annual budget. State aid helps to offset some of the cost, and other services are directly funded by the
state or federal government.
What is BOCES aid, who gets it, and why?
New York State gives a financial incentive to encourage participation in shared services by offering BOCES state aid for BOCES
services. This is how BOCES state aid works:
Each district’s board of education selects BOCES services for the current year. In the following school year, a portion of the cost of
BOCES services is returned to the district by the State of New York. The amount returned to each district depends on which services
the district buys and is based on a formula that takes into account the district’s financial resources. Money returned to the district is
http://www.nyssba.org/index.php?src=gendocs&ref=BOCES+Fact+Sheet&category=about_nyssba&print=y

121

Page 1 of 2

New York State School Boards Association

2/2/17, 3(53 PM

used as revenue.
What BOCES services do not generate BOCES aid for local districts?
Special education services from BOCES do not earn BOCES aid for local districts, but local districts do receive Excess Cost Aid to
offset some of the costs of special education. Also, some expenses within services may not be aided. Other services that do not qualify
for BOCES aid are student transportation, services funded from other sources, consumables and adult education. The amount of aid
varies from district to district. Statewide, BOCES administrative and capital expenses are 40% covered by BOCES aid and service
agreements are 21% covered by BOCES aid.
Do BOCES students graduate from high school?
BOCES does not confer high school diplomas. Most Career and Technical students and some special education students graduate
from their local districts with Regents diplomas.

http://www.nyssba.org/index.php?src=gendocs&ref=BOCES+Fact+Sheet&category=about_nyssba&print=y

122

Page 2 of 2

Appendix D: Straw vote for participation
This document is for the October 2015 SLSA business meeting. The following is an
executive summary and a brief description of my research concept and procedures. I would
appreciate a straw vote to be taken that shows whether SLSA directors would be interested in
participation.
Executive Summary
The field of school librarianship has an associated body of advocacy literature primarily
focused on raising awareness to the benefits of having an appropriately staffed school library
media center with teacher librarians, however, the same cannot be said of social capital.
There has been some important work done in the library and information science (LIS)
field on the development and use of social capital in public libraries, although the majority of
research studies come from outside of LIS. Yet, no study has examined the development of
social capital by school library system directors or teacher librarians. The purpose of this
study is to fill the void in the literature by exploring how school library system directors and
teacher librarians develop and use social capital, and the role of social capital in advancing
agendas, allocating resources, and gaining institutional support.
* For the purposes of this study, social capital will be defined as: relationships matter--with
benefits accruing from and residing in social connections.
Interviews
Sources of Research Material.
This study will probe for critical incidents in the participant’s career, through a series of
semi-structured, in-depth interviews. The researcher will explore the areas of career
progression, and the development, use and role that social capital plays in advancing
agendas, allocating resources, and gaining institutional support through narrative inquiry.
The researcher acknowledges that inclusion in the study will be an imposition to the
participant. The benefits of this study will be made clear to the participant during the initial
solicitation e-mail. By participating, the individual will be contributing to the body of
literature on social capital in general, and will gain insight into the processes surrounding the
acquisition and expenditure of social capital and its implications for gaining influence as a
library director.
123

Anticipated Risks. None
Protection Against Risks.
Although there are no identifiable risks associated with the study, data from the
interviews will be protected. Subjects will be assigned numbers that match with their college
data and kept in a locked room in the SUNY Oneonta Director’s Office. Once the study has
been completed, these data and all identifiable data will be shredded and destroyed.

124

Appendix E: SLSA endorsement of concept

125

Appendix F: Invitational e-mail
May 25, 2016
Dear Director,
I am conducting a research study and would love to chat with you for 45+- minutes
sometime prior to July 4 if at all possible. An introduction to my research study was brought to
you this past fall at a meeting and roundly endorsed for director participation. Thanks!
The purpose of this study is to study how school library system directors develop and use
social capital, and the role of social capital in advancing agendas, allocating resources, and
gaining institutional support.
* Social capital development begins with relationships. From these relationships access to
resources and social networks are gained.
You are invited to participate in an interview because you are a library director in New
York State. Your help in this study would be greatly appreciated. After you consent to the
interview and we agree upon a time, I will send you a consent form and basic information
pertaining to the study.
Please take a look at your schedule and pencil in options via the Doodle link. It won't be
very painful and the research may actually be useful on some level once my dissertation has been
completed.
Doodle Link:
Thanks,
Chuck O'Bryan, Library Director
State University of New York
College at Oneonta

126

Appendix G: Interview Questions for Directors
My primary interest is learning about the development of Social Capital and its use by School
Librarians. For the purpose of this study, Social Capital is defined as capital residing within the
relationships between people, allowing access to previously unattainable information, resources
and opportunities.
Please answer as many of the questions as you wish based on your own experience. Your
participation is voluntary. You may decline to participate or discontinue your participation at any
time.
(1)
Please share with me one of your critical incidents you first encountered in your present
position when you developed social capital. A critical incident usually
involves change or
challenging experiences, tipping points, or defining moments.
•

Questions
Describe the situation or incident?

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

(2)

Sub-questions
What was the context and how did
the situation unfold?
Did you initiate the contact or?
Who were the key individuals
involved?
Did you know the person or people,
beyond knowing their title or job?
Did you have a history with them?
What role did you play in the
scenario?
How do you think your interaction
fostered social capital for you?
Was the social capital you
developed specific to one area,
multiple areas, or all areas?

Please share with me another critical incident, at your present job, when you
developed social capital that had long-term or long-range implications.
•

Questions
Describe the situation or incident?

•
•
•
•
•
•

127

Sub-questions
What was the context and how did
the situation unfold?
Did you initiate the contact or?
Who were the key individuals
involved?
Did you know the person or people,
beyond knowing their title or job?
Did you have a history with them?
What role did you play in the
scenario?

•
•

How do you think your interaction
fostered social capital for you?
Was the social capital you
developed specific to one area,
multiple areas, or all areas?

(3)
Please share with me one of your first critical incidents, at your present job, when you
first used your social capital.
•
•
•

Questions
Describe the situation or incident?
What happened?
How did your interaction require
expenditure of social capital?

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

128

Sub-questions
What was the context and how did
the situation unfold?
Who were the key individuals
involved and did you know them
beyond knowing their title or job?
Did you first strategize as to how
you could use your social capital?
If so, what types of strategies did
you use?
Was this a day-to-day event, or did
you use your social capital for a
major event?
What role did the use of social
capital play in the scenario?
How do you know that your social
capital had been used? Did
anything occur that you might
attribute to the use of your social
capital?
Did your relationship with those
involved change as a result of the
interaction, and if so--how?
What other areas of your work have
you spent social capital?
Did you feel that once used, you
had less social capital?
Can you offer any examples of how
you added to your social capital?

(4)
Please share with me another critical incident, at your present job, when you used social
capital in a situation that had long-term or long-range implications.
•
•
•

Questions
Describe the situation or incident?
What happened?
How did your interaction require
social capital from you?

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

129

Sub-questions
What was the context and how did
the situation unfold?
Who were the key individuals
involved and did you know them
beyond knowing their title or job?
Did you first strategize as to how
you could use your social capital?
If so, what types of strategies did
you use?
Was this a day-to-day event, or did
you use your social capital for a
major event?
What role did the use of social
capital play in the scenario?
How do you know that your social
capital had been used? Did
anything occur that you might
attribute to the use of your social
capital?
Did your relationship with those
involved change as a result of the
interaction, and if so--how?
What other areas of your work have
you spent social capital?
Did you feel that once used, you
had less social capital?
Can you offer any examples of how
you added to your social capital?

Appendix H: Consent form
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH PROJECT
Project Title: School Librarians and Next Generation Advocacy: Gaining Power and
Influence Through the Development of Social Capital

Principal Investigator:
Charles R. O’Bryan
P) 607.643.6643
E) charles.obryan@simmons.edu
Principal Investigator’s Signature: ________________________________
Research Participant’s Name: ____________________________________
Research Participant’s Signature: __________________________________
Date: __________________________
Invitation to Take Part and Introduction: Charles R. O’Bryan, Ph.D. candidate, Simmons
College, Boston, Massachusetts, is conducting a research study under the direction of Melanie
Kimball, Associate Professor, Simmons School of Library and Information Science. This study
will explore the development and use of social capital and its impact on gaining power and
influence by school library system directors or school librarians and will help fill a significant
gap in the literature of social capital. If school librarians can gain influence and power they may
be able to shape a school’s research agenda. Indirectly, this study could help student success in
terms of ensuring that school librarians are in place to help them with their information seeking
and research needs. You are invited to participate in an interview because you are a school
library system director or a school library media specialist in New York State.
Purpose of Research: The objectives of this study are to explore the following questions:
This study will help school library system directors, school librarians and other K-12 teachers
and administrators understand (1) the importance of social capital, (2) its development and use,
and (3) how social capital and social networks might help them realize their goals.
Your Rights: It is important for you to know that your participation is entirely voluntary. You
may decide not to take part or decide to quit the study at any time, without any penalty.
Procedures: School Library System Directors will be interviewed using a series of probing
questions to identify critical incidents when you developed and used social capital during your
present position. By agreeing to participate in the study, you will be asked to send a link to a
survey with general information to the school librarians associated with your service area. These
school librarians will be surveyed using similar questions to those you will be answering.
130

Risks: Participants may have concerns about sharing personal experiences during the interview.
However, your interview responses and their transcription will be kept confidential.
Benefits: Although there is no direct benefit to you for participating in this study, your
participation will likely benefit the field of research in library leadership. You may also become
more aware of your personal practices.
Costs: Participating in this research study will not have any direct cost(s) to you, other than the
time spent during the interviews.
Confidentiality: All information will be kept confidential. In all records of the study, a code
number will identify participants with the associated name known only to the researcher. Your
name and personal information will not be shared with anyone outside of this research study and
will not be used in any reports or publications of this study. Upon completion of the study, all
transcriptions will be destroyed.
Voluntary Participation: Participation is voluntary. You do not have to participate in this study
if you do not want to. If you agree to be in this study, but later change your mind, you may
withdraw at any time. There are no consequences of any kind if you decide you no longer want
to participate.
Questions: Please feel to ask any questions you may have about the study or about your rights as
a participant. If other questions occur to you later you may call me, the investigator, Charles R.
O’Bryan at 607.643.6643 or e-mail to charles.obryan@simmons.edu. If at any time during or
after the study you would like to discuss the study or your research rights with someone who is
not associated with the research study, you may contact the Human Protections Administrator of
the Simmons College IRB at 617-521-2414.

131

Appendix I: Follow-up to interview
Thank you for your participating in this study. Following transcription of the interview, I will
provide you with a copy to review for accuracy. After all responses in the study have been
collected and the stories re-told, I will provide you with the transcript for your review.
Additionally, I will be providing you with a draft copy of the entire study for review once it has
been completed. Please review the documents to ensure that your story has been re-told
accurately and that your identity has been adequately protected. You may choose to opt out of
the study at any point and for any reason

132

Appendix J: Survey questions

Default Question Block

Intro.
Introduction: Survey
Greetings! Chuck O’Bryan here, past School Library System Director, DCMO BOCES
and currently a PhD student at Simmons College. You are invited to take a very brief
demographic survey as the accompaniment to our recent "Chat with Chuck" phone
or Skype interview.
Please answer as many of the following questions as you can based on your own
experience. Your participation is voluntary. You may decline to participate or
discontinue your participation at any time.
The survey should take you about 2-3 minutes to complete. All responses will be
kept completely conPdential and will only be used for the purposes of this
research. Completion of the survey implies consent for use of the data or
responses in my research. You will be assigned a number thus masking your
identity during the data analysis.
If you have questions about the research, please contact Chuck O’Bryan at:
Charles.Obryan@Simmons.edu. Also you may contact my faculty advisor,
Professor Melanie Kimball. Her telephone number is (617) 521-2795. If you have
questions about your rights as a human subject, you may also contact the Human
Protections Administrator in the OfPce of Sponsored Programs at Simmons College
at 617-521-2415.

133

Please submit your responses by September 16, 2016 at the latest. Thank you for
participating in the "chats with Chuck" and for providing additional information
through this demographic's survey!

Q1. Click to write the question text
Assigned research number.

Q2. What is your age?
Less than 25
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65+
I prefer not to respond

Q3. What is your sex?
Female
Male
Other
I prefer not to respond

Q4. For how many years were you employed as a Teacher Librarian or School
Library Media Specialist?
Less than 1 year

134

1-3 years
4-6 years
7-10 years
More than 10 years

Q5. For how many years have you been employed as a School Library System
Director or Coordinator?
Less than 1 year
1-3 years
4-6 years
7-10 years
More than 10 years

Q6. Prior to your current position, were you employed as a classroom teacher?
Yes
No

Q7. Are you an active member of any of the following library organizations?
Member
NYLA
SSL section of NYLA
AASL
ALA
Other

135

OfHcer

136

Email

Phone

Face-to-Face

No contact

Building level
administrators
District level
administrators
Board of Education
members

Q11.
Please rate the degree of accessibility of the following individuals:
Top-down
communication
only

DifHcult to
contact

Neutral

Easy to
contact

Open-door
policy

Building level
administrators
District level
administrators
Board of Education
members

Q12. Have you been asked to present at meetings when these administrators were
present? (i.e. project updates, as a guest speaker)
Yes
No

Q13. Have you been given opportunities for leadership roles as a SLS Director
outside of your normal job capacity (i.e. managing a new project or initiative)
Yes

137

No

Q14. How do you interact or socialize with administrators outside of work?
Recreationally (i.e. golf outing, sports team, etc.)
Community organizations (i.e. serve on a nonproHt board, volunteer, etc.)
Other (please describe)
I do not interact or socialize with administrators outside of work

Q15.
To what degree has my relationship with administrators positively impacted the
following:
A great
deal

A lot

A moderate
amount

A little

None at all

Access to
Information
Access to Resources
Access to
Opportunities

Q16. Have you created an advocacy plan* for reaching the upper level
administrators in your current position?
*An advocacy plan is a strategy to demonstrate the importance of library services
(i.e. impacting student achievement) for the purpose of ensuring adequate
resourcing and stafPng.
Yes
No

138

Q17. Have districts that you have responsibility for recently experienced changes to
budget or stafPng? Please select all that apply.

Budget
decrease

Librarian
cuts

Support
staff
cuts

Elimination
of an
Elementary
Librarian

No
changes
to
budget
of
stafHng

Budget
increase

Current
year
2 years
ago
3 years
ago
4 or
more
years
ago

Q18. What is your highest level of educational attainment?
BS or BA
MS or MA
MLS or MSIS
More than 1 Master's Degree
Ph.D or Ed.D
Other

Q19. Please feel free to include any additional comments below.

139

Additional
Librarian(s)
added

Additional
support

Tks. Your participation in this survey is important to gaining a broader
understanding of relationships in the K-12 environment and the work done by
Teacher Librarians. Thanks!

140

