Organizational Culture and Library Chief Executive Officers’ Servant Leadership
Practices

Submitted by
Ava Leonie Barrett

Abstract
The purpose of this qualitative, single case study was to explore how a group of library
CEOs perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant
leadership practices to employee success as well as organizational performance. It was
not known how these CEOs perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism
linking their servant leadership practices to employee success as well as organizational
performance. Guiding the study were the seven-dimensional servant leadership and the
organizational cultural models. Research questions examined the servant leadership
practices of the library CEOs to understand how those practices enabled an organizational
culture that engendered employee success and organizational performance. The sample
consisted of 15 participants from three libraries in South Central Florida. The first three
of the five phases of analysis cycle, the servant leader measurement tool, and NVivo 11
were used to analyze the data. Emergent themes were consistent with the practice and
characteristics of servant leadership. Five of them, empowering staff, developing
community, developing communication, organizational change, and conceptualizing and
strategizing, related to Research Question 1. Working with minimal supervision and
collaborative work related to Research Question 2. Three others, productivity, going
beyond, and engaged employees, related to Research Question 3. Conclusions found that
CEOs do perceive their practice of servant leadership to be congruent with employee and
organizational success. Implications are for researchers interested in better understanding
the mediating role organizational culture plays in CEO servant led organizations.
Keywords: Servant leadership, organizational culture, employee success, and
organizational performance

Chapter 1: Introduction to the Study
Introduction
The study of the concept of organizational leadership continues to be of great
interest to scholars and practitioners, even after more than half a century. Wu, Kwan,
Yim, Chiu, and He (2015) described a wide scale preoccupation with the topic. Jones
(2005) posited that nothing else—not technology, or even finances—impacts the
competitive advantage of any organization as this factor does. The many organizational
scandals that have surfaced recently involving unethical leaders such as Bernie Madoff
and Jerry Sandusky are confirmation of the negative effect poor leadership can have on
the organizations they lead.
This topic of organizational leadership has produced several studies addressing
the need for quality leadership in organizations (Wu et al., 2015). These demonstrate the
type of leadership that engenders positive employee behaviors (Jaramillo, Bande, &
Varela, 2015). They also provide information on team effectiveness and the success of
organizations because of such leadership (Mahembe & Engelbrecht, 2013). One outcome
is the development of many models of organizational leadership including situational
leadership, servant leadership, transformational leadership, the level five leadership,
authentic leadership, and the GROW model, to name a few. Recently, there has been a
gravitation to the servant leadership model spawned by Robert Greenleaf (1970), as one
of the most viable models of successful organizational leadership. This is a phenomenon
of interest to this study.
Servant leadership has a heavy emphasis on service (Greenleaf, 1970). In
organizations where this model is practiced, Liden, Wayne, Liao, and Meuser (2014)

2
posited that a serving culture develops. In this organizational culture, the needs of others
are prioritized above that of the leader. Many studies have shown this leadership style to
be one that fosters an employee-friendly organization, practicing high levels of concern
for others while driving for effective customer service (Hunter, Neubert, Perry, Witt,
Penney & Weinberger, 2013; Jaramillo, Grisaffe, Chonko, & Roberts, 2009; Walumbwa,
Hartnell, & Oke, 2010). Additionally, Jones (2012b) contends that the model is the
popular answer to the need for leaders who are more efficient, principled, and employee
focused. These are characteristics that should also be important to leaders in public
libraries, according to Heaphey (2006) and Yarnetsky (2013), considering their mission
as service organizations. However, whether these concepts of servant leadership are
practiced in public libraries is not known (Heaphey, 2006; Yarnetsky, 2013). Answers
were sought in this study through the perspectives of three chief executive officers
(CEOs) of public library organizations. How these CEOs perceived organizational culture
as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’
success as well as organizational performance was of paramount interest.
In this study, servant leadership is defined as the phenomenon whereby a leader
sees him or herself as “servant first … beginning with the natural feeling that one wants
to serve. Then conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead” (Greenleaf, 1970, p. 6).
Liden, Wayne, Zhao, and Henderson (2008) studied Greenleaf’s (1970) concept and
created a servant leadership model comprising seven dimensions. These dimensions
include emotional healing, creating value for the community, conceptual skills,
empowering, helping subordinates grow and succeed, putting subordinates first, and
behaving ethically (Liden et al., 2008). In the context of this study, servant leadership

3
practices related to the utilization of one or all seven dimensions of the servant leadership
model by the library CEOs.
According to Watkins (2013), any definition of the term organizational culture
sparks huge debates, although there is agreement that the concept exists and plays a very
important role in organizational behaviors. For this study, the definition of the concept
adopted was Schein’s (2004). Accordingly, Schein defined organizational culture as:
A pattern of shared basic assumptions learned by a group as it solved its problems
of external adaptation and internal integration, which has worked well enough to
be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct
way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those problems. (p. 18)
This study focused on how CEOs in libraries perceive organizational culture
playing the role of a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to
employees’ success as well as organizational performance, in response to a need
identified by Peterson, Galvin, and Lange (2012). These researchers expressed the need
for an understanding of how organizational culture plays a mediating role in linking
servant leadership behaviors to improved firm and follower performance (Peterson et al.,
2012). In this study, the topic was explored in the context of libraries as service oriented
organizations. The idea was to gain further understanding of how the phenomenon of
servant leadership influences a positive response in organizations, especially in service
organizations such as libraries (Bambale, Shamsudin, & Subramaniam, 2012; Zehir,
Akyuz, Eren, & Turhan, 2013).
Bambale (2014) attested that servant led organizations are increasingly
recognized for their positive employee and organizational outcomes. For example, Carter

4
and Baghurst (2014) as well as Liden et al. (2014) showed that the serving culture created
by the servant leadership practices of CEOs in restaurants, positively affects not only the
performance of units (restaurants) but also influences individual employee’s attitudes and
behaviors. However, according to Liden et al. (2014), as well as Peterson et al. (2012),
how organizational culture and servant leadership actually lead to outcomes such as
positive organizational and employee performance still needs exploration, implying a gap
in the literature. This study was a response to this identified gap.
In this chapter, background information is provided on the history and present
state of servant leadership and organizational culture as found in the literature. The
problem statement is also presented, providing a glimpse of the focus of the study. An
explanation of the purpose of the study is provided and the three research questions are
introduced. Additionally, there is a discussion on the study’s contribution to advancing
scientific knowledge, along with justification for its conduct based on the gap identified
in the literature. This chapter also discusses the significance and rationale for the study
and the selected methodology. The nature of the research design, definition of terms,
assumptions, limitations and delimitations, and a summary of the key points of the
chapter complete the focus of this chapter.
Background of the Study
The right leadership is important for the success of any organization and its
employees. In such organizations, the assumption is that the CEO are significant
contributors to that success. Finkelstein, Hambrick, and Cannella (as cited in Peterson et
al., 2012) posits that CEOs do have such influence, and that they accomplish this by way
of “the vision they express, decisions they make, policies they implement, and what they

5
pay attention to, measure, and reward” (p. 565). This is within the context of the shift in
focus by both scholars and practitioners, from individualistic type leadership in
organizations, to a more relational style. Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership model is
increasingly being viewed as an answer to this new focus (Hu & Liden, 2011; Liden et
al., 2008; Neubert, Kacmar, Carlson, Chonko, & Roberts, 2008; Schaubroeck, Lam, &
Peng, 2011; van Dierendonck, 2011; Walumbwa et al., 2010).
In a prior study, Peterson et al. (2012) examined the relationship between servant
leadership practices of CEOs and various organizational variables. A cohort of 126 CEOs
from the technology industry comprised the sample of this quantitative study, utilizing a
survey design. Among other findings, the results showed that CEO servant leadership is a
predictor of firm performance. Peterson et al. (2012) also identified the need for future
research on the role culture plays as a mediating mechanism linking servant leadership to
organizational performance. These researchers stated:
One potential area of future research is exploring culture or climate as a mediating
mechanism linking servant leadership to firm performance. By creating an
atmosphere that encourages followers to develop, learn, and reach their potential,
the firm may indirectly reap the benefits. (Peterson et al., 2012, p. 589)
In addition to the above identified need, limitations have also been identified,
including a minimal number of both quantitative and qualitative empirical research on
servant leadership in organizations (Jones, 2012b; Peterson et al., 2012). For example, a
large percentage of the research examining leadership impact on employee and
organizational performance relates to transformational and charismatic leadership, not to
servant leadership (Liden et al., 2014). In addition, many of the researchers that have

6
examined servant leadership were focused on outcomes rather than determinants of those
outcomes (Peterson et al., 2012). These scholars have been concentrated largely on
business organizations such as restaurants (Carter & Baghurst, 2014; Liden et al., 2014).
Parris and Peachey (2013) also posited that there is a paucity of empirical research on
servant leadership in specific organizational settings. Thus, there was a need for further
understanding of how servant leadership influences organizational and employee
performance (Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al., 2012), as well as a need to expand the
research to varied organizational types (Peterson et al., 2012).
A review of the literature indicated that libraries are undergoing rapid
organizational changes (Bertot, 2012; Dusky, 2001; Riggs, 2001). Few library leaders are
prepared to lead this change. According to Riggs (2001), libraries have been overmanaged and under-led for too long, and this fact can no longer be ignored. As Riggs
suggested, “Leadership in these entities must be brought to center stage, and treated with
a capital L” (p. 5). In fact, there is the danger that libraries may deteriorate as centers of
community services if strong, dynamic, and visionary leadership is not provided
immediately (Riggs, 2001). This study is important to libraries and library leaders
because it brings focus to this area of librarianship which begs attention. If it informs
library CEOs’ practice as servant leaders, influencing an organizational culture that
impacts employee and organizational success, it is a valuable study for libraries.
Consequently, the goal of conducting this study was twofold. First, extend prior
research on the subject of servant leadership and organizational culture, thereby adding to
the literature on those subjects. This included an exploration of the concepts within nonprofit organizations. Second, the study aimed to provide further understanding of both

7
servant leadership and culture in organizations especially from the point of view of
library CEOs. Further, the study intended to provide an opportunity for a broader
understanding of how servant leadership leads to positive outcomes in organizations
(Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al., 2012).
Problem Statement
The underlying problem of this study pertained to the relationship between the
organizational culture a CEO creates, based on his or her leadership style and the success
of the employees and organizations that CEO leads. Therefore, it was not known how
CEOs in libraries perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking
their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational
performance. In this study, the definition for organizational culture as offered above, was
based on that created by Schein (2004). organizational culture is:
A pattern of shared basic assumptions learned by a group as it solved its problems
of external adaptation and internal integration, which has worked well enough to
be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct
way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those problems. (p. 18)
The term servant leadership is based on the definition (as offered above) by
Greenleaf (1970). That definition states that it is the phenomenon whereby a leader sees
him or herself as “servant first … beginning with the natural feeling that one wants to
serve. Then conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead” (Greenleaf, 1970, p. 6). On the
other hand, noted the CEOs’ servant leadership practices are expected to be indicative of
organizational outcomes. “Success for employees” refers to employee accomplishment of
established, specific performance goals and objectives, whether at the library

8
departmental level or at the level of the organization’s mission and vision statement
(University of Missouri, Division of Finance and Administration, 2008). Success for the
organization was based on evidence of performance related to the organization’s vision
and mission.
The population under study are CEOs and senior level staff in libraries. Under the
direction of Library Boards, Library CEOs are administrators who have total
responsibility for the operation of libraries, COSLA (Chief Officers of State Library
Agencies, 2015). Thus, their work involves the management of the library collections,
provision of library services to patrons and community organizations, policy creation and
administration, and departmental planning. The work requires the incumbent to have
thorough knowledge, skill and ability in every phase of the library field. A Masters in
Library and information science is a requirement for this position.
As members of the Library administrative team, senior level library staff are
responsible for providing significant leadership and contribution to the mission of the
Library. Persons in this position are often managers of library departments. They are also
frequently the experts in the area of library services they specialize in. Additionally, they
are responsible for strategically leading, managing, and developing customer-focused
professionally robust library services, operating at an organization wide level for
managing and strategically planning for library services. This level staff are part of the
Library Management Team (University of Limerick, 2009). Studying the phenomena of
servant leadership and culture among this population, served to extend the research on a
leadership model that has been shown to influence employee success and organizational
performance (Liden et al., 2014; Parris, & Peachey, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012). More

9
importantly, the study shed light on how library CEOs perceive organizational culture in
relation to their servant leadership practices and the need to provide leadership resulting
in successful organizational performance.
The magnitude and importance of this problem is evident in the literature.
According to Peterson et al. (2012):
One potential area of future research is exploring culture or climate as a mediating
mechanism linking servant leadership to firm performance. By creating an
atmosphere that encourages followers to develop, learn, and reach their potential,
the firm may indirectly reap the benefits. (p. 589)
Liden et al. (2014) espoused a similar concept, opining that the serving culture
created by the servant leadership practices of CEOs in restaurants positively affects the
performance of units, but that there is a need to determine how this outcome is possible
(p. 1435). Thus, this was an established need identified in the literature. Research in other
entities can help shed light on this problem (Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al., 2012).
Data gathered may help to bring important understandings on how the library
CEOs perceive the relationship between their servant leadership practices and the success
of employees and the performance of their organizations. Indirectly, the study brought
attention to the theoretical premise that, the serving culture that develops because of the
work of servant leaders, results from placing a priority on serving others (Liden et al.,
2014). The study also added to the literature on the subject of servant leadership, which,
according to Parris and Peachey (2013), is prominently practiced but grossly
understudied.

10
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this qualitative, case study was to understand how the CEOs of
libraries in South Central Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating
mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as
organizational performance. The general population derived from 36,000 libraries in
North America ALA (American Library Association, 2016) comprising approximately
13,500 Public Librarians with Master’s degrees in Library and Information Science
(MLIS) (Department for Professional Employees, 2011). The target population consisted
of approximately 240 executive and senior level public library leaders in 80 public
libraries in Florida (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2008). Not every member
of this population had a chance to participate in the study, so a sample comprising 15
participants was drawn from the senior staff of two county and one city library in south
central Florida, including the CEOs of the three libraries. Of interest to this case study is
the phenomenon of the perspectives of the CEOs as it pertains to their servant leadership
practices within the context of their organizations’ culture.
Leadership exerts an influence on others, including helping them determine how
to act to reach set goals (Vacar, 2015). Schein (2004) described this as leadership
defining the success or failure of organizations. This is determined through organizational
culture, engendered by the leader’s style of leadership, demonstrating the type of
influence leaders have over individuals in an organization. Thus, organizational culture as
defined by Schein (2004), and the servant leadership practices (or style) of library CEOs,
as defined by Greenleaf (1970), were the phenomenon to be studied in this research. An
informal interview was conducted with the CEOs to determine their perspectives on the

11
organizational culture and servant leadership effect in their organizations. The servant
leadership questionnaire (Liden et al., 2008) was utilized with senior level staff who
evaluated their CEOs’ servant leadership characteristics. Conducted also were nonparticipant observation and examination of documentation.
Research Questions
It is not known how the CEOs of libraries perceived organizational culture as a
mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as
well as organizational performance. Therefore, the following research questions guided
this qualitative case study:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an
organizational culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
The phenomena of interest to this study were therefore organizational culture and
library CEOs’ servant leadership practices. Based on the literature, there is support for
the power of servant leadership as a catalyst engendering employee success and
organizational performance. This is evident in the works of authors such as Jones
(2012a); Mehta and Pillay (2011); Peterson et al. (2012); Udani, and Lorenzo-Molo
(2013); Weinstein (2013). With respect to organizational culture, Mujeeb and Ahmad
(2011) posited that this is an important source of an organization’s competitive
advantage, since this factor is responsible for how organizational procedures are shaped,
the unity that leads to a cohesive organization, how it problem solves, and thus how it
accomplishes (or not) the achievement of its goals. Thus, it makes sense that servant led

12
organizations operate within some type of organizational culture that plays a role in the
success or not of that organization.
All three questions have direct bearing on the problem statement, speaking to
different parts of the problem that need exploring. The first question engendered an
understanding of the CEOs’ own perception of how their servant leadership practices
create the type of environment that enabled employees to be successful. The second
question enabled an exploration of the CEOs’ perception of how their organizations’
culture enabled their employees to be successful. The last question looked at the CEOs’
perception of how the successes of the employees contributed to their organizations’
performance.
Advancing Scientific Knowledge
A review of recent literature revealed that although servant leadership is
recognized as a path for good leader/follower relationships, there are still several related
areas that need research (Bambale, 2014; Carter & Baghurst, 2014; Lachman, Gerstein, &
Friedman, 2014; Parris & Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015).
According to Peterson et al. (2012), there was a need to explore the concept of
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking servant leadership to employee
success and firm performance. In a time when leadership was viewed as critical to an
organization’s success or failure, this was a call to examine the other side of the
leadership coin. Schein (2004) described this as examining how leaders create culture. In
the context of this research, this was an examination of how organizational culture serves
as a mediating mechanism linking the CEOs’ servant leadership practices to the success
of both employees and organization. This represents a distinct gap in the literature.

13
Farling, Stone, and Winston (1999); Parris and Peachey (2013); van Dierendonck
and Patterson (2015) also identified a general insufficiency of empirical research on
servant leadership. According to Parris and Peachey, this theory may be the answer to
perceived selfishness among cooperate leaders. However, more than 3 decades after
being coined by Greenleaf (1970), the servant leadership theory remains fledgling; it is
prominently practiced, but severely under-researched (Parris & Peachey, 2013). This
represents another gap in the literature.
A gap in the empirical research on servant leadership in specific organizational
settings have also been identified (Parris & Peachey, 2013). One such organizational
setting is that of public libraries which themselves are service organizations. Heaphey
(2006) opined that while there are many books and articles on servant leadership, very
few addressed the matter in relation to public libraries. This leadership model is one that
seems to have much to offer public libraries, their staffs, and the communities they serve
(Heaphey, 2006); however, there is a definite gap in the literature in this field.
Reed, Vidaver-Cohen, and Colwell (2011) noted there are a minimal number of
empirical studies measuring servant leadership among top executives in organizations.
Although many studies have addressed the measurement of servant leadership, generally,
none have been found that specifically target the behaviors of top executives (Reed et al.,
2011). This research contributed to filling a gap in this area of the literature.
This study was a medium for addressing the need and various gaps identified
above. By utilizing a qualitative case study approach to explore the perceptions of select
CEOs, the study addressed the need identified by Peterson et al. (2012). A case study
provided a means of investigating how organizational culture played a mediating role in

14
linking the CEOs’ servant leadership practices to their employees’ success and
organizational performance (Peterson et al., 2012). The study now addsto the empirical
literature on servant leadership, thereby addressing the identified general gap on the topic
(Farling et al., 1999; Parris & Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015).
Public libraries, typifying a specific type of organizational setting, were the focus of the
current research. By studying these entities, the study addressed the matter of servant
leadership in specific organizations (Parris & Peachey, 2013). The study incorporated
empirical research on top executives, thereby addressing the gap identified by Reed et al.
(2011) in this area of the literature. Significantly, this study added to the body of
knowledge on organizational leadership generally, and organizational development
specifically, the field of study being pursued by this researcher.
This study was important for extending the research on Greenleaf’s (1970) theory
of servant leadership, which functioned as the study’s theoretical foundation. This theory
is the basis for any study on this leadership style, forming a springboard from which to
investigate the matter in organizations. According to Heaphey (2006), servant leadership
could be useful in public libraries as it could conceptually assist library leaders (CEOs) to
be organizational builders, champions, coaches, and innovators, among other things.
The study was also important with respect to the servant leadership model of
Liden et al. (2008). Pursuit of this model in the three public libraries opened the
opportunity for the exploration of a style of leadership that may not be common to
libraries. The model expresses that leadership style as seven servant behaviors or
dimensions. It enables the leader to assume responsibility not only for the success of the
organization, but also for followers, customers, and other stakeholders in a moral sense.

15
These dimensions served the purpose of identifying the CEOs’ servant leadership
practices, thereby adding to the literature on servant leadership.
For Schein’s (2004) model, on the other hand, application of Schein’s
organizational cultural levels to the servant leadership practices of library CEOs provided
a powerful analytical tool for the conduct of this study. This tool enabled an
understanding of the role of culture as a mediating mechanism in servant led
organizations. This added to the literature on organizational culture and servant
leadership, specifically in a public library setting.
Significance of the Study
This research fits in many ways within prior research (Farling et al., 1999; Parris
& Peachey, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015). Prior
researchers have focused largely on CEOs who were servant leaders in restaurants
(Peterson et al., 2012). Others have reviewed employee success as an outcome of CEOs’
servant leadership (Parris & Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015).
Previous researchers have also addressed research results showing CEO servant
leadership as a predictor of firm performance (Latham, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012).
However, scholars have not explored how CEOs perceive culture as a mediating link
between their servant leadership practices and the success of employees and the
performance of the organization.
The focus of this study was on CEOs as servant leaders in the context of libraries.
As leaders of organizations serving the public, these CEOs have a responsibility to ensure
the success of the organization. Schein (2004) confirmed this position, positing that the
leader’s behaviors shape the culture of the organization, thereby affecting the success of

16
that organization. The success of employees was also central to this study and was
explored from the point of view of the CEO. Their perceptions of how the organization
culture links their servant leadership practices to, not only the organization’s
performance, but also to employee success was explored. Gaps were addressed and needs
identified in the empirical literature (Farling et al., 1999; Parris & Peachey, 2013; van
Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015).
This study also served as a practical contribution to the field of leadership,
exploring aspects with no evidence of empirical research to date. The model of servant
leadership of Liden et al. (2008) and Schein’s (2004) model of organizational culture are
topics explored separately in the leadership literature. However, there is no evidence of
these two models being utilized together to explore the perceptions of library CEOs.
Findings from this research may assist in developing a better understanding of how
organizational culture play a mediating role in linking the CEOs’ servant leadership
practices to positive organizational and employee performance. The study looked at how
the leadership dimensions of the servant leadership model links to Schein’s (2004) model
of cultural levels in a library setting. This may be a nuance for the field of organizational
leadership, but it is an important contribution nevertheless, especially for libraries as
service organizations.
This research was therefore significant for the practical value it provided for the
real world of libraries as service organizations. Although it might provide future
researchers with new directions for studying libraries as organizations in which servant
leadership may be practiced, CEOs responsible for these entities, as well as the
communities they serve may benefit significantly now. The study may provide empirical

17
information for CEOs to utilize in improving the overall performance of their libraries,
while obtaining success for employees. The findings of this study contribute to a better
understanding of how the CEO servant leader/subordinate relations are mediated by the
culture created in organizations. Additionally, the findings may indicate how servant
leadership may help in overall improvement of stakeholder interactions. Practically, the
practice of the servant leadership model may demonstrate that this leadership style is
viable model for libraries as service organizations (Anzalone, 2007; Heaphey, 2006;
Yarnetsky, 2013).
Rationale for Methodology
The methodology selected for this study was the qualitative research
methodology. This methodology does not involve the testing of any hypothesis. Instead,
it utilized three research and twelve interview questions to explore the perceptions of
three CEOs. This is as it relates to the two phenomena of organizational culture and
servant leadership in a natural environment, in the libraries in which they work. The
study also incorporated the use of multiple qualitative data collection sources including
interviews, non-participant observation, and documentation, as well as a questionnaire,
which is a small quantitative component of a mainly qualitative study.
Yin (2011) posited that there are five reasons for selecting a qualitative
methodology in research. If the study is seeking to research the meaning of people’s lives
under real world situations, this is a reason to utilize a qualitative approach (Yin, 2011).
When a researcher is attempting to determine the perspectives or views of the study’s
participants, this is another reason to use the qualitative methodology (Yin, 2011). If the
intent of the study is to explore the context of people’s lives and to provide insights into

18
concepts which help with an understanding of human social behavior (Yin, 2011) there is
a need for a qualitative research methodology. Last, when evidence is to be collected
from many sources rather than one source, there is a need to do a qualitative style study.
Because attempts were made to determine the perspectives of the three library CEOs,
while trying to provide insights into the concepts of servant leadership and organizational
culture, the appropriate approach was a qualitative methodology. Moreover, the intent
was to collect evidence from more than one source for this study, further qualifying it for
a qualitative methodology.
The problem statement and research questions of this study determined the need
to understand the perspectives of the three library CEOs in this study. Subjective
information was gathered representing the CEOs’ thoughts on the phenomena of servant
leadership and organizational culture. A qualitative research approach lent itself to
representing the views of these study participants (Yin, 2011), thus opening up the study
to subjectivity.
This approach was not appropriate for quantitative research, which objectively
tests variables that are controllable and changeable with experimentation (InghamBroomfield, 2014). The quantitative method of inquiry was also not suited to handling
the personal views of study participants such as was forthcoming from the CEOs. Instead,
quantitative studies seek to capture numerical data. Thamhain (2014) validated this
understanding of the nature of quantitative research and posited that a qualitative
approach is much better for capturing the broader, in-depth descriptions possible from
interviews such as was conducted with the CEOs. Cronin (2014) also agreed, opining that
the qualitative approach is the best method for researching in-depth material.

19
According to Yin (2011), the qualitative approach is also useful when seeking to
understand the contextual aspects of people’s lives. This has implications for how they
conduct their lives socially, and even environmentally (Yin, 2011) or culturally. Carcary,
(2011) stated that the intent behind this type of research is the understanding and
explanation of social phenomena. Effort was also made to understand library CEOs’
perspectives on how organizational culture played a mediating role linking their servant
leadership practices to the success of their employees and organizations. This is the
equivalent of seeking to understand the social context of their lives in their organizations,
making the qualitative approach the best for this study. According to Yin (2011), other
social science research methods are not capable of addressing this type of context,
adequately. Most importantly, because a quantitative approach would involve focusing on
a limited set of variables (Yin, 2011) which was not practical for this study, the
qualitative method was the best choice.
Qualitative research also seeks to do more than merely diary everyday life,
according to Yin (2011). When there is a need to focus on complex behaviors and the felt
needs of participants of a study, this method is useful (Isaacs, 2014). The qualitative
method helps in the explanation of the events of the lives of the participants of a study.
This is accomplished through emerging or existing concepts (Yin, 2011), unlike the
quantitative method, which is concerned with answers based on statistical accuracy and
objective measurement of events (Hamer & Collinson, 2014). An understanding of the
perceptions of the CEOs from select libraries through the concepts of servant leadership
and organizational culture was also important. These were existing concepts, thus
earmarking the qualitative method as most appropriate for this study.

20
Nature of the Research Design for the Study
The research design selected for this study was a single case study of a group of
CEOs in three libraries in South Central Florida. This design is described as very
complex, permitting induction of a rich and reliable model (Vohra, 2014). Further, Yin
(2009) postulates that one reason for selecting the single case study design is as a
“revelatory case” (p. 48). In such a case, there is an opportunity to observe and analyze a
phenomenon that had not been researched previously. In this study, the servant leadership
practices of a group of library CEOs is the phenomenon of interest, because of their
“revelatory nature” (Yin, 2009, p. 49), having the distinction of never been previously
researched. This design was appropriate for two main reasons. First, it was appropriate to
the qualitative methodology selected for the study. This methodology has a set of distinct
designs associated with it, including ethnographic, case study, narrative, grounded theory,
historical, and phenomenological research (Houghton, Casey, Shaw, & Murphy, 2013).
Like the phenomenological study, the case study provides responses to “how” and “why”
questions (Yin, 2011). However, while case study researchers seek in-depth answers to
questions concerning people in a real-world context (Yin, 2011), such as in this study, the
phenomenological researcher seeks to understand peoples’ experiences in the words of
the people themselves (Yin, 2011). This was not the focus of this study. The narrative
approach would also not be appropriate, since it focuses on telling the real-life story of
participants, accentuating a sense of being there (Yin, 2011); this was also not the focus
of the current study.
The second reason the case study design was appropriate was based on the
research questions and the sample being studied. According to Aczel (2015) when the

21
research question asks “how” and “why” questions, the case study design is appropriate.
In this study, all three research questions begin with the word “how”. Questions such as
these lead to an understanding of the situations under observation, including observations
and conversations in the form of interviews with the participants (Aczel, 2015). The
target population consisted of 240 senior and executive level public library leaders in 80
public libraries in Florida (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2008). A sample of
15 persons was selected from the target population comprising three CEOs from three
different libraries, and four each of their senior level staff. Because a case study design
utilizes a small number of participants (Cronin, 2014) involving contemporary events,
and the sample for this study was small, incorporating the contemporary perspectives of
three CEOs, this design was appropriate for the study.
The research questions sought to determine how library CEOs perceive
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. Thus, a study was
conducted of this small sample in a natural setting, which was best done using the case
study approach because it focused on specific situations, which allowed for in-depth
descriptions (Cronin, 2014; Houghton et al., 2013; Yin, 2011).
Data collection tools such as semi structured interviews and reviews of
documentary sources such as organizational documents are appropriate to this design
(Lauckner, Paterson, & Krupa, 2012). These were the tools used in this study, along with
member checking to ensure validation and triangulation. These allowed for the
investigation of a broad cross section of important areas in the specific library situation,
including individuals, groups, activities, or a specific phenomenon (Cronin, 2014). This

22
helped to find answers to the research questions posed in this study, as each tool
contributed to a better understanding of the perspectives of the CEOs and the
organizational culture they helped to create through their servant leadership practices. For
example, through the semi-formal interviews the CEOs provided data that explained their
perceptions of how the organizational culture that they helped to create as a result of their
servant leadership practices, led to the success of their employees as well as of the
organizations. The data from the non-participant observations as well as the
organizational documentation in many ways provided data that validated thoughts
expressed by the CEOs and in turn helped provide answers to the research questions. This
includes the 28-item servant leadership questionnaire, which gathered data from the
perspective of the senior level staff in the libraries. This data was used to augment the
qualitative findings of the study relating to the perceptions of the CEOs. This was a small
quantitative component of a mainly qualitative study.
Definition of Terms
In this section, definitions are provided for selected terms used throughout the
study. The definitions provide a means of ensuring understanding of their utility. The
following are the selected terms and their meanings:
Artifacts. Higgins and McAllaster (2004) described these as including not only
the “myths and sagas about company successes and the heroes and heroines within the
company” (p. 63), but also the “language systems and metaphors; rituals, ceremonies, and
symbols; certain physical attributes such as the use of space, interior and exterior design,
and equipment; and the defining values and norms” (p. 63). According to Schein (2004),
artifacts are the surface level at which a culture could be analyzed, including its

23
architecture, technology, the way its members dress, as well as visible or audible
behavior patterns (Schein, 1984). Both definitions were applicable to this study as they
were aligned closely with the purpose of the study and provide clear definitions.
Basic underlying assumptions. This is “unconscious, taken-for-granted beliefs,
perceptions, thoughts, and feelings… (ultimate source of values and actions)” according
to Schein (2004, p. 26). Hudson and Irwin (2010) described this concept as
“organizational culture represented on its deepest level” (p. 5). Schein (1984) described
the concept as values that govern behavior, based on the reasons people provide for their
behavior or rationalizations for those behaviors (p. 3). Additionally, Schein (2004)
defined the concept as “implicit assumptions that guide behavior; that tell group members
how to perceive, think about, and feel about things” (p. 31). This latter definition was the
one used for this study.
Conceptual framework. This is a method of using broad ideas and principles in
order to organize research and provide an explanation for a natural phenomenon
(Marshall & Rossman, as cited by Riviera, 2011). Lacey (2010) posited that the concept
is a method of identifying a researcher’s world view on the topic of research, providing
insights on their assumptions and preconceptions about study. The first definition was the
one of importance to this study, since it is within the conceptual framework that several
ideas are discussed to better understand the phenomena of servant leadership and
organizational culture.
Employee success. Chen, Chen, and Li (2013) defined employee success as when
“employees become tolerant, open-minded, patient, optimistic, proactive, and willing to
learn [and grow].” It also refers to the accomplishment of established, specific

24
performance goals and objectives, whether at the departmental level or at the level of the
organization’s mission and vision statement (University of Missouri, Division of Finance
and Administration, 2008). This later definition provided the tool necessary for
measuring the employee success iterated in the study.
Espoused beliefs and values. Schein (2004) described these as the strategies,
goals, and philosophies espoused or adopted by an organization because of their
successful application in that organization. Armenakis, Brown, and Mehta (2011)
described these values as the very important decision criterion that becomes the rule of
action. Schein’s (2004) definition was the one relevant to this study.
Followers. These are individuals in an organization whose behaviors and
performance are influenced by leaders (Zhu, He, Trevino, Chao, & Wang, 2015).
Bjugstad, Thach, Thompson, and Morris (2006) provided an alternative definition that
followership is “the ability to effectively follow the directives and support the efforts of a
leader to maximize a structured organization” (p. 304). This gives the impression of
choice in followership, supporting the idea that without followers there are no leaders,
and that the leader’s effectiveness rests solely on the follower’s consent and willingness
to support that leader (Bjugstad et al., 2006). Both definitions were applicable to the
current study.
Leadership. Leadership involves recognizing the needs and motives of followers,
leading to both leaders and followers being elevated (Burns, 1978). According to Carter,
DeChurch, Braun, and Contractor (2015), a contemporary definition would posit the
concept as that which “enables organizations to function effectively, directing, inspiring,

25
and coordinating the efforts of individuals, teams, and organizations toward the
realization of collective goals” (p. 597). Northouse (2013) described the concept as,
An entity within an organization that provides the guidance and sets the
philosophical tone followed by the working members of the organization. This
may be a specific person supervising a small organizational unit, or may be the
general collection of individuals who oversee all operations of an organization (p.
17).
Non-profit organizations. These are organizations that do not aim primarily to
make a profit from their activities (Sinuany-Stern & Sherman, 2014). They often achieve
this end. However, the profits realized are not for sharing with shareholders but rather for
reinvestment in the organization in order that the entity may realize its purpose of
assisting the needy (Sinuany-Stern & Sherman, 2014).
Organizational culture. This describes “a pattern of shared basic assumptions
learned by a group as it solved its problems of external adaptation and internal
integration, which has worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore, to be
taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those
problems” (Schein, 2004, p. 17). A second definition offered by Pettigrew (1979)
described the concept as a sharing of meanings and assumptions that helps in an
understanding of how to operate within the culture. According to Mills and Hoeber
(2013), people involved in the organization are responsible for the shaping and
influencing of what becomes known as organizational culture. This may involve shared
forms of ideas, symbols, rules, values, and even behavior patterns (Mills & Hoeber,
2013).

26
Public libraries. This describes those libraries which are accessible to the public
and funded by public (most times local) means such as taxes. This does not include
academic or school libraries in educational institutions (Rubin, 2010). According to
Yarnetsky (2013), these entities are libraries created to serve patrons at the community
level, unlike academic libraries created to serve students and researchers, and special
libraries for special constituencies.
Servant leader. This term describes a leader who nurtures and protects followers,
seeking to first serve them, and then to lead them as a way of serving (Greenleaf, 1970;
Yingying, & Qing, 2014). According to Spears (2002), these are leaders who possess 10
essential characteristics including listening, empathy, healing, self-awareness, persuasion,
conceptualization, foresight, stewardship, commitment to the growth of people, and
building community. Liden et al. (2008) described such leaders in terms of seven
dimensions including emotional healing, creating value for the community, conceptual
skills, empowering, helping followers grow and succeed, putting followers first, and
behaving ethically. This last definition was the one applied to this study.
Servant leadership. This is a phenomenon whereby a leader sees him or herself as
“servant first … beginning with the natural feeling that one wants to serve. Then
conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead” (Greenleaf, 1970, p. 6). Hirschy, Gomez,
Patterson, and Winston (2014) described the term as “a global style of leadership” (p. 97)
with the unique capacity to meet the many challenges that leaders in different crosscultural communities are facing.
Serving culture. This describes “a key mechanism through which servant
leadership behavior affects individual and unit outcome” (Liden et al., 2014, p. 1435).

27
Here the term culture incorporates Schein’s (2004) definition of the word. Service culture
is to be found in organizations at what Liden et al. described as the work unit level. It
specifically refers to the “behavioral norms and shared expectations” of placing a priority
on helping others (Cooke & Rousseau, 1988. p. 255).
Transformational leaders. These leaders inspire others to excel further and
elevate followers to a higher level; specifically, these leaders raise “the followers’ level
of consciousness about the importance and value of desired outcomes and the methods of
reaching those outcomes” (Burns, 1978, p. 141). Such leaders concentrate on the values
of followers helping them to align their values with those of the organization (Givens,
2008).
Transformational leadership. This form of leadership comprises “characteristics
of idealized influence, individualized consideration, intellectual stimulation, and
inspirational motivation [which] has been found to have implications for higher
leadership effectiveness in new market environments and production locations”
(Ghasabeh, Reaiche, & Soosay, 2015, p. 459). Givens (2008) concurred, positing that this
is leadership which is associated with both personal and organizational outcomes, and
which affects the satisfaction and commitment of followers.
Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations
Assumptions. Assumptions are ideas accepted as factual and true in a study, even
without evidence, according to Patidar (2013). The following assumptions were present
in this study. It was assumed that participants in this study were not deceptive with their
answers, but answered questions honestly, openly, and in an unbiased manner when
interviewed. This assumption was based on the literature that portrays servant leaders as

28
highly ethical leaders (Chonko, 2015; Greenleaf, 1970; Liden et al., 2008; McMahone,
2012). The assumption was made that the CEOs in this study would demonstrate these
servant leadership characteristics; that is, that they would be ethical servant leaders. This
was a theoretical assumption based on the servant leadership theory.
The assumption was made that this study would accurately represent the current
situation in each of the libraries to be studied. The methodology selected was qualitative
and the design was a case study. This allowed for the use of four specific methods of data
collection including interviews, a questionnaire, non-participative observation, and
documentation. This also allowed for triangulation of the data, which, according to
Carter, Bryant-Lukosius, DiCenso, Blythe, and Neville (2014) as well as Yin (2009),
allows for confirmation of the consistency of the findings generated by different data
collection sources. This assumption was methodological.
Another assumption was that all CEOs in the study would practice servant
leadership principles. According to Yarnetsky (2013), there are many librarians who
practice the servant leadership principles unaware. Based on this, it was assumed these
CEOs who are librarians, would practice some aspects of the servant leadership
principles. This was a topic-specific assumption.
An additional assumption was that the CEOs would be willing to share their
perspective on servant leadership. This was based on the idea that if they volunteer to
participate, that this was an indication of their willingness to discuss their perspectives.
This was a methodological assumption.
One methodological assumption was that the researcher’s close proximity to the
research subjects would influence the outcome of the study (Yin, 2011). This was

29
because the researcher was familiar to some of the participants. According to King and
Horrocks (2010), researcher bias can be assumed based on the researcher’s own values
and principles that would influence the reporting of the findings from the interviews.
Limitations. The limitations were present in this study. One was the sample size.
Only 15 participants were selected from among staff in libraries throughout the state of
Florida. The sample was therefore not necessarily representative of the whole population,
making its generalizability limited. Additionally, 12 of the participants (the senior level
staff) were selected by the CEOs in the study. This could have placed a limitation on the
applicability of the findings to other such settings. According to Green (2014), however,
generalizing in qualitative studies is not necessary, since the focus of the study was not
on the whole population but rather, on the perspectives of the participants. Miles,
Huberman, and Saldana (2013) pointed to the limitation created by the fickle nature of
memory. A researcher can never be certain that the responses offered by participants,
based on their memory, are accurate. This was a limitation of the study.
Delimitations. Delimitations of the study described those situations or
circumstances which can be controlled. The study was delimited to only three libraries in
south central Florida. The demographic sample was limited to library CEOs and their
senior level staff. This was appropriate because this study utilized a qualitative
methodology, for which there was no need to have an expansive number of participants; a
requirement of the use of this method was to narrow the number of participants but
deeply record their lived experiences. The time for the data collection was limited to a
schedule created for and approved by the libraries, after approval by the IRB. The study’s

30
scope was limited to the data culled from the interviews, observation, and review of
documentation from a small sample, which was identified utilizing purposeful sampling.
Regardless of the assumptions, limitations, and delimitations stated above, the
results of this study will be of value to the study of organizational leadership.
Significantly, the results have the potential to help bring attention to the benefits possible
from the application of the principles of servant leadership, as they are mediated by
organizational culture. Thus, it was expected that the findings from this study would
contribute to advancing knowledge on the role of culture and servant leadership in
employee success and organizational performance.
Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study
The underlying problem of this study pertained to the relationship between the
organizational culture a CEO creates, based on his or her leadership style, and the success
of the employees and organization that CEO leads. Therefore, the purpose of this
qualitative case study was to determine how CEOs in libraries in south central Florida
perceive organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. This first chapter,
introduced the major infrastructure of the study highlighting several key points in its
conduct. Theoretically, it was based on Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership theory, as
well as the servant leadership and organizational culture models by Liden et al. (2008),
and Schein (2004), respectively. This is a response to the shift in focus by both scholars
and practitioners, from individualistic type leadership in organizations, to a more
relational style. Libraries as institutions are also undergoing radical change, calling for
leaders prepared to lead this change (Riggs, 2001). Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership

31
model is increasingly being viewed as an answer to this new focus (Hu, & Liden, 2011;
Liden et al., 2008; Neubert et al., 2008; Schaubroeck et al., 2011; van Dierendonck,
2011; Walumbwa et al., 2010). Background information in the study therefore provided
insights on the importance of the right organizational leadership for not only the success
of the organization, but also of its employees.
Prior research by Peterson et al. (2012) served as the catalyst for this current
study. Peterson et al. (2012) pointed out the need for studies that investigated the link
between organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking servant leadership to
organizational success. This study was developed in response to that identified gap in the
literature.
The problem statement as it emerged from the literature, and in relation to both
the general population affected by the study, as well as the research questions stated that
it was not known how CEOs perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism
linking their servant leadership practices to the success of employees and organizations.
Three questions arose from this problem statement. They are:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
These served as a guide to the study, including the selection of data sources and the
development of questions for the semi-formal interviews.
The rationale for selecting the particular methodology utilized in the study was
also discussed in chapter 1. The methodology was a qualitative one, using a case study

32
design. Data for this case study was derived from semi-formal interviews, non-participant
observations, documentation, and a servant leadership questionnaire. This design was
appropriate to the qualitative methodology selected for the study because of its inclusion
in the set of distinct designs associated with this qualitative methodology, including
ethnographic, narrative, grounded theory, historical, and phenomenological research
(Houghton et al., 2013). The case study design was most appropriate of all these designs
because it allowed the story to be told as it happened (Stake, 1995), giving a voice to the
participants’ experience (Camic, Rhodes, & Yardley, 2003), something that none of the other
qualitative research designs could accommodate (Yin, 2011).

In this chapter, there was also an identification of limitations in the literature. For
example, recent literature revealed that although servant leadership is recognized as a
path for good leader/follower relationships, there are still several related areas that need
research (Bambale, 2014; Carter, & Baghurst, 2014; Lachman et al., 2014; Parris &
Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015). Additionally, Peterson et al. (2012),
stated that there is a need to explore the concept of organizational culture as a mediating
mechanism linking servant leadership to employee success and firm performance. Last,
Farling et al. (1999); Parris and Peachey (2013); van Dierendonck and Patterson (2015)
posited that there is a general insufficiency of empirical research on servant leadership.
The chapter also describes how this study fits with prior research which inspired
this study. Prior researches focused on CEOs practicing servant leadership in restaurants
(Peterson et al., 2012). Others reviewed employee success as an outcome of CEOs’
servant leadership (Parris & Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015) while
others addressed research results showing CEO servant leadership as a predictor of firm
performance (Latham, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012). However, scholars have not explored

33
how CEOs perceive culture as a mediating link between their servant leadership practices
and the success of employees and the performance of the organization (Peterson et al.,
2012). This research on public libraries also fits by addressing a gap identified in the
empirical research on servant leadership in specific organizational settings,
In the study fifteen definitions of frequently used terms are provided.
Assumptions were also addressed such as that participants in this study were not
deceptive with their answers, but answered questions honestly, openly, and in an
unbiased manner when interviewed. An example of limitations identified include the fact
that only 15 participants were selected from among staff in libraries throughout the state
of Florida. The sample was therefore not necessarily representative of the whole
population, making its generalizability limited. There are also delimitations in the study
such as those relating to situations and circumstances that could be controlled. For
example, the study was delimited to only three libraries in south central Florida.
Chapter 2 contains a review of the current literature on servant leadership and
organizational culture, as well as an introduction to the theoretical and conceptual
frameworks undergirding the research. In Chapter 3, there is a description of not only the
methodology, but also the research design and procedures used for this study. Chapter 4,
on the other hand, provides details on the analysis of the data, including both a written
and graphic summary of the results of the research. Chapter 5 ends the dissertation and
provides interpretations and discussions of the results of the research. What follows this
is chapter 2, starting with an introduction to the chapter as well as background
information on the problem addressed in the study.

34
Chapter 2: Literature Review
Introduction to the Chapter and Background to the Problem
There are many published studies regarding the effect of the practice of servant
leadership on both the employee and the organization’s performance (Bambale, 2014;
Carter & Baghurst, 2014; Lachman et al., 2014; Parris & Peachey, 2013). However, no
definitive studies have been found discussing the mediating role culture plays as a
mechanism linking CEOs, such as library leaders’, servant leadership practices to
organizational performance and employee success. Peterson et al. (2012) called for future
studies on the topic and noted this gap in the literature. The current study was a response
to this call. Specifically, through this qualitative case study, answers were determined for
the research questions identified in Chapter 1. In the section that follows, there is an
outline of the organization of this chapter to accomplish this review.
Organization of the chapter. There are four main sections in this chapter. The
introductory and background sections appear first, providing information on the purpose
of the study; what the literature review addressed; how the chapter was organized; how
the literature was surveyed; a historical overview of the topic based on the identified gap
or need; and a review of how the problem had evolved historically. In this chapter, there
was also a discussion of the theoretical and conceptual framework. Following this is the
third section, including themed discussions on the literature as follows: (a) leadership, (b)
servant leadership historical background, (c) transformational and servant leadership, (d)
servant leadership and organizational impact, (e) servant leadership and organizational
culture, and (f) the practice of servant leadership by CEOs.

35
The fourth and last segment of this chapter is a summary of the discussion in each
preceding section. A review of how the literature was surveyed will be incorporated into
this discussion.
How the literature was surveyed. The survey of the literature for this study was
dictated by two factors: sources for finding articles, such as the various online databases
provided by the Grand Canyon University (GCU), and the strategies used for researching
these databases. Several GCU databases were utilized, including Academic Source
Complete, Business Source Complete, Lope, and Emerald Publishing from the GCU
online library.
The accomplishment of the search involved several strategies. The strategies
utilized included the careful selection of terms based on the topic of interest. The term
leadership as the main subject was selected, along with many combinations of other
terms utilizing this one word. The additional terms were combined in different ways,
including the use of Boolean logic. They were “servant leadership”, organization*
(truncation) and culture, “servant leadership” and performance, and “servant
leadership” and organization* culture, “servant leadership” and CEOs, and
organizational leadership and culture.
The employment of several other strategies helped to locate important data on the
topic. For example, various delimiters were applied including the use of only articles
such as those published 2012 and after (Bambale, 2014; Burton, & Welty-Peachey, 2013;
Carter, 2012; Chen, Chen, & Li, 2013 and Yingying & Qing, 2014). Such articles were
also limited to only full text, scholarly, and peer-reviewed items. Older, seminal articles
were retrieved to strike a balance in the research and to provide definitions and describe

36
foundational concepts. Some of these older articles were identified through references in
the more current articles, while others emerged from scholarly online searches using
Google Scholar and .pdf searches.
Different approaches were used to research the theories of servant leadership and
organizational culture as well as to identify the foremost scholars in those fields. The
GCU library databases as well as Google Scholar allowed for the review of articles on the
servant leadership model of Liden et al. (2008). This was one of the foundational theories
for this research. On the other hand, there was a review of Schein’s (2004) text,
Organizational Culture and Leadership, for information on the theory of organizational
culture, the second foundational theory underpinning this research. The foremost scholars
in the field were identified through the many references made to their work in other
articles. The historical overview of the problem, based on the need defined by Peterson et
al. (2012) follows this section. There was also a discussion on how the problem had
evolved historically into its current form.
Historical evolution of the problem. The positive effect of the practice of
servant leadership on organizational performance as well as on employees was well
established in the literature (Chen et al., 2013; Overstreet, Hazen, Skipper, & Hanna,
2014; Peterson et al., 2012). Liden et al. (2014) also referred to this positive servant
leadership outcome through their research on the servant led restaurant. The results of a
study of 961 employees in 71 restaurants indicated that as employees experienced CEO
servant leadership, the employees in turn practiced servant leadership. This led to the
development of positive attitudes and behaviors among employees, which also impacted
the organization’s performance (Liden et al., 2014).

37
Through an examination of outstanding cooperatives in Indonesia, Harwiki (2013)
also demonstrated that servant leadership influences employees’ performance, among
other constructs. However, Choudhary, Akhtar, and Zaheer (2013) found in a study
conducted in Pakistan among 155 for-profit participants that transformational leadership
had more effect than servant leadership on organizational learning. This influenced
organizational performance, according to Choudhary et al. On the other hand, these
researchers did find that both leadership styles had great effect on organizational
performance in many other areas.
Several other researchers referred to the influence servant leadership has on
employees’ performance. They showed this as a positive relationship between servant
leadership and such employee outcomes as job attitude, organizational citizenship
behavior (OCB), and performance at the individual level. This included researchers such
as Liden et al. (2014); van Dierendonck (2011). With respect to team performance, Hu
and Liden (2011), as well as Schaubroeck et al. (2011) provided empirical evidence for
servant leadership practices as the catalyst for positive levels, delving into the matter of
goal and process clarity as well as affect-based trust. At the organizational level Peterson
et al. (2012) found the same positive outcome, as they examined CEOs as servant leaders,
and their impact on firm performance. Dinh et al. (2014) confirmed the position of
Peterson et al. (2012), even when the research controls for the more popular
transformational and leader-exchange leadership models. Despite all this empirical
research, however, a need is still evident in the literature.
The need or gap. Several areas of study relevant to both servant leadership and
organizational culture have yet to be researched. According to Liden et al. (2014) and van

38
Dierendonck, and Patterson (2015), the question of how servant leadership can affect
positive outcomes for employees, as well as organizations, needs further research. While
many researchers have reiterated the positive impact servant leadership has on
organizations, few have addressed the matter of how this phenomenon occurs. In
addition, few scholars have addressed the role of CEO servant leadership in obtaining
positive outcomes for employees and the organization. The role culture may play in the
improved performance of both employees and organization also needs to be researched.
Peterson et al. (2012) recognized this need and suggested a further study on the matter
within the context of organizational culture.
Servant leadership has been receiving some attention as a research topic, but there
is room for far more research on the matter (Bambale, 2014; Barbuto & Wheeler, 2006;
Kool & van Dierendonck, 2012). Peterson et al. (2012) and Jones (2012b) also confirmed
this point, stating that the number of empirical research on servant leadership in
organizations was limited. In fact, most research examining leadership impact on
employee and organizational performance related to transformational and charismatic
leadership (Liden et al., 2014). Thus, there is a need to do further research to understand
the impact of servant leadership on organizational and employee performance.
Peterson et al. (2012) discovered one example of this need for additional research
on servant leadership. According to these authors, Peterson et al.’s (2012) discovery of
the role of culture in mediating positive results in servant led organizations, need to be
studied (Peterson et al., 2012). The authors stated:
One potential area of future research is exploring culture or climate as a mediating
mechanism linking servant leadership to firm performance. By creating an atmosphere

39
that encourages followers to develop, learn, and reach their potential, the firm may
indirectly reap the benefits. (Peterson et al., 2012, p. 589)
Consequently, the intent behind conducting this study was twofold. First, the plan
was to extend prior research about servant leadership and culture in organizations. Parris
and Peachey (2013) are among those who recognized this need, pointing to the fact that
most empirical research on the subject focus, on the development of theoretical
frameworks and measurement tools. However, utilizing the multi-dimensional servant
leadership model of Liden et al. (2008), as well as Schein’s (2004) model of
organizational culture as a means of responding to the research questions, will help add to
the empirical servant leadership and organizational culture literature.
The second intent behind conducting this study was to provide further
understanding of servant leadership by exploring the mediating role of culture in the
relationship between library CEOs’ as servant leaders, and their employee and
organizational performance. Liden et al. (2014) showed that servant leaders create
serving cultures that encourage positive organizational performance as well as positive
individual attitudes and behaviors. If Liden et al. are correct, library CEOs as servant
leaders should be operationalizing environments in their libraries characterized by such a
culture. The senior level questionnaire in this study was designed to determine whether
this culture was in place from the perspectives of the senior level staff. Thus, the
respondents were asked to rate the CEOs’ caring attitude on a seven-point Richter scale
including statements such as “(S)he (the CEO) cares more about others’ success than
his/her own” or “(S)he cares about others’ personal well-being.” This study will go

40
beyond demonstrating the existence of a serving culture created by the CEOs as servant
leaders, however, to look at why this outcome is possible in the perspectives of the CEOs.
The study utilized a qualitative, single case study design to address the problem of
interest to the research. According to Vohra (2014), a case study design is a complex
design which permits induction of rich and reliable models. Yin (2009) described this
design as a study that contributes to our knowledge of individuals. According to the
problem statement, there was a need to know how library CEOs perceived organizational
culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’
success as well as organizational performance. In the following two sections, background
information is provided on the concepts that helped identify answers to this problem.
Theoretical Foundations and Conceptual Framework
The foundation of this study is based on three different constructs. These were
Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership theory, the servant leadership model of Liden et al.
(2008), and Schein’s (2004) organizational culture model. As such, each of these
constructs had bearing on the development of the study’s purpose, its research questions,
the phenomenon of interest, and the instruments selected for collecting data.
Servant leadership theory. The servant leadership theory, based on Robert
Greenleaf’s (1970) work, formed the foundation for this study, along with Schein’s
(2004) organizational culture and the servant leadership model of Liden et al. (2008).
Greenleaf wrote extensively about servant leadership, resulting in great insights and
knowledge on leadership. Greenleaf was influenced by his years of leadership research
and development during his tenure at AT&T, as well as his role as consultant to large
institutions (Spears, 2002). Greenleaf (1970) first coined the term servant leader.

41
According to Greenleaf, any great leader is first a servant. This essentially captures the
essence of the theory Greenleaf developed in the 1970s pertaining to leadership in
organizations resulting in employee success and positive organizational performance.
The theory was developed in response to Greenleaf’s (1970) reading of Herman
Hesse’s book Journey to the East. It led Greenleaf to recognize the leadership crisis in
our society. The novel described a group of men travelling together on a long trip. A
humble man, Leo, accompanied them. Leo was singular because he completed all the
group’s chores and tried to meet their needs. When he disappeared, the group fell into
disorder and they even abandoned the trip. Interestingly, Leo was later found to be the
head of the organization that sponsored the trip. His influence on the group was not
because of his position but because of his willingness to serve them. This was a
revelation for Greenleaf and led to a theory based on his idea that a great leader must first
be a great servant. For him a leader was innately a servant led to lead, to serve better.
Greenleaf (1970) described it this way: “It begins with the natural feeling that one wants
to serve, to serve first. Then conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead” (p. 6).
The servant leadership theory is paradoxical, challenging the status quo in
organizational leadership where the traditional organizational pyramid with the leader at
the top is flipped so the leader is now at the bottom and followers on top. Greenleaf, who
postulated that only those who proved themselves trusted servants should be looked on as
leaders by followers, reinforced this idea in his seminal work The Servant as Leader
(Greenleaf, 1970). Greenleaf made the point that there needed to be a new view of
leadership, a view supported by later researchers (Berger, 2014; Fusco, O'Riordan, &
Palmer, 2015; Storsletten & Jakobsen, 2015). The assertion was that servant leadership

42
refers to a leadership theory in which the leader assumed responsibility not only for the
success of the organization but also in a moral sense, for employees, customers, and other
stakeholders (Peterson et al., 2012).
Library CEOs, embracing the servant leadership principles will therefore assume
responsibility not only for the organization’s success but also for the success of
employees, based on Greenleaf’s theory. In the discharge of such responsibility as servant
leaders, these CEOs’ leadership style will be radical, demonstrating this perspective on
leadership. This has implications for all stakeholders including employees and customers.
Asking the CEOs, the following semi structured interview questions which were all based
on the theory, helped to demonstrate how the study aligned with the theory:
1. Do your organization's policies, practices, and procedures advance these (servant
leadership) characteristics? If so, how and if not, why not?
2. Please provide specific examples of how your leadership style affects those you
supervise directly.
3. Do you believe a not-for-profit organization such as your library, practicing these
(servant leadership) dimensions can actually address the needs and requirements
of its customers? If so what are some of the needs of your customers that you are
able to meet?
The research questions also demonstrate the alignment of the study with this
theory. For example, the first question asked, “How do servant leadership practices of
library CEOs enable an organizational culture of employee success?” The data collection
instruments selected were very appropriate to the collection of data for answering the
question. Responses from the interviews helped in an understanding of how the theory
was at work in the organization. The responses to the questionnaire by the senior level
staff as well as information reviewed from documents and researcher observations were
also pertinent since all were framed by the theory.

43
Spears (2002) defined servant leadership as a new kind of leadership model which
prioritized service to others as the number one responsibility of leaders. Spears was also
responsible for the development of the first set of servant leadership characteristics, based
on Greenleaf’s (1970) work. These characteristics are listening, empathy, healing,
awareness, persuasion, conceptualization, foresight, stewardship, commitment to the
growth of people, and building community. Many conceptual tools and frameworks have
emerged over the last 30 years from Robert Greenleaf’s work and all could be attributed
to these characteristics. Overall, Greenleaf began a radical way of viewing organizational
leadership with the creation of his servant leadership theory.
From the theory emerges the idea that servant leadership influences the
individual’s performance in various organizational settings, including the service
industry, which was the setting of interest to this study. Jaramillo et al. (2015) posited
that this influence is because of the critical role that servant leaders play in facilitating
positive employee performance. Employees led by servant leaders functioned at a
maximum level mainly because this leadership style focused on the employee’s strengths
rather than critically evaluating performance (Searle & Barbuto, 2011). Being the boss or
exercising leadership power over others misses the point of leadership (Hunter et al.,
2013; Jaramillo et al., 2009; Walumbwa et al., 2010; Yoshida, Sendjaya, Hirst, &
Cooper, 2014). The following items from the questionnaire for the senior level staff
spoke to this concept and demonstrated alignment with the theory:
1. He/She puts others’ best interests above his/her own
2. He/She provides others with work experiences that enable them to develop new
skills
3. He/She sacrifices his/her own interests to meet others’ needs.

44
Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership theory was a leadership style also noted for
its focus on improving organizations not only through empowerment of employees but
also through culture building in the organization (Jones, 2012b). According to Mahembe,
and Engelbrecht (2014), this outcome was possible because the servant leadership theory
was instrumental in effecting positive team building, which contributes to an
organizational culture of strong team spirit. According to Schein (2004), culture and
leadership are two sides of the same coin. When an organization fails to run effectively, it
is because of a lack of appropriate leadership, such as servant leaders can provide (Finley,
2012), for building a conducive culture for success.
Public libraries are not-for-profit enterprises. Nevertheless, for the public’s
benefit and justification of their role as a public service entity, they need to be run as
efficiently and effectively as the for-profit enterprise. Leadership is needed to engender
this effectiveness and efficiency. According to Spears (2002), former Director of
Greenleaf’s Center for Servant Leadership, this type of leadership emerges from the
motivation and inspiration to help others that a leader has. In short, the practice of the
servant leadership theory by leaders such as the CEOs in libraries is expected to engender
a culture of success.
Servant leaders play a critical role in creating a culture of success for employees
in organizations (Doh & Quigley, 2014; Gatut & Jiwa, 2013; Latham, 2014; Tysiac,
2013). One method for accomplishing this is is through providing motivation for the
individual employee (Carter, 2012; Liden et al., 2008, 2014). The second research
question of this study focused on this. The question asked how the organizational culture
enables employee success. Several authors have confirmed that the servant leadership

45
practices of leaders affect employee success (Finley, 2012; Harwiki, 2013; Jones, 2012b;
Parris & Peachey, 2013). Researchers have noted that culture in organizations only
happens when a leader’s behavior resulted in successful accomplishment of tasks and
followers felt good about the resulting relationship built among them (Schein, 2004).
Thus, as Liden et al. (2008) posited, the culture of success in organizations is dependent
on the regular recognition, utilization, and development of employees’ unique talents that
encourages their success. This is also dependent on the leader’s ability to help employees
recognize, grow and develop their talents (Hunter et al., 2013; Jaramillo et al., 2009;
Walumbwa et al., 2010; Yoshida et al., 2014). If the CEOs in the subject libraries
practiced the servant leadership concept, they would be enabling them to be a success
thus building a culture of success. Results from data gathered from the instruments such
as the questionnaire, the documentation, and even the observation demonstrated this.
Because of the emphasis of servant leadership’s theory on service to others along
with its recognition that the role of organizations was to develop people who can build a
better tomorrow (Parris & Peachey, 2013) it was hailed as the best answer to
organizational ineffectiveness. Additionally, because servant leadership provided an
alternative approach to the traditional, directive leader style, there was more
collaboration, trust, and building and strengthening of relationships in servant led
organizations (Finley, 2012). These findings were helpful in bringing clarity to the role of
library CEOs as they practiced servant leadership in libraries. They enabled an
understanding of how such practices can lead to employee success and organizational
performance and thus contributed to answering the first and second research questions.
Analysis of the data gathered from the library sites, confirmed alignment with the theory.

46
This study extended the application of the servant leadership theory by adding to
the empirical literature on the subject. The theory was also be extended as a viable
leadership theory for application in libraries as service institutions. Last, this theory was
extended as it was used in research on a specific group of CEOs, in a population never
before researched.
Servant leadership model. Spears (2002) developed 10 characteristics from his
study of Greenleaf’s work that have been used by several other scholars to develop other
servant leadership models and instruments (Barbuto & Wheeler, 2006; Laub, 1999;
Sendjaya, Sarros, & Santora, 2008). As a result, many servant leadership constructs have
emerged as frameworks for enabling an understanding of the theory as seen in the
behaviors of organizational leaders. Liden et al. (2008) were among this category of
scholars. Utilizing the 10 characteristics identified by Spears (2002), Liden et al. (2008)
discovered nine dimensions of servant leadership that can be used to measure the
individual servant leader’s practice of the characteristics. These researchers later reduced
the number of characteristics to seven, based on further research. In the current study,
there was an adoption of the seven-dimension model that emerged as one of the
foundational concepts underpinning the research. Through the application of these
dimensions in libraries, servant leadership was shown to be important for empowering
and developing staff (van Dierendonck, 2011).
The dimensions outlined by Liden et al. (2008) included:
1. Emotional healing—being sensitive to the concerns of others
2. Creating value for the community—a conscious, genuine concern for helping the
community
3. Conceptual skills—the possession of an understanding of the organization and the
tasks to be accomplished in order to be able to assist and support others

47
4. Empowering—encouraging and facilitating others, especially immediate
followers, in identifying and solving problems, as well as determining when and
how to complete work tasks
5. Helping followers grow and succeed—demonstrating genuine concern for others'
career growth and development by providing support and mentoring
6. Putting followers first—the use of words and actions by the leader to ensure
followers understand that the satisfaction of their work needs is a priority of that
leader. This may involve that leader being willing to leave their own work in
order to troubleshoot with the follower
7. Behaving ethically—interacting openly, fairly, and honestly with others
All dimensions or behaviors are characteristic of servant leaders (Liden et al., 2008).
As Heaphey (2006) pointed out, the measure of success for most organizations is
the financial bottom line. High financial returns meant a good leader and low returns a
bad leader. For not-for-profit organizations, such as libraries, however, this was not a
suitable measure. The seven dimensions outlined by Liden et al. (2008) offered a more
viable framework for measuring the leadership of this organization that had service as its
main business. The dimensions provided specific characteristics by which to explore
servant leadership practices among the CEOs in this study.
The dimensions also had bearing on the problem and purpose of the study which
sought to understand how the CEOs of three libraries in south central Florida perceived
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. For example, the
questionnaire used with the senior level staff from each library was based on these seven
dimensions. Questions were included, for example, that helped the senior level staff
articulate their perceptions of how the CEO in their library put others first or created
value for the community.

48
The interview questions which were framed based on the dimensions, were
therefore intended to help guide the CEOs as they sought to verbalize their perceptions of
their own practice. After all, according to Heaphey (2006), many library leaders are
practicing the characteristics of servant leadership unawares. Thus, the dimensions
formed the conceptual framework for both the questionnaire and the interview questions,
which enabled the CEOs and their staff to determine the level at which they were
practicing servant leadership principles.
Thus, the seven dimensions of Liden et al. (2008) provided a framework that was
viable for this study. They were instrumental in the design of the study’s research and
interview questions and provided the framework for the questionnaire to be used for the
senior level staff. Additionally, these seven dimensions provided a framework against
which to analyze collected data. The study itself extended the servant leadership model
by applying it in a not-for-profit organization, a setting in which there was very little
evidence of its application. The model was also extended as it was used to research a
population largely underrepresented in the literature.
Organizational culture model. Schein’s (2004) organizational culture model
also formed a part of the conceptual framework for this study. Various definitions have
been offered for this model, including one by Pirjol and Maxim (2012). This definition
held that organizational culture was “the one that directs the employees to act according
to the principles and values of the organization and to understand what is good, bad, ugly
or beautiful for it” (Pirjol & Maxim, 2012, p. 371).
Schein (2004) also provided a definition for the concept, which had procured for
him the title of inventor of the term corporate culture (Crainer & Dearlove, 2002). The

49
term is now widely used, according to Las Heras and Grau (2011), although there has
been great difficulty in determining a definition for the word culture. According to
Schein (2004), organizational culture is:
A pattern of basic assumptions, invented, discovered, or developed by a given
group, as it learns to cope with its problems of external adaptation and internal
integration, that has worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore is to be
taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those
problems. (p. 17)
Schein (2004) posited that if there is a culture in an organization, this implies the
existence of a form of stability. Additionally, according to Armenakis et al. (2011), it
would be useful to describe the culture of an organization in relation to the cultural
elements framework as suggested by Schein. This framework comprised three elements
or levels. This was where the “cultural phenomenon was visible to the observer”
(Armenakis et al., 2011, p. 25) or the points at which the culture could be analyzed.
Schein named these levels or elements artifacts, espoused beliefs and values, and
assumptions. This model’s role as conceptual framework for the study will be discussed
next.
Schein’s (2004) model provided a conceptual framework for the development of
the purpose of the study. This purpose was to understand how the CEOs of three libraries
in south central Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism
linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational
performance. Organizational culture was at the center of the purpose of the study since
the intent was to understand how each CEO perceived the role this concept played in

50
taking their servant leadership behaviors and rendering them as catalysts for success.
According to Schein, culture relates to nonnegotiable values which are that way because
they have passed from the artifacts level to the assumptions level. Thus, this model
became a method of determining the impact of servant leadership in bringing success to
the individual organization and its members to the extent that success is an assumption.
Schein’s (2004) model also provided a framework for the development of the
research questions for the study. In fact, the first two research questions were couched in
organizational model language. Again, organizational culture was central to each
question, and dictated the content of the data to be collected in response to each.
The organizational culture model also formed a framework for determining the
data collection tools to be used in this study. Four different tools were used. They were
semi structured interviews, questionnaire, documentation, and non-participant
observation. Three of these tools were directly impacted by this framework. The first
were the interview questions. Because of the content of the research questions, the
interview questions must, of necessity contain inquiry that related to organizational
culture. Thus, five of the 12 questions had direct bearing on organizational culture. For
example, one question asked: How do you see (or not) these dimensions impacting the
culture of your organization? This was a direct question pertaining to the organizational
culture model. Because the study was qualitative the interview questions were semi
structured, allowing for the development of a social relation of sorts (Yin, 2011). This
allowed for the gathering of deep rich data.
As a tool, documentation gathered was also dictated largely by the organizational
culture framework. According to Yin (2011) documents are invaluable primary evidence.

51
Schein (2004) described some of these documents as being available at the artifact level.
For example, Schein referred to an organization’s published list of values as an artifact.
In the selected libraries, these comprised the organizational chart, and vision/mission
statement. Espoused beliefs and values, at the second level of Schein’s model also
provide a framework for data gathering. Since this level involves the strategies, goals,
and philosophies espoused by the organization, this type of data was also gathered
utilizing the documentation tool. Libraries generally develop strategic plans as well as
annual operational plans. These are tools that were examined in the three libraries as part
of the document gathering activity. According to Rappaport and Richter (2013), this is
the level at which the shared cultural values the members profess is visible.
The tool of non-participant observation was also utilized in the framework of the
organizational culture and operated at the artifact level. According to Pirjol and Maxim
(2012), this involves examining the natural activities of people in the organizational
environment, hearing what they say and observing what they do. In the library setting,
this involved the observation of the interaction between CEO and senior staff, senior
level staff and subordinates, as well as staff and customer. This was helpful in
determining success, since according to Chen et al. (2013), employee success is
established when employees become tolerant, open-minded, patient, optimistic,
proactive, and willing to learn. Spending 2 days in each library provided insights on the
interactions taking place in each library, since artifacts in the library include “all the
phenomena that one sees, hears, and feels” (Schein, 2004, p. 25). Pirjol and Maxim
(2012) suggested an understanding of these artifacts is to be guided by the research

52
questions in a study. Two of those in this study pertained to organizational culture, as
stated above.
Schein’s (2004) model provided a framework not only for the development of the
purpose of the study but also for the creation of the research and interview questions, and
the collection of data for analysis in answering those research questions. The levels were
fitting instruments for understanding how culture could be a mediating mechanism,
impacting employee and ultimately organizational performance in the participating
libraries. Additionally, Schein’s (2004) model was extended by reviewing how the
servant leadership assumptions of the CEOs in the selected libraries became the shared
assumptions of those they led, enabling stability, meaning, and even growth in these
organizations.
Review of the Literature
Servant leadership, the phenomenon explored in this study, is an effective
response to the desperate call for ethical leadership in organizations today (Reed et al.,
2011; Russell & Stone, 2002). One crisis after another has arisen in several organizations,
typified by the recent scandalous reports on leaders in firms such as Enron, WorldCom,
and Qwest (Bart & Fuller, 2013; Hurley, Gillespie, Ferrin, & Dietz, 2013; Shaked &
Orelowitz, 2013). According to Resick, Hanges, Dickson, and Mitchelson (2006), the
response to all this corruption must be a cleansing from the toxicity in these organizations
by injecting ethical leadership, which can only happen if ethical leaders are in place. This
opened the door for the acceptance of servant leadership as a possible answer to this
dilemma (Sendjaya et al., 2008).

53
According to English (2011), servant leadership is a good solution because
leaders who embrace this leadership model invariably assist followers in developing a
servant attitude to the organization, while demonstrating a commitment and loyalty to its
success, even in the face of change. Consequently, the concept of servant leadership has
gained considerably in popularity, resulting in the publication of many articles on the
topic. Many researchers in prior studies have taken note of this popularity. This includes
authors such as Jones (2012b); Parris and Peachey (2013); Reed et al. (2011). A critical
review of the literature indicated that the reason for this rise in popularity was recognition
of the positive effect of servant leadership in organizations as a means of engendering
employee success and organizational performance (Parris & Peachey, 2013). Scant
attention has been focused, however, on how such outcomes were possible (Liden et al.,
2014; Peterson et al., 2012), resulting in a deficiency in the literature.
Researchers in the leadership field have recognized the above-mentioned
deficiency and suggested topics for further research as a way of filling the gap. Peterson
et al. (2012) were involved in this type of research. They postulated that there is a need to
understand how CEOs perceive organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking
their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational
performance (Peterson et al., 2012). The review of the literature for this study was
conducted with this in mind. Topics reviewed include a look at the following: (a) the
concept of leadership and definitions offered for it; (b) the historical background of
servant leadership; (c) servant leadership and transformational leadership; (d) servant
leadership and organizational impact; (e) servant leadership and organizational culture;
and (f) servant leadership and CEOs. Following this is the review of the literature as laid

54
out above, starting with a review of the term leadership and its definitions offered in the
literature.
Leadership defined. This research was grounded in the field of organizational
leadership. It was therefore pertinent that the review of the literature examined the
scholarship on the subject as a way of identifying a definition of the term, leadership.
This helped to establish a place for this study in the field of organizational leadership in
general.
Leadership has been the contemplation of historians, philosophers, and social
scientists for thousands of years (English, 2011). In fact, the word “leader” appeared in
the English language as early as 1300, according to the Dictionary (1933), although the
term leadership came much later in 1800 (Bass & Bass, 2008). Additionally, Bass and
Bass mentioned several regions of early civilizations in which the principles were
practiced. This includes the Egyptians with their 2300 B.C.E. document Instruction of
Ptahhotep, which illustrates the incorporation of leadership principles; the Chinese,
through their famous author and philosopher Lao-tzu in 6th century B.C.E.; as well as
Babylon and Asia, among other early nations (Bass & Bass, 2008). Burns (1978) asserted
that leadership is one of the most observed yet least understood phenomena on Earth. In
other words, there was no one definition but rather a cacophony of voices asserting their
ideas as to the term’s meaning. The next section therefore discussed meanings or
definitions of leadership advanced by various researchers over the years.
The term “leadership” has evaded a single definition over the years. Tannenbaum
and Massarik (1957) confirmed this position and posited that there has been a shifting of
the theoretical focus over the years from trait, to situational and then to leader

55
effectiveness based on being able to meet followers’ needs. For Drucker (1966),
leadership is about effectiveness. To this end, Drucker identified five characteristics of
effective leaders including the characteristic of listening, one of the characteristics of
servant leadership as described by Spears (2002). Kouzes and Posner (2007) also defined
leadership in terms of characteristics, positing that there are five key practices which
identify a person as providing leadership. On the other hand, Cawthon (1996) confirmed
the great men and women theory, postulating that not only is this position on leadership
supported by the great philosopher Aristotle, but that the pioneers of American political
thought also accepted it.
Attempts have been made to define leadership in terms of impact on followers.
Thus, according to McCall (2002), leadership is “an achievement term that denotes some
degree of success in eliciting collective behavior from others in pursuit of a goal to be
achieved” (p. 133). Bennis (2006) reflected this idea and viewed leadership as the
leader’s effort at helping followers realize meaning as part of their work situation.
Researchers that are more recent have varying approaches to the definition of the word.
For Summerfield (2014), the definition of the term ought to be very simple. To
this end, Summerfield researched various published works but found that the definitions
were in terms of what leaders do (Summerfield, 2014). In the end, however, Summerfield
himself developed a meaning, which describes what leaders do. He stated that the best
definition is that leaders “make things better” (p. 252). Volkmann, Tokarski, and Ernst
(2012) also researched the literature for a meaning of the word leadership, and opined
that its meaning is contextual. The question, therefore, is not what leadership is, but
rather, how to understand the phenomenon. Vacar (2015) explained the term within the

56
context of project management. Accordingly, leadership is not only a means of
influencing followers but also as a way of motivating them to act for the accomplishment
of organizational goals (Vacar, 2015). This has implications for the individual leader.
According to Vacar, it also has implications for managers who think of themselves as
leaders. Helping such managers to understand the essence of leadership would be a
means of helping them lead more effectively (Vacar, 2015), and thus contribute to more
successful employees and high performing organizations.
Thus, all these definitions seem to have two things in common; they offer a view
of leadership in terms of relationships and they focus on the individual leader. However,
other researches offer additional approaches. For example, Shaked and Schechter (2013)
advocated a system approach specifically for finding a definition of school leadership. In
their opinion, the challenges of high expectations, accountability, and uncertain
conditions principals face daily seem to require a systems leadership approach (Shaked &
Schechter, 2013). However, Shaked and Schechter fell short of offering a definition for
this concept of leadership. They opined instead that this is systems thinking which is “a
holistic framework that views the entire component parts of a system in the context of
and in relation to the other parts, emphasizing the influence of the system’s parts on one
another and on the entire system” (Shaked & Schechter, 2013, p. 775). Siegel (2015)
drew attention to still another way of defining leadership. Siegel spoke definitively of
responsible leadership, which the author defined as a result of recent pressure on leaders
to be socially responsible (Siegel, 2015). A discussion of this next approach follows.
Emphasizing the concept of social responsibility, Siegel (2015) described an
approach to the meaning or definition of leadership in organizations. In this context,

57
social responsibility is related not to the individual leader, but rather to corporate actions.
According to Siegel, this is an attempt to accomplish set goals for various stakeholders
including customers, suppliers, employees, the local community, non-governmental
organizations, and shareholders. It could also be for accomplishing other goals including
those pertaining to diversity, work practices, and even sustainability. In this environment,
Siegel suggested that leadership involves a willingness on the part of not only the
organization but also the leader to go beyond mere adherence to rules and regulations in
order to accomplish the desired end. This approach is somewhat reflective of the servant
leadership approach in which leaders seek to build trust by selflessly serving others first
(Greenleaf, 1970). However, Siegel (2015) admitted the difficulty of a real definition for
the term leadership and intimates that its relevance should be in relation to values-based
leadership. This has implications for the concept underlying this study of servant
leadership, which will be discussed next.
In summary, leadership as a concept has been contemplated for centuries,
appearing in English as the word “leader” as early as 1300 (Dictionary, 1933). The term
leadership itself first appeared in the 1800s, according to Bass and Bass (2008). The
principle was practiced in Egypt since 2300 BCE; in China since sixth BCE; and in other
nations such as Asia and Babylon a long time ago. However, no definitive definition has
ever appeared. In the 20th century, Tannenbaum and Massarik (1957) described the term
as a composite of three delineable facets: the leader’s psychological attributes, the
situation in which leadership is operational, and the ability of the leader to meet
followers’ needs. In contrast, Drucker (1966) posited that leadership is about
effectiveness, and listed five characteristics including listening as in servant leadership.

58
Kouzes, and Posner (2007) described the concept as key practices. Cawthon (1996)
posited the great man position as an optimum leadership strategy, while Bennis (2006)
was more focused on what leaders do. More recently, Volkmann et al. (2012) suggested
that a definition be based on the context in which it is used, while Shaked and Schechter
(2013) advocated a systems approach. Siegel (2015) emphasized social responsibility as
well as a values based relevance that should be in relation to values-based leadership.
Historical background of servant leadership. Servant leadership was at the
heart of this research study. It was therefore critical to explore the history of the topic to
establish the place of this study in the research. According to van Dierendonck and
Patterson (2015), the servant leader concept is traceable back to ancient times, and was
evident culturally, geographically, philosophically, and religiously. For example, tenets
of the concept of servant leadership are evident in religions such as Christianity with
Jesus Christ as the central figure, Buddhism with Buddha, Islam with the prophet
Mohammed, Judaism with Yahweh, and Confucianism with Confucius. According to
Sendjaya et al. (2008), Jesus, as founder of the Christian religion between 31 and 33
A.D., provided a most powerful demonstration of the concept of servant leadership in a
religion. In Mark 10:43 (King James Version), Jesus informed His disciples who were
struggling for power, that anyone who would seek to be the leader must become a servant
to their followers. Jesus further demonstrated His point in John 13:4-5 when He, their
leader, knelt and washed the dirty feet of His disciples.
Philosophically, Lao-Tzu, the Chinese philosopher credited with the development
of Taoism between 600 and 400 BC, also supported servant leadership. Lao-Tzu
philosophized that without a good leader, things would not get done but when it was

59
done, that leader would take no credit for it (Shinagel, 2016). However, as a philosophy,
it was not until the late 20th century that the term “servant leadership” was introduced to
the world.
Robert Greenleaf introduced the term “servant leader” as a fresh new way of
viewing the activities of those who would lead. Greenleaf (1970) developed his idea of
the concept after reading the short novel Journey to the East by Hermann Hesse, a
German-born Swiss poet, novelist, and painter. Inspired by the main character in the
story, Leo, who at first appeared to be servant to a group of priests on a spiritual
pilgrimage, but who later emerged as the leader of the group of priests, Greenleaf
embraced the overarching theme of the story. The theory purports that great leaders serve
first (Greenleaf, 1970). Expanding on this idea, Greenleaf—now recognized as the father
of the modern concept of servant leadership—defined the servant leader as that person
who naturally wants to serve and who will be a leader as a part of the quest to serve.
Based on the writings of Greenleaf, these leaders have characteristic behaviors, thus
implying specific characteristics for servant leaders. This will be the next topic of
discussion.
According to Mehta and Pillay (2011), there is no known list typifying a
comprehensive, agreed upon set of characteristics describing servant leadership. Many
researchers have emerged providing their view of the concept often based on their own
research. Larry Spears, in his capacity as CEO of the Greenleaf Center for Servant
Leadership, developed a list of 10 characteristics or attributes of a servant leader, which
he said was based on his interpretation of Greenleaf’s work. These attributes include
listening, empathy, healing, awareness, persuasion, conceptualization, foresight,

60
stewardship, commitment to the growth of people and building community (Spears,
2002). Since then, several other descriptions of servant leadership characteristics have
emerged from various researchers. A review of the most prominent ones follows.
Graham (1991) referred to four leader characteristics, which include low need for
power, genuine humility, high empathy, and communication skills. According to
Graham, these characteristics could also serve as antecedents of servant leadership.
Mehta and Pillay (2011) suggested, however, that the characteristic low need for power
emanating from Graham’s work seems to undermine the servant leader concept.
Laub (1999) also created a list of characteristics, which he referred to as six core
dimensions of servant leadership. This includes the characteristics of valuing people,
developing people, building community, displaying authenticity, providing leadership;
and sharing leadership (Laub, 1999). Because of this work, Laub received recognition as
the creator of one of the first empirical instruments for measuring servant leadership in
organizations. The Organizational Leadership Assessment (OLA) tool is the name given
to his measure. It is now a validated, quantitative measure of servant leadership in
organizations (Laub, 1999).
Russell and Stone (2002) conducted a review of the literature on servant
leadership, positing that from their review, there are at least 20 different attributes or
characteristics of servant leaders. Russell and Stone classified nine of these as “functional
attributes” (p. 146). These functional attributes are the real characteristics of servant
leadership, although there are additional attributes, which Russell and Stone described as
accompanying attributes. Combining both sets of attributes, Russell and Stone (2002)
developed what he called a “researchable” or “working model” (p. 145) of servant

61
leadership, which is intended to assist in an understanding, application, research and
further development of the servant leadership concept. However, although the
accompanying attributes are supplemental to, and meant to augment the functional
attributes, they are more than merely supplemental. They are on occasion also prerequisites to effective servant leadership (Russell & Stone, 2002).
Patterson (2003) referred to the seven values or constructs of servant leaders.
According to Patterson, leaders who lead as servants are expected to have agapao love,
act with humility, be altruistic, be visionary for the followers, be trusting, be serving, and
empower followers. Barbuto and Wheeler (2006) also contributed to the notion of a list
of behaviors that are characteristic of servant leaders. The authors suggested five factors
of servant leadership, including altruistic calling, emotional healing, wisdom, persuasive
mapping, and organizational stewardship. These authors also conducted a literature
review designed to contribute to the conceptualization and measurement of servant
leadership. By incorporating a scale development and validation process, Barbuto and
Wheeler managed to produce what they classified as a refinement of the servant
leadership construct.
Of interest to this study was the contribution to the empirical development and
study of the concept of servant leadership of Liden et al. (2008). Describing behaviors
characteristic of servant leaders, Liden et al. used the term dimensions. These dimensions
include conceptualizing, emotional healing, putting followers first, helping followers
grow and succeed, behaving ethically, empowering, and creating value for the
community. Developing a tool with 28 items addressing the seven dimensions of servant
leadership, Liden et al. (2008) contributed an instrument intended as a measurement for

62
servant leadership characteristics in leaders, as opposed to Laub’s (1999) tool which
measures the organization. The model of servant leadership of Liden et al. (2008) formed
a large part of the theoretical foundation for this study. It provided a tool for enabling the
comparison of the servant leadership practices of the library CEOs, as enunciated in their
interviews, with the responses of their senior level staff to the questionnaire, as well as
with organizational documentation and non-participant observations.
According to Liden et al. (2014), servant leaders can inspire servant leadership
behaviors in employees because of the serving culture they develop in their
organizations. The results of this research presented a positive relationship between the
serving culture and organizational performance, employee performance, creativity, and
customer service behaviors. On the other hand, Liden et al. indicated a negative
relationship between the serving culture and staff turnover. In the discussion that follows,
a review of the literature comparing the servant and transformational leadership models is
provided.
Servant leadership and transformational leadership. Servant leadership is a
viable answer to the leadership dilemma faced by organizations (Spears, 2002; van
Dierendonck, 2011; Weinstein, 2013). While this concept is defined by Greenleaf (1970)
as a description of a leader who desires to serve first and lead as a way of serving, Burns
(1978) defined the transformational leader as “one who raises the followers’ level of
consciousness about the importance and value of desired out comes and the methods of
reaching those outcomes.” (p. 141). How these concepts compare and why many leaders
utilize servant leadership as against transformational leadership are questions addressed
in this review. This will help to establish the benefits of utilizing the servant leadership

63
principles rather than the transformational in organizational leadership. This was
important to this study, which had a direct focus on servant leadership as a response to
the need for filling a gap identified in the literature (Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al.,
2012).
The importance of good leadership for organizations cannot be overstated. Many
recent researchers allude to this need citing the necessity of sound leadership as the
antidote for the type of troubles experienced by many organizations recently (Fehr, Kai
Chi, & Dang, 2015; Lawton & Páez, 2015; Wu et al., 2015) According to Caldwell et al.
(2012), a new type of leadership is needed to counter the recent cynicism surrounding
this matter. Latham (2013) agreed, opining that leaders need to be able to maintain high
levels of performance in a constantly changing world. Another proponent of this view
was Osula and Ng (2014), who stated that leaders who fail followers lead to distrust and
antagonism, providing proof of the importance of values-based leadership. According to
Latham (2014), maybe too much credit is given to leaders as the linchpin of
organizational success. The consensus among researchers is that this is indeed the case;
leadership of organizations is what makes the difference where success is concerned.
What’s more, the model a leader espouses can make a difference, according to Tebeian
(2012), “since the leader is the main pawn, the generator and sustainer of a healthy
[organizational] environment” (p. 1092). According to Choudhary et al. (2013), two
models worth examining for suitability in an ethical setting are transformational and
servant leadership.
Servant leadership and transformational leadership have many similarities.
According to Nisar, Saeed, and Shah (2012), both servant and transformational leadership

64
are “highly influential, visionary, trustworthy, and respectable” leadership models (p. 16).
Both also believe in the delegation of responsibility, and the need to empower employees,
and are good role models for integrity and honesty (Nisar et al., 2012). Thus, both
leadership models are hailed by many as ideal for successful organizational operations.
This is important because, as Rubio-Sanchez, Bosco, and Melchar (2013) posited, not
only do leaders influence culture, they also influence it because of their personal
leadership values.
Many leadership models are values-based. Values have a great impact on the
leader’s effectiveness as well as the performance of organizations (Russell, 2001).
Transformational and servant leadership are two models, which are values-based. In the
transformational leadership model, values play the role of motivating followers to be
empowered to innovate, create, and be productive. This is in response to leaders who
pride themselves on being strong role models for their followers. These leaders have
strong ideals and hold themselves to high moral values (Avolio & Gibbons, 1988).
Additionally, leaders practicing the transformational model of leadership are recognized
as change agents whose vision for the organization inspire followers to meet high
standards and place their trust in their leaders. Transformational leaders also strongly
emphasize the need for morals and values in followers and express their appreciation of
followers.
The foundation of the servant leadership model is also values-based. RubioSanchez et al. (2013) affirmed this position stating that servant leadership is distinct from
other leadership types because of its values-based foundation. In other words, the
personal values of servant leaders distinguish them from other leaders (Russell, 2001).

65
These values of the servant leader are however, very functional, and encompass
distinctive leadership attributes such as vision, empowerment, trust, and appreciation of
others (Russell, 2001). For example, according to Rezaei, Salehi, Shafiei, and Sabet
(2012), the existence of trust in an organization is indicative of the presence of a servant
leader and is a clear sign of interpersonal relations.
Both transformational and servant leaders place a high value on integrity. Ruiz,
Ruiz, and Martínez (2011) described such leadership as an inspiration to others,
engendering confidence in followers because of the leader’s own trustworthiness. The
result is a high level of trust as an essential part of both models. Empowerment is also
important to both models. While transformational leaders believe in empowering their
followers to innovate, create, and be productive, servant leaders empower employees by
encouraging them to act with authority and be responsible because of trusting
relationships (van Dierendonck, Stam, Boersma, de Windt, & Alkema, 2014). According
to Russell (2001), servant leadership also empowers employees to incorporate the
concept of teamwork as well as the values of love and equality into their work life. Both
transformational and servant leaders inspire followers. Servant leaders accomplish this
when they express appreciation for followers while transformational leaders inspire them
through their vision for the organization. There are, however, many ways in which these
two concepts are dissimilar.
According to Washington, Sutton, and Sauser (2014), servant leadership in
organizations represents a shift away from the traditional organizational structure. In
organizations, a pyramid normally represents traditional leadership. At the top is the
leader, while followers form the base of that pyramid. Information and decisions flow

66
from the top of the pyramid to the bottom of it, so that followers are not part of the
decision-making process. Washington et al. (2014) posited that this model of leadership
creates an environment in which followers are expected to serve the leader. It also is a
leadership model, which emphasizes the need for follower commitment to organizational
objectives. This is transformational leadership.
In stark contrast to this traditional model is that of servant leadership, in which the
pyramid is turned upside-down. In this case, the leaders are at the bottom of the pyramid
to serve followers, the organization, and other stakeholders. This is leadership focusing
on the good of others, rather than on the leader’s own interest (Washington et al., 2014).
Thus, the motivation of servant leaders is primarily to serve while the aspiration of
transformational leaders is to lead (Washington et al., 2014).
Transformational and servant leadership are different in other ways. According to
Nisar et al. (2012), a huge part of this difference is their focus. The focus of
transformational leaders is the achievement of organizational objectives. To this end,
such leaders concentrate on helping followers function efficiently in order to accomplish
organizational goals (Nisar et al., 2012). The accomplishment of this purpose involves
shared vision, delegation of authority to share that vision, and the provision of resources
necessary for aiding in the development of followers to meet the desired end (Nisar et al.,
2012). Furthermore, according to Nisar et al., transformational leaders are able to inspire
the commitment of followers, as they strive to be role models to these followers. Servant
leaders on the other hand, focus almost entirely on the fulfillment of the highest priority
needs of their followers (Nisar et al., 2012). They see themselves as the servants of the

67
followers and therefore treat their own self-interest as secondary to that of their followers
(Nisar et al., 2012).
Differences between transformational and servant leadership are noted by van
Dierendonck et al. (2014). Transformational leadership places an emphasis on leader
skills, the existence of hierarchical power relationships, organizational visions and
performance, among other things (van Dierendonck et al., 2014). In contrast, servant
leadership places an emphasis on humility, the leader’s spirituality, shared power,
autonomy and the moral development of followers, as well as an interest in the
development of the wider community (van Dierendonck et al., 2014). Thus, while there
are many points of similarity between transformational and servant leadership, there are
also fundamental differences between them, which show them to be two entirely different
constructs.
To summarize, effective leadership is critical for high performance in any
organization. Caldwell et al. (2012), Latham (2014), and Osula and Ng (2014) concurred
on the need for values based leadership. Significantly, it is the leadership model that
makes the difference (Tebeian, 2012). Both transformational and servant leadership
models are worth examining and have certain characteristics in common. Leaders
practicing both models value influence, vision, trust, and respect (Nisar et al., 2012).
They also delegate responsibility and work to empower employees, while utilizing
integrity and honesty. Importantly, these types of leaders influence the culture of the
organization by their own values (Rubio-Sanchez et al., 2013). These values are
important to both leadership styles, for the effectiveness of leaders and the performance
of the organization (Russell, 2001). Transformational leaders are role models who use

68
values to empower, innovate, and produce (Avolio & Gibbons, 1988). Servant leaders are
also values based and provide vision, empowerment, trust and appreciation of followers
(Russell, 2001). Thus, these two leadership styles have much in common. However, there
are many areas of leadership on which both differ. A discussion of some of the pertinent
differences follows.
Servant leadership does not follow traditional organizational structure, while
transformational leadership follows the typical pyramid structure. Conversely, servant
leadership inverts the pyramid and leaders emphasize service for followers, organization
and stakeholders. The good of others becomes more important than the leaders
(Washington et al., 2014) for servant leaders. Servant leaders serve and transformational
leaders lead to enforce organizational objectives. Transformational leaders value
leadership skills, and hierarchical power, while servant leaders focus on high priority
needs of followers and self-interest becomes secondary (Nisar et al., 2012). Servant
leaders also utilize values of humility, spirituality, and shared power (van Dierendonck et
al., 2014). This has relevance for the current dissertation, which focused on the practice
of servant leadership in specific organizations. Following is a review of the literature on
how servant leadership affects the organization.
Servant leadership and CEOs. CEOs are the highest-ranking officers in their
organizations. According to Peterson et al. (2012), CEOs are responsible for setting the
tone of that organization, by way of the vision they share, decisions and policies they
make and implement, and areas of importance that they focus on. What they measure,
and even provide rewards for, are indicative of the culture of the organization (Schein,
2004). This has direct implications not only for employee performance but also for the

69
performance, direction (Peterson et al., 2012), and everything else affecting the success
or failure of the organizations they lead. Consequently, in the face of the many scandals
rocking so many prominent organizations recently, businesses look to these officers for
ethical leadership (van Dierendonck, 2011). This was of importance to the study at hand,
since it explored matters pertaining to CEOs and their servant leadership practices.
The intent of this section was to provide a review and synthesis of the literature
describing the practice of servant leadership by CEOs in organizations, as an answer to
the dilemma. Although very few empirical, current studies were found on the topic,
demonstrating the paucity in the literature (Liden et al., 2014), implications and effects on
organizational culture and performance, as well as on ethical organizational climate, with
a CEO as servant leader, was explored. This was of importance to this study, as it sought
to find answers to research questions on how the servant leadership practices of CEOs in
select libraries enabled a culture of success. A review of the literature follows, examining
all recent items found addressing the role of CEOs as servant leaders in organizations.
There was a utilization of recent literature (2012 – 2013) on the topic to guide this
review (Latham, 2013; Peterson, et al., 2012; Shin, 2012). One researcher who has
conducted an extensive study on the matter of CEOs and organizational culture is Latham
(2013). Authoring a two-part qualitative, multiple case study series, using grounded
theory methods, Latham interviewed 14 CEOs from successful, award winning
organizations. The intent was to elicit the perspectives of the CEOs on their leadership
role in achieving award winning, transformational performance excellence in their
organizations. This involved an exploration of their leadership role in developing, a
conducive organizational culture (Latham, 2013). The results include the identification of

70
35 new concepts pertaining to performance excellence, which were further divided into 5
categories (Latham, 2013). Part two of the series focused on three of the five categories,
one of which—organizational culture—was of interest to this current study.
According to Latham (2013), the CEOs in the study identify culture as integral to
the performance excellence of each of their organizations. In the research, four areas
pertinent to identifying characteristics common to high performing organizations arose,
and the relationship of each to performance excellence studied. The findings revealed that
a culture of performance excellence exists in each organization studied, mainly because
of the CEOs’ passionate commitment to purpose and meaning, as well as their humility
and confidence (Latham, 2013). This had implications for this study, which sought to
determine the mediating role culture may play in organizational, and employee
performance. A review of the literature on servant leadership and CEO from another
angle followed.
Peterson et al. (2012) also addressed the matter of CEOs’ servant leadership
practices and organizational culture. Although addressing the same broad subjects, the
focus and methodology that Peterson et al. (2012) implemented is different from that of
Latham (2013). Peterson et al. (2012) approached the research using a quantitative
methodology and therefore has a more representative sample size, utilizing 126 CEOs in
the field of technology. This is in comparison to Latham’s qualitative methodology using
14 successful CEOs. The selection of methodology for each arose from the questions
asked and the purpose (Cronin, 2014; Yin, 2009).
Peterson et al. (2012) looked at CEOs to determine what relationships exist
between their practice of servant leadership principles and various constructs of the

71
organization. These include the CEOs’ own leadership characteristics specifically of
narcissism, founder status, organizational identification, and organizational performance.
Latham, (2013) too, focused on the CEOs but from the point of view of determining how
the CEOs’ could provide leadership that led to performance excellence in their
organizations.
Thus, while Peterson et al. (2012) looked at the “what” of CEOs’ servant
leadership and the organization, Latham (2013) examined the “how” of it. In terms of the
findings, Peterson et al. found that the servant leadership practices of the CEOs they
researched predicted positive firm performance. This performance was measured as
return on assets, with a negative relationship between CEO narcissism and servant
leadership. Latham’s findings, however, point to the existence of a strong
transformational leadership style among the CEOs he researched, although there were
also strong indicators for servant leadership and spiritual leadership, all contributing to
performance excellence.
Another researcher, Shin (2012), tried to determine the relationship between
CEOs’ ethical leadership and the ethical climate of the organizations for which the CEOs
are responsible. Shin conducted this quantitative research in South Korea, utilizing a
sample of 223 CEOs and 6,021 employees. Utilizing the CEOs as moderators of the
relationship between the ethical climate and outcomes for work in the organization, as
well as acceding to little knowledge on the antecedents of ethical climate, Shin sought to
relate these factors to organizational outcomes such as the collective organizational
citizenship behavior. According to Shin, the results were as predicted. There was a

72
positive relationship between the self-rated ethical leadership of the CEOs’ and the
combined perceptions of their employees as it pertains to an ethical climate (Shin, 2012).
In summary, this section provided a review of the literature on servant leadership
and CEOs in organizations. The initial discussion focused on CEO servant leadership and
culture in a qualitative study where there were efforts to determine how the CEOs
provided leadership that led to a culture of performance excellence in their organization
(Latham, 2013). On the other hand, a quantitative study determined the relationship
between CEOs’ practice of servant leadership and various constructs of the organization
(Peterson et al., 2012). A third study is also presented. Although utilizing a quantitative
approach, this study looked at CEOs in South Korea to determine the relationship
between them and the ethical climate of their organizations (Shin, 2012). Thus, three
different perspectives emerged on the one topic, all demonstrating the efficacy of servant
leadership in organizations. This is directly related to the phenomenon of focus in this
study, which was the servant leadership practices of CEOs and the impact on the
performance of both employees and the organization. These findings are reflective of the
models of both Schein (2004) and Liden et al. (2008), which formed the conceptual
framework for this study.
Servant leadership and organizational impact. An examination of servant
leadership and its impact in various organizations reveals a crossing of many boundaries
and applications in the literature. This includes its impact in for-profit businesses, nonprofit organizations, churches, universities, healthcare entities, and even foundations
(Spears, 2002). In each of these sectors, there is a focus on the leadership model and its
impact on both the organization and employees. Understanding this impact will help to

73
strengthen the arguments put forth by this research for servant leadership as a viable
organizational leadership model. A review of the recent literature on this matter follows.
Servant leadership has been receiving favorable ratings as a leadership model in
many organizations. Liden et al. (2014) examined servant leadership in a chain of 71
restaurants, as for-profit entities. Employing a quantitative approach with a sample of 961
employees, these authors developed and tested a model to determine if leaders who
practiced servant leadership in organizations have direct influence in creating what Liden
et al. (2014) referred to as a “serving culture” (p. 1434). Findings demonstrated a positive
relationship between the serving culture and several organizational aspects. These include
the performance of the organization and employees, and individual attitudes and
behaviors as it pertains to creativity and even customer service behaviors. On the other
hand, there were negative results for the relationship between service culture and
turnover intentions, because of employee’s close identification with the restaurant.
Carter and Baghurst (2014) also researched the impact of servant leadership
practices on organization and employees in a restaurant setting. However, whereas Liden
et al. (2014) employed a quantitative approach utilizing a survey design, Carter and
Baghurst (2014) used a qualitative method with a phenomenological design incorporating
focus groups. Based on Carter and Baghurst’s findings, servant leadership again showed
a positive effect on employees. This time, the impact was on employee engagement and
loyalty. The results showed these employees to be more committed, with a healthy
appetite for good work relationships as well as for accomplishing organizational goals
(Carter & Baghurst, 2014). Additional sources demonstrating the impact of servant
leadership on for–profits follow this.

74
According to Liden et al. (2014), the literature reports several other studies
demonstrating the relationship between servant leadership and positive follower
outcomes. These outcomes include organizational citizenship behavior (OCB), job
attitudes, and employee performance. For example, Liden et al. (2014), and van
Dierendonck (2011) reported conclusions attesting to these outcomes. Additionally,
positive outcomes at the team level have been demonstrated by researchers such as Hu
and Liden (2011), and Schaubroeck et al. (2011), while Peterson et al. (2012) illustrated
this at the organizational level. Researchers van Dierendonck and Patterson (2015)
focused on a virtues position and deduced the adaptation of servant leadership to be both
meaningful and beneficial in organizations. In such organizations, employees hold a
strong sense of community and function at an optimal level (van Dierendonck &
Patterson, 2015). Thus, servant leadership has wide support from various sectors and has
been enjoying great success.
One recent study of importance is that by Zhijun, Jing, and Mingjian (2015), who
conducted research among 238 hairstylists and 470 of their customers in 30 salons. This
study is important for a few reasons. The first rests in the comparison it makes between
the outcome of the use of transformational leadership and servant leadership by managers
of the salons, as well as in the fact that this study has similarities to the study in hand at
the theoretical level. According to Zhijun et al., although transformational leadership
normally is effective for motivating staff at the boundaries, servant leadership is more
influential in-service industries characterized by intangible and volatile activities. Zhijun
et al. drew upon aspects of the seven dimensions undergirding the servant leadership

75
model of Liden et al. (2008) to define servant leadership in this service industry. This was
one of the theories foundational to the current study.
Zhijun et al. (2015) also relied heavily on Tajfel’s (1974) social identity theory for
an explanation as to the outcome expected. The conclusion the study draws is that leaders
can influence subordinates’ behavior when their own behaviors positively affect the selfidentity of the subordinate. This is reflective of serving culture (Liden et al., 2014). In
this culture, Liden et al. postulated that the servant leadership behaviors of leaders
influence subordinates to emulate their leader’s behavior and become servant leaders
themselves. This agrees with Greenleaf’s (1970) argument that one test of a true servant
leader is that those led become servant leaders themselves.
The social identity theory further posits that a part of our self-concept as well as
our social identity is tied to our group affiliation (Zhijun et al., 2015). That is, group
membership has strong implications for a person’s identity, worth, and values
(Pecukonis, 2014). Conversely, in serving culture, individual identification with the
organization because of the influence of the servant leader, rather than identification with
the group, affects the organization’s performance and enhances the individual’s attitudes
(Liden et al., 2014). This is also reflective of Schein’s (2004) organizational culture
theory, another foundational theory of this study.
According to Schein (2004), repeated success in implementing certain beliefs and
values in the organization results in basic cultural assumptions. If these assumptions are
strongly held, they will cause rejection of behavior on any other premise (Schein, 2004).
It is conceivable that those operating in the serving culture (Liden et al., 2014) may have
developed basic assumptions based on their espoused beliefs and values (Schein, 2004).

76
This was of interest to the current study, in which there was effort to understand the
mediating role of organizational culture in linking CEOs servant leadership practices to
the success and performance of the organization and its employees. According to Spears
(2002), many corporations have adopted this servant leadership model as part of their
organizational culture and practice, successfully. These include organizations such as TD
Industries, which, according to Faloon (2011), is successful in a large part due to
embracing the servant leadership principles. Other industries utilizing servant leadership
principles include the airline industry represented by Southwest Airlines, the hotel
industry represented by Marriott International, and the fast foods industry represented by
Starbucks (Umlas, 2013).
Non-profit organizations have also been impacted. According to Patrizia and
Massimo (2014), these organizations are expected to be ethical in their operation for the
sake of their stakeholders and the public. This marks them as suitable candidates for the
practice of servant leadership, which is considered a leadership model embracing ethical
principles (Burton & Welty-Peachey, 2013). For example, researchers conducted a study
to evaluate several scouting organizations internationally, as non-profit entities practicing
servant leadership. The researchers studied the mottos, promises, and laws of these
international organizations, as well as the intent of their programs, teachings, and service
projects (Rohm & Osula, 2013). Researchers have used the model of Sendjaya et al.
(2008) to measure the existence of servant leadership among the organizations. The case
study approach worked because a contemporary event emerged, around a particular
activity, bounded by time (Yin, 2009). The findings identified a strong relationship

77
between the scouting organizations and the servant leadership characteristics of Sendjaya
et al. (2008).
Studies have also been conducted in other non-profits demonstrating the
positive impact of servant leadership. Lynch and Friedman (2013) researched servant
leadership in a spiritual context, examining the servant leadership practices of leaders in
spiritual organizations. They concluded that although servant leadership is a valuable
approach, it would be more valuable if a spiritual component were added (Lynch &
Friedman, 2013). Correlations have also been demonstrated between the practice of
servant leadership in public (not-for-profit) organizations, and positive outcomes for the
organization and employees, as demonstrated by Hirschy et al. (2014), who researched
the concept in China. Additionally, Zhang, Kwong Kwan, Everett, and Jian (2012)
provided evidence of similar positive outcomes in their study of the impact of the
incorporation of servant leadership in organizations on work-to-family enrichment. Thus,
there is abundant evidence of positive outcomes for organizations, which incorporate
servant leadership practices into the fabric of their operations. Next, there was a review of
how this manifest itself culturally.
In summary, servant leadership has significant impact in many organizations, both
for profit and non-profit, including churches, universities, health-care entities and
foundations (Spears, 2002). The literature is replete with its favorable effects. Liden et al.
(2014) found positive relationships between a serving culture and various aspects of the
organization. However, Liden et al. also found a negative response between serving
culture and turnover intentions for some employees. The authors also cited positive
effects such as employee engagement, loyalty, commitment, and working to accomplish

78
organizational goals (Carter & Baghurst, 2014; Liden et al., 2014). A review of the
literature also found outcomes such as positive organizational citizenship behavior, job
attitudes and employee performance, where servant leadership is practiced. Results are
positive at both team and at organizational levels (Liden et al., 2014; Schaubroeck et al.,
2011; van Dierendonck, 2011).
Zhijun et al. (2015) found servant leadership concepts to be more influential in
service industries, than transformational leadership. Zhijun et al. utilized aspects of the
seven dimensions undergirding the servant leadership model of Liden et al. (2008) to
define servant leadership in the service industry. In this study, there was a reliance on the
same theoretical base for the completion of this study.
Liden et al. (2014) examined servant leadership from an entirely different point of
view. They opined that servant leadership behaviors could influence subordinates to
pattern the leaders’ behavior and adapt the servant leader’s characteristics, leading to
enhanced individual attitudes and better organizational performance on the part of the
subordinate or employee. Social Identity Theory also supports these positive servant
leadership outcomes (Liden et al., 2014; Schein, 2004). Non-profit organizations embrace
servant leadership concepts as ethical (Burton & Welty-Peachey, 2013; Lynch &
Friedman, 2013; Zhang et al., 2012). Overall, the impact of servant leadership in
organizations has been tremendous. All these outcomes were relevant to the current
dissertation, demonstrating the fact that other studies have been conducted on the topic
but none bearing the same focus in terms of population studied, questions researched, or
even type of organization involved. The next section reviewed the literature on servant
leadership and organizational culture.

79
Servant leadership and the effect of organizational culture. The culture of an
organization relates strongly to its leadership and this culture affects everything in that
organization (Schein, 2004). According to Schein (2004), organizational culture is:
a pattern of basic assumptions, invented, discovered, or developed by a given
group, as it learns to cope with its problems of external adaptation and internal
integration, that has worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore is to be
taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those
problems (p. 17).
The review of the literature on this topic had direct implications for this study
since this was the focus of the entire study. Pikturnaitė and Paužuolienė (2014) posited
that an organization’s culture has an influence on markets, profit, stakeholders, and even
sustained success. Schein (2004) posited that it is leaders who create that culture. This
has implications for the model of leadership applied in libraries to create the type of
culture conducive to positive outcomes for both the organization and employees.
A review of the literature revealed evidence confirming the effect the culture of
the organization has on various aspects of that organization, depending on its leadership
(Harwiki, 2013; Mujeeb & Ahmad, 2011; Pikturnaitė & Paužuolienė, 2014; Schein,
2004). The intent of this section of the review was to look at servant leadership and
culture, as these factors affect various organizational areas as revealed in the literature.
This included the impact on employee commitment to the organization, job satisfaction,
and empowerment. It also included a review of the literature on performance within the
organization, in response to servant leadership and organizational culture. Through the

80
discussion that follows, insights will be offered on each of these areas in the order listed,
starting with the impact on employee commitment.
Several studies have helped to establish the fact that organizational culture as
created by its leaders has an effect on various employee related factors such as employee
commitment, satisfaction, and empowerment. Keskes (2014) conducted a study which
focused on employee commitment. In the study, Keskes discussed the concept of the
three types of commitment, as suggested by Meyer, Allen, and Smith (1993): affective
commitment, normative commitment, and influence commitment. Keskes further stated
that these three types of commitment are measures of the individual employee’s
identification with, and involvement in the organization. The findings of the study,
although focused on transformational leadership, established a positive point
demonstrating that leadership does have an influence on employees’ organizational
commitment (Keskes, 2014).
Dwivedi, Kaushik, and Luxmi (2014) also researched employee commitment.
They posited that the commitment of employees to the organization is dependent largely
on the kind of interaction and relationship the employee experiences within the
organization (Dwivedi et al., 2014). More importantly, the employees’ response reflects
the attitude they perceive that management (leadership) has towards them as employees,
thus determining whether the organization will have high or low staff turnover (Dwivedi
et al., 2014). Another researcher studying job satisfaction and servant leadership is Mehta
and Pillay (2011). According to their research, which was established on a review of the
literature, servant leadership does affect job satisfaction (Mehta & Pillay, 2011). Schein
(2004) confirmed this view, stating that leaders create a stable culture when their own

81
assumptions become embedded in the daily workings of the organization. Thus,
leadership influences the daily operation of an organization and therefore the employees
who function in that organization. Consequently, without commitment among employees
resulting from positive leadership attitudes, there is high staff turnover and thus the
chance of organizational failure (Dwivedi et al., 2014).
Servant leadership has also been able to influence employee commitment because
of its employee focus. Jones (2012b) implied that the promotion of servant leadership in
large organizations should result in an increase of commitment by employees to the
organization and its effectiveness. According to Schmidt (2013), a servant leader’s focus
on employees encourages them to unite around the organization’s mission and vision and
thus develop a greater than usual commitment.
Several other researchers have confirmed the relationship between organizational
culture and employee commitment. Ezirim, Nwibere, and Emecheta (2012) are among
those researchers. Based on their research in Nigerian organizations, the same positive
relationship manifested itself between organizational culture and commitment, as was
seen in Kessler’s (2014) research. Reviewing the effect of organizational culture on what
he dubbed voluntary turnover, Kessler postulated that an organizational culture that
focuses on results and objectives, rather than on employees, has a positive effect on
voluntary staff turnover. The same holds true regardless of the industry. On the other
hand, Su, Baird, and Blair (2013) obtained results showing a positive relationship
between the organizational culture and employee commitment in the public sector, where
there is an employee focus such as in servant leadership. The next employee related

82
factor affected by both organizational culture and leadership is that of employee
satisfaction, specifically as it pertains to servant leadership.
Employee satisfaction has also been affected by organizational culture, and
servant leadership, as seen in the studies cited here. Jones (2012a) performed a qualitative
research study comprising a sample of 21 senior managers from 16 organizations. Jones
found that not only does servant leadership engender reduced customer turnover, it also
increases employee satisfaction. Mehta and Pillay (2011) also addressed the matter of
job/employee satisfaction because of servant leadership. These authors opine that there is
significant relationship between servant leadership and job satisfaction because of servant
leadership’s emphasis on serving, vision, values, teamwork, and empowerment (Mehta &
Pillay, 2011).
In his research on the influence of servant leadership on restaurant employees,
Carter (2012) described servant leadership as a leadership philosophy that not only
addresses employee engagement but also creates a “unique organizational culture” (p.
453). An understanding of how this organizational culture is engendered is critical to the
success of the organization; Carter posited that this is the responsibility of the leader.
This is the matter of interest to Doh and Quigley (2014), especially corporate social
responsibility. Doh and Quigley argued that this responsibility would engender
meaningful advances in the leadership field. The focus here is to determine how
responsible leadership is identified in organizational outcomes as well as to provide a
contribution to the further development of a theory of responsible leadership (Doh &
Quigley, 2014). Servant leadership is referenced here as one form of responsible
leadership (Doh & Quigley, 2014).

83
The servant leadership dimension of “creating value for the community” (Liden et
al., 2014) is most pertinent to this discussion, according to Doh and Quigley (2014).
According to Mittal and Dorfman (2012), this dimension involves collaborative effort
that affects stakeholders both inside and outside the organization. More importantly, as
part of leadership responsibility, Van Dierendonck (2011) posited that there is a positive
relationship between servant leadership and employee satisfaction, commitment, and
empowerment. This is possible only because of the high-quality relationships developed
by servant leaders within a culture of trust (van Dierendonck, 2011).
Ding, Lu, Song, and Lu (2012) also discussed servant leadership and employee
satisfaction in organizations in China, from a different point of view. In this study,
employee satisfaction plays a mediating role between servant leadership and loyalty. The
findings revealed a positive relationship between servant leadership and loyalty, and
demonstrated that employee satisfaction does in fact play a mediating role. This is a fresh
approach, which is even more interesting based on the study’s point of origin in China,
where leadership is top down, and authoritarian, utilizing a command model of leadership
(Ding et al., 2012). This study is therefore a shift away from the traditional leadership
style practiced in China, and supports the findings of Liden et al. (2008) on employee
loyalty. It demonstrates servant leadership’s ability to create a culture of positivity in the
organization. Next, there is a discussion on how servant leadership helps to create a
culture which engenders empowered employees.
In any service industry, employee empowerment is important for its impact on
that organization’s effectiveness and competitiveness (Zeglat, Aljaber, & Alrawabdeh,
2014). Empowered employees help maintain a dynamic edge important for customer

84
satisfaction (Zeglat et al., 2014). Such a state in employees is dependent on the power of
leaders and the model of leadership they utilize to create a culture that helps to unleash
the potential of those they lead (Van Winkle, Allen, De Vore, & Winston, 2014). Servant
leadership is a model which provides this leadership style, according to Van Winkle et al.
This point was reiterated in the quantitative research conducted among 116 employees in
various small businesses (Van Winkle et al., 2014). The servant leadership behaviors of
leaders and the perceptions of empowerment by employees was reviewed. Findings
showed a positive relationship between the servant behaviors of immediate supervisors
and the perception of empowerment of employees (Van Winkle et al., 2014). In the
following section, there will be a review of literature on organizational culture, servant
leadership, and organizational productivity.
Servant leadership not only affects ethics, customer service, and employee
satisfaction in organizations, it also affects organizational performance. Several scholars
have demonstrated this fact. Schwepker and Schultz (2015) researched the influence
ethical servant leadership has on the creation of a caring ethical climate. The result of this
type of climate is not only the employee’s positive performance but there is also a
positive outcome for customer service (Schwepker & Schultz, 2015). The results of this
quantitative study of 279 business-to-business sales people reinforced the understanding
that servant leadership creates a culture that positively affects the value enhancing
behavior performance of the sales force as well as the overall sales performance
(Schwepker & Schultz, 2015).
Liden et al. (2014) as well as Carter and Baghurst (2014) examined similar
themes in a restaurant setting and arrived at comparable conclusions. They found that

85
servant leadership in organizations lead to the creation of a culture, which Liden et al.
(2014) referred to as a serving culture. This serving culture has a direct influence on
performance for both the restaurant and the individual employee. Jaramillo et al. (2015)
also examined the servant leadership theme within a sales context. Again, the results
validated prior findings which showed servant leadership as a strong force in enhancing
employee and organizational performance.
Several other studies have been conducted exploring the themes of servant
leadership and a culture that engenders organizational and employee performance. These
include Zhijun et al. (2015), who researched servant leadership and employee service
performance, and Choudhary et al. (2013), who compared transformational and servant
leadership to determine their impact on organizational performance. It also includes
Tebeian (2012), who also compared transformational and servant leadership, using a
literature review to build a conceptual model. This exploration of transformational and
servant leadership within an organizational cultural environment is a way of motivating
high performance in employees.
In summary, the model of leadership applied in the organization is important in
order to create a culture conducive to positive outcomes for both the organization and
employees. An examination of the literature on Servant Leadership indicates that this
leadership model can create an organizational culture that affects employees’
commitment, job satisfaction, empowerment, and performance. Thus, several researchers
have agreed that leadership does have an influence on the organizational culture, which in
turn affects employee’s organizational commitment. This includes Dwivedi et al. (2014),
Ezirim et al. (2012), Jones, (2012b), and Keskes (2014).

86
Significantly, employees’ response reflects their perception of leaders’ attitude to
them, which in turn affects staff turn-over, and organizational productivity (Dwivedi et
al., 2014; Schein, 2004). Schmidt (2013) found that the Servant Leadership approach
focuses on employees, promoting organizational unity and employee commitment. Van
Dierendonck (2011), on the other hand, found positive relationships between servant
leadership and employee satisfaction, in addition to commitment and empowerment.
Thus, the servant leadership approach encourages a culture of positivity and allows the
employees to become more committed and empowered. This dissertation topic included
exploring organizational culture to understand how it may provide a mediating role in
linking servant leadership behaviors of CEOs to improved firm and follower
performance. This linked the findings in the above studies to this dissertation, helping to
develop a better understanding of the topic. Next, will explore the matter of servant
leadership and CEOs in organizations.
Methodology and Design Used in Prior Studies
The methodologies and designs utilized in prior empirical research show that the
use of the qualitative case study approach for this present study was appropriate. The two
relevant methodologies identified in the literature are those with a qualitative and a
quantitative approach. In the quantitative approach researchers tested theories by
examining relationships among variables, according to Ingham-Broomfield (2014). In the
qualitative approach on the other hand, the researcher is concerned with human
experiences and tries to understand the meaning research participants ascribe to a
phenomenon (Ingham-Broomfield, 2015). The instruments used to gather data for the
quantitative approach are those which allow for statistical or other types of numerical

87
measurement (Ingham-Broomfield, 2014) while instruments used for the qualitative
approach are non-numerical and provide information-rich data (Ingham-Broomfield,
2015). The sampling methods used for identifying participants for the research in both
approaches are also different. While the quantitative approach involves a form of
probability sampling such as random, stratified, or proportional (Ingham-Broomfield,
2014), sampling for qualitative studies can be purposeful, convenience, or snowballing
(Ingham-Broomfield, 2015). Furthermore, while quantitative research involves the use of
large samples, qualitative approaches typically involve small samples.
Through the literature, studies relating to this study utilizing the quantitative
methodology in research, were identified. They include research by Shin (2012), Peterson
et al. (2012), and Schwepker and Schultz (2015). Shin (2012) examined the relationship
between the ethical leadership of CEOs in South Korea and the ethical climate created as
a result, in the CEOs’ organizations. This quantitative study had a sample comprising 223
CEOs and 6,021 of their employees. The employees were selected by the human resource
manager of each organization using random sampling based on pre-determined number
of employees allowed from each company (Shin, 2012). The researchers used
questionnaires as the data gathering instruments for both CEOs and employees. The
CEOs self-reported that a high level of ethical climate strength in the organizations was a
direct cause of the CEOs’ ethical behaviors in those organizations. Another result was a
correspondingly high level of collective organizational climate behavior (OCB). When
the ethical climate of the organization registered as low, it caused the collective OCB to
be correspondingly low. This prior study was like this one in that its focus was on CEO
relationships in their organization and how their servant leadership behaviors impact

88
factors in the organization. Unlike this current study, however, the prior study measured
the behaviors of the CEOs in relation to their organizational climate, utilizing typical
methodologies common to quantitative research. In the current study, an understanding of
the perceptions of the CEOs in relation to organizational culture and employee success
and organizational performance was sought. Thus, this study employed a typical
qualitative approach.
Peterson et al. (2012) also conducted research among CEOs in the technology
industry, utilizing a sample of 126 CEOs. The purpose was to examine the relationship
between the CEOs’ servant leadership behaviors, executive characteristics of narcissism,
founder status, organizational identification, and firm performance (Peterson et al., 2012).
From the data gathered was obtained statistical findings which revealed a negative
relationship between executive narcissism and servant leadership, compared to a positive
relationship between founder status and servant leadership (Peterson et al., 2012).
Interestingly, there was also a prediction of subsequent firm performance because of the
CEOs’ servant leadership.
This was of interest to this study since an aspect of the research sought to
understand the performance of three libraries because of the servant leadership behaviors
of their CEOs. Peterson et al. (2012) demonstrated typical quantitative approaches,
measuring relationships, utilizing large samples for the study, as well as a survey as a
data gathering tool that allows for retrieving numerical data. This contrasts with the
current qualitative study, in which a small sample was utilized, in order to explore CEOs’
perceptions, and utilize data-gathering tools that retrieve information-rich data, thus
demonstrating the suitability of the qualitative methodology.

89
Schwepker and Schultz (2015) assessed the matter of servant leadership from the
point of view of subordinates rather than CEOs. As in the two prior studies, this
quantitative research also concerned itself with measuring relationships, this time
between sales people who are servant leaders and their customers. The researchers
utilized a sample of 279 business-to-business salespersons. The results suggested that
servant leadership impacted the value enhancing behavior performance of the sales
persons as well as their outcome sales performance (Schwepker & Schultz, 2015). Again,
the methodology utilized here demonstrates the qualities of a genuine quantitative study,
operationalizing the numerical data gathering approach, the study of relationships, and
utilizing a large sample.
This had implications for this study, which sought to determine how the CEOs of
three libraries in south central Florida perceive organizational culture as a mediating
mechanism linking their own servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well
as to organizational performance. Although utilizing a qualitative approach, there were
parallels between this study and that of Schwepker and Schultz (2015). Specifically, both
studies involved the concept of servant leadership, touted as a highly ethical leadership
style (Jaramillo et al., 2015; Parris & Peachey, 2013). However, both researchers also had
distinct approaches appropriate to the type of methodology each represents,
demonstrating the appropriateness of each of the mechanics that make these studies what
they are, whether quantitative or qualitative. Below are additional insights on the
qualitative approach.
Qualitative methodology, unlike quantitative, is not grounded in numbers.
According to Ingham-Broomfield (2015), this methodology is concerned with exploring

90
human experience in a subjective way, using methods that are non-statistical, for
analysis. Researchers prior to this study who utilized the qualitative methodology in
research related to servant leadership include Carter and Baghurst (2014); Jones (2012a)
and Latham (2013). Latham’s qualitative multiple case study involved 14 CEOs. In
typical qualitative style, the researcher focused on their leader behaviors, their individual
leader characteristics, and on their organizational culture (Latham, 2013). Latham utilized
interviews to gather in-depth information about these leaders exploring their experiences,
to gain a deeper understanding of how they were able to transform their organizations to
be successful award-winning ones.
This study had many parallels with Latham’s (2013) research. Both are qualitative
multiple case studies and the focus of both is an understanding of CEOs. The sample
sizes were also comparable, with this study utilizing a total of 15 participants, while
Latham’s included 14. Thus, unlike a quantitative approach, designed to handle data from
large samples that are statistically representative, Latham’s qualitative study, as well as
this study, narrowly focused on small samples that are information rich. Latham utilized
interviews for data gathering, a tool that the current study utilized as well, along with
documentation, a questionnaire, and observation.
The appropriateness of the methodology and design selected for this study were
also confirmed by Thamhain (2014), who suggested that a qualitative method allows for
the capturing of a much broader in-depth scope of variables than is afforded by the
quantitative type. Cronin (2014) agreed, opining that the qualitative approach is the best
method for researching this type of in-depth material. Yin (2011) explained that
understanding phenomenon in its own natural setting is best accomplished through

91
utilizing a qualitative method requiring descriptive representation of the data, rather than
a quantitative method, which requires numerical statistical representation of that data.
Yin posited that qualitative studies should aim to represent the views and perspectives of
participants. Importantly, this study was to garner information on the participants’
perspectives on servant leadership, and the role of culture as a mediating mechanism
between the CEOs’ servant leadership practices and the positive performance of the
organization and employees. These reasons helped to establish why the qualitative
method was the most appropriate approach for this study.
Sources of Data
In this study, four different sources for collecting data were utilized. These
included semi structured interviews, non-participant observation, review of documentary
sources, and a questionnaire. These sources are all common means of data collection in
the conduct of qualitative research (Honan, 2015). The fourth source, the questionnaire,
was the exception. This source was included because it posed questions specific to the
topic of interest, (servant leadership practices) and is directly related to the servant
leadership model of Liden et al. (2008). Including this fourth source also ensured data
source triangulation (Carter et al., 2014; Yin, 2009). According to Carter et al. (2014),
triangulation allows for the analysis of retrieved data in several ways including
comparisons between data from each participant in the case study, as well as comparison
of data from each source (Newman & Newman, 2007).
Each instrument was selected as the best tool for capturing the data necessary for
answering specific research questions (Yin, 2011). Consequently, the instruments used to
find responses to the first research question, RQ1, were those which captured data on

92
how the servant leadership practices of the library CEOs are embedded in the
organization, leading to a culture of success. This was based on Schein’s (2004) concept
that it is through the imposition of the leader’s beliefs, values, and assumptions that
culture formation begins. Face-to-face semi structured interviews were utilized for the
CEOs, and Liden et al.’s (2008) 28-item servant leadership questionnaire for their senior
level staff, along with documentation and non-participant observation. Discussion on the
appropriateness of each source follows this.
Interviews as a means of collecting data in a qualitative research study is an
accepted and well-established source, according to Caven (2012). In fact, Caven stated
that this is a key tool because of its strength in flexibility and adaptability to varied
research settings. The importance of this tool as a data collection source for the library
CEOs was validated by Drew (2014); as well as Jacob and Furgerson (2012). According
to Jacob and Furgerson (2012), “Skilled interviewers can gain insight into lived
experiences, learn the perspectives of individuals participating in a study, and discover
the nuances in stories” (p. 2). This data gathering tool was useful in assisting in the
capture of appropriately rich data from each CEO in each library. Additionally, this
source allowed detailed notes to be made immediately after the interview, including not
only verbal pronouncements but also facial and tonal expressions.
Drew (2014) conducted a study that added another dimension to the applicability
of interviews in this study. Drew’s research pertained specifically to elites (or CEOs) in
organizations in Germany, with interesting parallels with CEOs in libraries in the United
States. In the study, Drew posited that semi structured, open ended interview questions
are the best means of obtaining the rich organizational information that the elite offers, if

93
barriers of access and suspicion can be overcome. Drew expected that the CEOs in the
selected libraries in the United States would also have access to rich organizational
information that they are privy to because of their position. Retrieving this data from
them through semi structured interviews was invaluable.
Documentation was another source of data collection for this study.
Documentation helped in the gathering of data in qualitative studies and was one of the
methods selected for this study. According to Yin (2011), this method is good for
identifying details such as correct spelling, titles, and dates of events, wording of mottos,
mission statement, slogans, and other forms of communication. In other words, it
corroborates and augments data from other sources. Documentation also falls under a
class of data sources that, according to Yin (2011), represents primary evidence. The data
collected in this way will be useful for reducing issues of reflexivity, since they were
created for reasons other than those being investigated (Yin, 2011). They thus were not
influenced by this study. This is different from interviews, which do allow researchers to
influence participants as well as be influenced by them (Yin, 2011). Similarly,
observations may be subject to what Yin (2011) calls a “one-way reflective effect”
(p.150) which is the researcher’s influence on those being observed (Yin, 2011).
However, the slant of the data collected through the documentary sources should still be
examined for motive (Yin, 2011). For this study, the libraries’ documentary sources
included their mission and vision statements, their promotional materials such as fliers,
monthly and other reports, their website, and any other available source of
documentation.

94
Non-participant observation was the third source of data collection. This source
allows the researcher to be completely passive (Yin, 2011). It was an important method
for complimenting other data collection means. This was because the data collected was
not filtered by input from others but represents what was seen and perceived personally
(Yin, 2011), resulting in information rich data. According to Polkinghorne (2005),
information-rich data helps provide great understanding about the issues critical to the
study. Observation allowed for this gathering of data that helped provide a better
understanding about the organizational climate and culture, and ultimately about the
CEOs who were the focus of the study. This rendered non-participant observation a
quality source of data for this study and therefore most appropriate.
While the CEOs were being interviewed, there was an opportunity to directly
observe the condition of that CEO’s office space to determine the prosperity or even
impoverishment of the organization (Yin, 2009). In this study, non-participant
observation also included activities such as the interaction between study participants and
other library stakeholders such as other staff and customers, interaction between CEO
and senior staff, observation of the condition of the building such as posters and other
notices on walls, and observation of the conduct of meetings as allowed.
The fourth data collection tool was that of the 28-item servant leadership
questionnaire (Liden et al., 2008) for the libraries’ senior level staff. This questionnaire
posed questions specific to the topic of interest, which was servant leadership practices of
the CEOs. It was directly related to the servant leadership model and helped to decipher
some of those deep underlying assumptions Schein (2004) suggested are at work in
organizational cultures. Thirteen of the 28 items specifically solicited answers to help

95
determine the presence of servant leadership dimensions in the libraries, from the point of
view of the senior library staff, making it a very appropriate tool for gathering data for
this study.
According to Polkinghorne (2005), the intent behind qualitative research is
“enriching the understanding of an experience” (p. 140). The experience of interest was
that of the CEOs in the three libraries. Because this questionnaire was so focused on
retrieving data that allowed for an understanding of the experiences of the CEOs, it was
appropriate for this study. Including it also ensured data source triangulation (Carter et
al., 2014; Yin, 2009).
For RQ2, the intent was to gather data to determine how culture enables
employees to be successful. The face-to-face interview and direct observation was useful
for this question. According to Schein (2004), these are the best tools for gathering this
type of data. For RQ3, the type of data to be gathered was that which demonstrated how
employee success contributed to organizational performance. The tool used was
documentation. A field study was conducted to test and evaluate the semi structured
interview questions, which were created for the current study.
Summary
Chapter 2 contains four main sections. The first was an introductory portion,
providing background information on the purpose of the study; what the literature review
addressed; how the chapter was organized; how the literature was surveyed; and a
historical overview of the topic based on the identified gap. According to Peterson et al.
(2012), a specific aspect of the subject of servant leadership needs research, which is how
culture or climate acts as a mediating mechanism linking servant leadership to firm

96
performance. This need was reinforced by researchers such as Liden et al. (2014) and
Parris and Peachey (2013), who showed that the serving culture created by the servant
leadership practices of CEOs in restaurants positively affects the performance of units as
well as individual employee’s attitudes and behaviors. However, little is known of how
this outcome is obtained. Studying the phenomenon of servant leadership and culture
among CEOs’ in libraries will serve to extend the research. Following this section
identifying the gap is a review of how the problem had evolved historically.
A review of the theoretical and conceptual foundation of the study followed, exploring
Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership theory and the separate concepts of the servant
leadership dimensions of Liden et al. (2008) and Schein’s (2004) organizational culture.
The research questions emerged from these, as Greenleaf’s theory and the concepts of
Liden et al. (2008) speak to the servant leadership portion of the questions while Schein’s
(2004) portion supports the organizational culture question.
In the third section, themed discussions on the literature on leadership, the
historical background of servant leadership, a comparison of transformational and servant
leadership, servant leadership and organizational impact, servant leadership and
organizational culture, and servant leadership and CEOs was provided. Information from
all these sections converged to define the key strategic point of the research, which was to
find answers to the three research questions.
These questions arose from the study of the literature, which revealed that
although several empirical studies had been done on servant leadership illustrating the
positive impact its practice has in organizations (Bambale, 2014; Carter, 2012; Ding et
al., 2012; Faloon, 2011; Finley, 2012; Harwiki, 2013; Hunter et al., 2013; Jones, 2012a)

97
scant attention has been focused on how such outcomes are possible (Liden et al., 2014;
Peterson et al., 2012). Specifically, there was still a need to understand how CEOs
perceive organizational culture as a mediating mechanism, linking their servant
leadership practices to employee success and organizational performance (Peterson et al.,
2012). Through this study, the matter was addressed. As a result, the study provided
future researchers with new directions for studying libraries as organizations in which
servant leadership may be practiced. The hope was to provide helpful information for
improving overall performance in organizations. This would be based on a better
understanding of a CEO servant leader/subordinate relation, mediated by the culture
(Peterson et al., 2012) created in organizations such as public libraries. This was the
fourth and last segment of this chapter, providing a summary of all the prior discussions.
Following this is Chapter 3, in which will be provided, information on the methodology
and design used in the research.

98
Chapter 3: Methodology
Introduction
The focus of this qualitative case study was to research servant leadership and
organizational culture from the perspectives of CEOs in select libraries in south central
Florida. Although servant leadership positively affects organizations, emphasizing leader
behaviors as a means of helping followers realize their fullest potential (Chanhoo,
Kwangseo, & Seung-wan, 2015; Liden et al., 2014; Pircher, Steinheider, & Burkus,
2015), there was a need to understand how this was possible (Peterson et al., 2012).
Specifically, there was a need to understand CEOs’ perceptions of how organizational
culture provided a mediating role in linking their servant leadership behaviors to
improved firm and follower performance. A review of the literature revealed a gap in the
empirical research focusing on servant leadership and these positive results in
organizations; few scholars have sought to determine how such outcomes were possible
(Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al., 2012). It was hoped that this study would help to fill
the gap by providing answers as to how this was possible.
The purpose of this qualitative, case study was to understand how library CEOs
perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant
leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. This
chapter describes the strategies that were utilized in determining answers to the research
questions that arose from the identified problem. The chapter also provides details on the
methodology, research design, and population studied. There is also a delineation of the
sources of data and a discussion of the validity and reliability of such data sources. How
the data was collected as well as ethical considerations were areas highlighted for

99
discussion, in addition to limitations to the study. A summary of key points raised in the
chapter concluded the discussion. This provided a transition into Chapter 4, in which is
presented the results of the study and an explanation of the analysis of the data.
Statement of the Problem
Before this study, it was not known how CEOs in libraries perceived
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. Libraries as
serving institutions are undergoing rapid changes in the current technology driven world
(Riggs, 2001). The success of these organizations is largely dependent on the types of
organizational culture the CEOs of these entities develop, as they realize the influence
their leadership has on both employees and the organizations. Schein (2004), recognizes
and acknowledges this leadership affect, and posits that culture relates to the values
leaders seek to instill in their organizations. What happens in organizations with respect
to leadership, whether a success or failure, is very easily observed (Schein, 2004).
However, why there are such outcomes is not as easily determined. Understanding that,
according to Schein, is very important and is attributable to the organizational culture
created by leadership. Servant leadership, according to Greenleaf (as cited in Spears,
2002), speaks to leaders who believe that this outcome in organizations is dependent on
the creation of organizational cultures where serving the greater needs of others is the
primary goal of leadership.
The population affected in this study is CEOs and senior staff of the libraries in
south-central Florida. Studying the phenomena of servant leadership and organizational
culture among this population will extend the research on a leadership model

100
demonstrated to affect employee success and organizational performance positively
(Liden et al., 2014; Parris & Peachey, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012). More importantly, the
study will shed light on how CEOs perceive organizational culture as a mediating
mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to followers’ success as well as
organizational performance (Peterson et al., 2012). The research questions posed in the
study are primary means of determining how the CEOs in fact perceive the problem.
Research Questions
The following research questions therefore guided this qualitative case study:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
These research questions were predicated on an interest in the phenomena of
organizational culture and library CEOs’ servant leadership practices. Based on the
literature, there was support for the power of servant leadership as a catalyst engendering
employee success and organizational performance. This was evident in the works of
authors such as Chanhoo et al. (2015); Jones (2012a); Khan, Khan, and Chaudhry (2015);
Mehta and Pillay (2011); Peterson et al. (2012); Udani and Lorenzo-Molo (2013);
Weinstein (2013). Organizational culture, on the other hand, is an important aspect of an
organization’s competitive advantage (Armenakis & Lang, 2014; Engelen, Flatten,
Thalmann, & Brettel, 2014; Mujeeb & Ahmad, 2011). Through the influence of this
concept, organizational procedures are shaped, the unity that leads to a cohesive
organization are developed, and problem solving is done (Ovidiu-Iliuta, 2014; Schein,

101
2004). Studying both concepts together, that is servant leadership and organizational
culture, provided an understanding of CEOs perception of how the function of both
phenomena in organizations lead to the success of employees and organization (Latham,
2013; Peterson et al., 2012; Shin, 2012).
Data collection tools including semi structured interviews, non-participant
observation, a questionnaire, and review of documentary sources such as photographs,
policies and procedures, mission statements, and even program schedules were
appropriate for eliciting responses to the research questions. These allowed for the
opportunity to explore everything that was in the specific CEOs’ situation, including
individuals, groups, activities, or a specific phenomenon, as suggested by Cronin (2014).
This helped to find answers to the research questions posed in this study.
Research Methodology
The approach selected for this study was the qualitative methodology. Merriam
(as cited in Snyder, 2012) described this methodology as an understanding of how people
make sense of their world and the experiences they have in it. Methodology refers to a
close alignment of theory and method (Kramer-Kile, 2012) or of ideas and actions. In
other words, the qualitative approach brings visibility to the interpretive and material
practices of people (Denzin & Lincoln, as cited in Kramer-Kile, 2012). Patton (1999)
posited that this methodology is different from quantitative methodology which utilizes
experimental and non-experimental designs in the study. Instead, qualitative research
helps to tell a compelling story that provides information-rich details describing the
experiences and ideas of the participants in their own natural settings (Patton, 1999) such
as the CEOs in this study can do in their natural library settings. In fact, Patton (1999)

102
stated “perhaps nowhere is the difference between quantitative and qualitative methods
better captured than in the different strategies, logics, and purposes that distinguish
statistical probability sampling from qualitative purposeful sampling” (p. 49).
This study was conducted to determine the perspectives of three library CEOs,
based on the problem statement and research questions of the study. This involved
information of a subjective nature representing the participants’ thoughts on the matter at
hand. Because the qualitative research approach lends itself to representing the rich views
of study participants (Casey & Houghton, 2010; Cronin, 2014; Yin, 2011), it allowed for
subjectivity, which was suitable for this methodology.
In contrast, quantitative research objectively tests variables that are controllable
and changeable with experimentation (Ingham-Broomfield, 2014), and is not related to
the personal views of the participant. It seeks to capture numerical data, not descriptive
data (Harland & Holey, 2011); thus, it was not a suitable method for this study (Cronin,
2014). Furthermore, understanding the perceptions of others can be very complex in its
exploration and cannot be easily reduced to quantifiable terms (Bergen & While, 2000).
Additionally, a qualitative approach by its very nature, allows for a deeper knowledge
and understanding of the problem through the analysis of the participants’ underlying
behaviors and attitudes (Bergen, & While, 2000). This view was validated by Thamhain
(2014), who suggested that a qualitative approach allows for the capturing of a much
broader in-depth scope of descriptive information, as was done with the library CEOs,
than is possible with the quantitative approach. Cronin (2014) also agreed, opining that
the qualitative approach is the best method for researching this type of in-depth material,

103
thus confirming another reason the quantitative methodology was not suitable for this
study.
According to Yin’s (2011) third reason above, the qualitative approach is also
useful when seeking to understand the contextual aspects of people’s lives. This has
implications for how they conduct their lives socially, and even environmentally (Yin,
2011) or culturally. Through this study, an understanding of library CEOs’ perspectives
on how organizational culture plays a mediating role linking their servant leadership
practices to the success of employees and organization emerged. This was the equivalent
of understand the context of their lives in the organization, making a qualitative approach
the best for this study. Based on Yin (2011), other social science research methods were
not capable of addressing this type of context adequately. Most importantly, because a
quantitative approach would involve focusing on a limited set of variables (Yin, 2011)
which was not practical for this study, it was best to use the qualitative method.
The intent of the study was to use several instruments in the gathering of data
(Yin, 2011). Four main types of instruments were utilized: interviews, a questionnaire,
documentation, and non-participant observation. In utilizing this approach, there was a
hope to do more than merely create a diary of the everyday life of the CEOs participating
in the study. Utilizing this method rather than a quantitative one resulted in a better
understanding of the organizational culture of libraries and the servant leadership
practices of their CEOs (Carter et al., 2014; Yin, 2011) and the ultimate outcome of such
practice.
Last, the quantitative method is concerned with answers based on statistical
accuracy and objective measurement of events (Hamer & Collinson, 2014), using single

104
sources of data such as an experiment or even a survey. In this study, there was an
attempt to understand the perspectives of the CEOs in the select libraries through
gathering data on their concepts of servant leadership and organizational culture. This
involved the gathering of large amounts of textual, rather than statistical data. Thus, the
qualitative methodology was the most appropriate for this study. Selection of this
methodology has important implications for the type of research design to be used in the
conduct of the research. An in-depth discussion of the selected research design follows
this.
Research Design
A single case study design was selected to examine the perceptions of library
CEOs in relation to the phenomena of servant leadership and organizational culture in
libraries. The purpose of this case study was to understand how CEOs perceived
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. Anderson, Leahy,
DelValle, Sherman, and Tansey (2014) suggested the use of case studies if an institution,
group, or person is to be described, explored, or explained in depth. In this single case
study, the perceptions of a group of library CEOs from three different libraries in South
Central Florida was explored, making the case study design an appropriate choice. This
group formed a bounded system.
To be considered a single case study, the case of interest must be bounded in one
of three ways. It can be bounded by time, space or location, and activity, and encompass
a system of connections (Merriam, 2009). In this study, the group is bounded by location.
They are all CEOs of libraries and it is in this context that they are being studied. It is in

105
these settings that they balance their roles as CEOs practicing the leadership concept of
servant leadership. It is here in their libraries that they perceive their practices are
creating an organizational culture conducive to employee success and organizational
performance.
Retaining the meaningful characteristics of real-life events in a holistic manner is
an advantage of case studies (Yin, 2011). This study matched this description of case
studies, as the real-life perceptions of library CEOs were reviewed, using tools suitable
for capturing in-depth information. These were semi structured interview questions, a 28item questionnaire utilizing a 7-point Likert-like scale, non-participant observation, and
documentation. These were all tools appropriate for utilization in a case study, according
to Lauckner et al. (2012).
The case study design, according to Vohra (2014), allows for the capturing of rich
and reliable data. For this study, qualitative research was conducted, capturing the
perspectives of CEOs in a library setting using the lens of servant leaders. This allowed
for in-depth, and therefore rich, reliable answers to questions on the CEOs and their
practices in a real-world setting (Houghton et al., 2013), a significant reason for using the
case study design. As a phenomenological study, the approach would have been different,
as efforts would have had to be made to stay as faithful as possible to the lived
experiences of the study participants, as described in their own words (Yin, 2011).
This study could also not be appropriately handled as a narrative study since the
narrative design was intended to capture detailed stories of the life and experiences of a
single person or a small group of people (Anderson et al., 2014). Grounded theory design
was also not useful since this design is usually applied when a theory does not exist and

106
there was a need to first focus on an individual’s concerns than on the emerging concerns
of a group, according to Chwalisz, Shah, and Hand (2008). An ethnographic study would
also not be appropriate since the researcher’s focus is on understanding human behavior
by complete immersion in the life, culture, or situations of the subjects being studied
(Blomberg, Giacomi, Mosher, & Swenton-wall, 1993).
Population and Sample Selection
The general population of the study included the 13,500 librarians with Master’s
degrees working in public libraries throughout North America (American Library
Association, 2016). The target population consisted of approximately 240 executive and
senior level public library leaders in 80 public libraries in Florida (Institute of Museum
and Library Services, 2008). Public libraries were defined as those libraries which are
accessible to the public and funded by public (most times local) means such as taxes
(Rubin, 2010). These did not include academic or school libraries in educational
institutions (Curzon & Quinonez-Skinner, 2009; Gupta, 2012). From these 80 libraries,
purposive sampling (Acharya, Prakash, Saxena, & Nigam, 2013; Kandola, Banner,
O’Keefe-McCarthy, & Jassal, 2014) enabled the selection of a sample comprising the
executives and senior staff of two county libraries and one city library in south central
Florida.
The CEOs in the study had responsibility for libraries serving a total population of
approximately 445,692, with total registered memberships of approximately 227,440,
more than half of the total population served. There was a total of 12 libraries from which
the sample was selected, encompassing one county library system comprising six
libraries, another comprising five libraries, along with the single city library (11 county

107
libraries and one city library). Each was actively involved in providing service to the
community in which it was located. The headquarters of the two county library systems
were very close to major cities in Florida, and the city library was 45 minutes west of a
major city. The study sample size therefore comprised three library CEOs and four of
their senior level staff from each library, for a total sample size of 15 participants. The
sample was purposefully selected as soon as the study obtained Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approval, based on the researcher’s knowledge of the population.
Certain characteristics dictate the selection of participants for a study, to ensure
the right population is used for that specific research (Marshall, Cardon, Poddar, &
Fontenot, 2013). In this study, each CEO had to be the leader of a library or library
system that included senior level staff who had seniority based on either job
responsibility or based on longevity with the library or system. The CEO also had to selfidentify as practicing servant leadership dimensions as described by Liden et al. (2008).
Such participants were recruited while the researcher, who was a CEO herself, was
attending an annual conference of library CEOs sponsored by the Florida Division of
Library and Information Services, held in Tallahassee, Florida. The simple method used
to identify and select suitable CEOs is described next.
A description of Liden et al.’s (2008) seven dimensions of servant leadership was
utilized by the researcher to share with attendees at the conference. These attendees were
asked whether they thought their leadership style corresponded to the description
provided. Of the approximately 30 to 40 CEOs in attendance, only four showed an
interest and self-identified as servant leaders. The researcher took the opportunity to
explain about her research to these four conference attendees and asked them if they

108
would be interested in participating in the research. All four agreed to do so but one
moved to California before time to gather the data and had to be dropped from the study.
Thus, three self-identified servant leaders were selected for participation in the study,
including two who led county library systems and one who led a city library.
1. For the senior staff, the general criteria for selection were:
2. Senior level staff in the selected libraries or staff with employment seniority;
3. Those who met with the CEO regularly, individually or as a group, as in senior
leadership staff meetings or other meetings;
4. Those who had at least 2 years’ work experience with the CEO;
5. Those who understood the dimensions of servant leadership, as described by
Liden et al. (2008).
Using the sampling method described above, the CEOs and senior level staff participants
from each library were purposefully selected.
Gay & Airasian (2003) posit that in purposive sampling, “the researcher selects a
sample based on his experience and knowledge of the group to be sampled” (p. 115).
They also indicated that it is more effective to utilize purposive sampling than random
sampling, because the random participant may prove to be less knowledgeable about the
topic of interest than the purposely selected one, who would therefore be a more expert
informant (Gay & Airasian, 2003). This can lead to the provision of more reliable and
robust data. Such a sampling method will have intentional bias but this is in fact its
strength (Gay & Airasian). Furthermore, according to Tongco (2008), the benefit of
purposive sampling over randomization is that it can be more realistic as it pertains to the
time, effort, and cost involved in identifying participants. This researcher had prior
knowledge of the CEOs, having attended several annual directors’ meetings at which
most library directors (CEOs) for libraries in Florida gather each year. This knowledge

109
was utilized in the selection of three directors (CEOs) who were recognized as successful
leaders of their organizations, and who were willing to participate in the study.
Thus, purposive sampling involved an investigation of possible participants,
based on the judgment of the researcher with an eye to making selections for the study.
This process allowed the hand-picking of participants for the study based on the
knowledge and experience of the researcher (Kandola et al., 2014). This method provided
leeway for the researcher to deliberately select participants who could best contribute to
an understanding of the CEOs’ perception of the phenomenon of study, the servant
leadership and organizational culture (Kandola et al., 2014) concepts.
In this study, this purposive sampling method allowed for the selection of not only
CEOs, but also senior level staff in all three libraries, based on the researcher’s own
knowledge and experience in the field (LoBiondo-Wood & Haber, 2013). The belief was
that the senior level staff sample thus identified, would be best suited to respond to the
questionnaire that addressed the servant leadership practices of the CEOs from their point
of view. A purposive method for selecting the staff in the three libraries was utilized.
Purposive sampling allowed a list from each library of the population to be sampled, to
be used for choosing individuals based on the predetermined parameters (Kandola et al.,
2014) indicated above. Tongco (2008) describes this purposeful method of selection as a
deliberate choice of participants because of qualities they possess. In other words, the
researcher determined what was needed for the study and identified people who could fill
that need, based on their knowledge (Bernard, 2002). Thus, the senior level staff selected
to participate were chosen in part, because they worked closely with the CEOs and would

110
therefore be best qualified to describe the CEOs’ characteristic leadership style, based on
their knowledge of the CEO.
Using this purposeful method was important for ensuring the credibility and
reliability of the research by eliminating researcher bias, according to Patton (1999). With
the need for only four senior level staff from each library, this purposeful sampling
method provided a means for the researcher to reduce the number of participants in the
two county libraries, which comprised five branches in one instance and six in the other,
and several staff members in each. In the city library, which had a smaller staff
compliment, all senior level staff were eligible to participate. If insufficient numbers of
the senior staff of that library agreed to participate, plans had been made to ask for other
participants with seniority, based on longevity of employment at that library. However,
this was not necessary as sufficient senior staff was available and willing to participate.
The sample size of 15 was adequate for several reasons. First, according to Mason
(2010), qualitative samples are most times much smaller than those in quantitative
studies. Second, Thompson (as cited in Marshall et al., 2013) posited that smaller sample
sizes usually involve more contact time with each interviewee, and that theoretical
saturation generally occurs between 10 and 30 interviews. However, Marshall et al. stated
that the researcher should conduct additional studies even after they feel that saturation
has been met. Consequently, for this study, it was estimated that a half of the suggested
maximum sample size was adequate.
Third, Crouch and McKenzie (2006) stated that the focus of qualitative studies is
on meaning and not on generalization, which would require large representative samples.
Dworkin (2012) concurred, positing that the focus of qualitative studies is on obtaining a

111
deep, rich understanding of phenomenon. Furthermore, there was danger that a large
sample size would lead to repetition and therefore become superfluous (Mason, 2010).
Because of the labor-intensive nature of qualitative studies, analysis of a large sample
size could not only be time consuming, but also impractical in some cases (Mason, 2010).
This was a position agreed to by Cleary, Horsfall, and Hayter (2014), who recommended
a small sample size for qualitative studies because of the systematic and rigorous nature
of this methodology. Last, this number met and surpassed the GCU required sample size
requirements for case studies of a minimum 10 participants or cases.
Yin (2011) suggested that a larger sample size was good for creating confidence
in the findings of the study. However, Yin also suggested that the complexity of the topic
for study as well as the depth of the data collection needed should serve as a guide to the
researcher. Further, according to Cleary et al. (2014), a smaller sample size is typical of
qualitative studies. Patton (1999) agreed, suggesting that focus on a small sample size
selected purposefully would engender a better understanding of the phenomenon,
especially in the case of the study of individual behavior on a day-to-day basis.
The appropriate authority at each site was asked to distribute the informed consent
forms (see Appendix C) to all senior level staff that met the criteria above in each library.
Those who indicated an interest in participating in the study were informed of their right
to participate voluntarily based on their understanding of the purpose, risks, and benefits
involved (Sharp, 2015) in the study. They were also informed of their right to opt out at
any time for any or no reason (Sharp, 2015). The sample participants were instructed to
sign the informed consent form with the understanding that a purposeful system would be
used to determine their eventual inclusion in the study. Thus, the purposeful sampling

112
method (Kandola et al., 2014) was utilized, even where there was a need to reduce the
number of interested participants. There was discussion on the matter of confidentiality
with each prospective participant. They were made aware of the fact that data collected
would be held in strictest confidence (Wolf et al., 2015) and that pseudonyms would be
used to protect their privacy and identity.
Based on the Grand Canyon University Procedure and Guidelines for Obtaining
Site Authorization to Conduct Research, site authorization letters were sent to the sites of
interest in south central Florida, requesting permission from the appropriate authority to
utilize their facility for the research. Next, IRB approval was requested for these
authorization letters from the research sites, and copies of IRB approved site
authorization letters returned to the appropriate authority at each research site. The copies
of site authorization and informed consent letter were filed with the Office of Academic
Research and with the IRB at Grand Canyon (Henkel, 2012).
Sources of Data
This study relied on four sources of data: semi structured interviews, a
questionnaire, non-participant observation, and review of documentary sources.
According to Casey and Houghton (2010); Yin (2009), the use of multiple data collection
sources contributes to the validity, reliability, and triangulation (Carter et al., 2014) of the
data. For example, Yin (2011) posited that inferences developed from observations are
not only strengthened by data gathered from interviews, but will also either corroborate
or challenge findings. This provides triangulation (Patton, 1999; Yin, 2009), which is
very important in qualitative studies for combating threats to validity (Yin, 2011). Thus,
this study achieved triangulation with the use of four different sources of data.

113
Cronin (2014) pointed out the importance of developing a rigorous data collection
protocol. This is critical to case studies, which have a goal of providing as accurate as
possible a description of the case (Cronin, 2014). For qualitative methodologies,
interviews can be utilized as instruments for collecting data (Yin, 2011) using openended questions related to the research questions, in a semi structured style. Mojtahed,
Nunes, Martins, and Peng (2014) stated that this instrument includes important
techniques for obtaining facts and knowledge about the phenomenon under study. For
this study, the style used with the library CEOs was open-ended interviews, based on
Schein’s (2004) three levels of organizational culture model and the servant leadership
model of Liden et al. (2008) with its seven dimensions of leadership.
The types of questions included in the interview were intended to gather data to
aid in an understanding of human experiences (Cohen & Masnion, as cited in Mojtahed et
al., 2014; Yin, 2009). In this case, the need was to understand the perceptions of the
library CEOs in relation to their servant leadership practices and organizational culture.
Per Mojtahed et al. (2014), the constructivist approach is normally associated with
qualitative studies and means the researcher must rely upon the participant’s views of the
phenomenon. Semi structured, face-to-face, individual interviews were conducted
(Hawamdeh & Raigangar, 2014) with CEOs to retrieve data on their views as it pertains
to the study’s purpose. Although a tape recorder was utilized with the CEOs’ permission,
the interview was treated as a process of gathering and giving information (Booth &
Booth, 1994). LeCompte and Goetz (1982); Sandelowski (1986) emphasized the
importance of validity and reliability in qualitative research. Data from interview
questions were rendered valid and reliable through respondent validation to get feedback

114
from participants to avoid misinterpretation of the information they provided (Yin, 2011).
Triangulation was also utilized to this end (Patton, 1999; Yin, 2009).
Interviewers can capture non-verbal cues that are rich in meaning by making
detailed notes immediately after the interview, incorporating as much as can be
remembered on not only verbal pronouncements but also on facial and tonal expressions
(Yin, 2011). Drew (2014) indicated that this is the best method of obtaining data from
organizational elites. If established barriers such as issues of access and suspicion
towards the interviewer can be overcome, Drew posited that semi structured interviews
can result in the gathering of rich data. Accordingly, many of these cues are included in
the field notes captured by this researcher during the open-ended interviews. A field
study was conducted to test the validity of these open-ended interview questions. A report
of the results is present in the data collection and management section of the study.
The 28-item servant leadership questionnaire created by Liden et al. (2008) was
used with the senior library staff to determine their perceptions of servant leadership as
practiced by the CEOs in their organizations. According to Yin (2009), utilizing this type
of instrument is consistent with a qualitative case study, such as this study was. It
involved more structured questions, much like a survey. Permission was obtained from
the Elsevier publishers to utilize this questionnaire. Directly related to the servant
leadership model (Liden et al., 2008), this instrument helped to decipher deep underlying
assumptions suggested by Schein (2004) that were at work in the organizational cultures
of the libraries. Thirteen of the 28 items specifically solicited answers to help determine
the practice of servant leadership dimensions in the libraries, from the point of view of
the senior library staff. The instrument was individually available to the senior level staff

115
participants through the Survey Monkey online site. Its function was to complement the
data obtained through the interviews.
Using observation as an instrument in the collection of data in a study can be
invaluable. According to Nicolini (2014), this is one of the main methods used in human
and social sciences for gathering data. This method allows for the gathering of data on the
participants in his/or her own context. According to Yin (2011), the results of the
observation may be a form of primary data. This is because the information gathered
constitutes what is observed personally through the senses, unaffected by the thoughts or
perceptions of others in one way or another. According to Yin (2011), the activity can be
formal, dubbed systematic observation. Rashid and Hassan (2013) observed that this
instrument allows for first-hand involvement in the study, causing the researcher to hear,
see, and experience the participants’ reality as they do. In fact, according to Rashid and
Hassan, this instrument of non-participant observation enables direct experience and
observational access to the world of those being observed, thus offering access to
understanding their world of meaning and everyday life.
The observation method used in this study was systematic non-participant
observation. The physical surroundings of the libraries were observed, including visual
and audio cues in relation to the seven servant leadership dimensions of Liden et al.
(2008). It also included observation of indicators of the organizational culture according
to Schein’s (2004) three levels, and CEO-to-staff, as well as staff-to-customer
interactions. The specific observational instruments included qualitative, judgmental
observer ques contained in a protocol (Yin, 2011) (see Appendix H), determining which
of the servant leadership dimensions were obvious. This contributed to the validity of the

116
study by complimenting data gathered from the interviews of the CEOs. Documentation
as an informational instrument was another way of contributing to this validity.
Documentation as a method of gathering data in qualitative studies was one of the
instruments selected for this study. According to Yin (2011), this method is good for
identifying details such as correct spelling, titles, and dates of events, wording of mottos,
mission statement, slogans, and other forms of communication. These are some of the
data collected with this instrument for this study. Additional data included information
from documents such as the library’s Annual Plan of Service, meeting minutes, fliers,
newspaper articles, and other such documents to determine alignment with the seven
dimensions of servant leadership of Liden et al. (2008) as well as with Schein’s (2004)
three levels of organizational culture.
Documentation also fell under a class of data sources that, according to Yin
(2011), represents primary evidence. This source of data gathering draws from original
documents not yet analyzed by any author (Yin, 2011). The type of document selected
also depends on the purpose of the study. The data collected in this way was useful for
reducing issues of reflexivity, since they were created for reasons other than those being
investigated (Yin, 2011). These documents were therefore not influenced by this
researcher’s own study and included many of those mentioned above. Additionally,
according to Hall and Rist (1999), documentation is a means of verifying data because
what people say is not necessarily what they do. This data collection method is therefore
different from interviews, which allow researchers to influence participants as well as be
influenced by them (Yin, 2011). It is also different from observations, which may be
subject to what Yin (2011) called a “one-way reflective effect” (p. 150), which describes

117
the researcher’s influence on those being observed. Documentation was important for
strengthening the study, as it allowed for methodological triangulation (Denzin, as cited
in Hall & Rist, 1999) of data. One additional factor important to the veracity of the study
was that of validity.
Validity
Validity is one of the most important factors in any consideration involving
research (LeCompte & Goetz, 1982; Sandelowski, 1986). The term refers to the extent to
which there is an accurate reflection or assessment of the phenomenon a study is trying to
research (Yin, 2009). The concept exists in three different forms and is useful for helping
to establish the quality of the research (Yin, 2009) on the library CEOs. The forms are
construct validity, which is the test used to determine whether correct operational
measures are in place for the phenomenon being researched; internal validity, which is
useful for specific types of studies such as for explanatory or causal studies; and external
validity, which pertains to the domain to which a study’s findings can be generalized
(Yin, 2009). Each has tactics, which identify measures useful for determining validity.
Construct validity was most pertinent to the current study.
Construct validity was established through many design features or tactics built
into its conduct. For example, as suggested by Yin (2011), use was made of respondent
validation or member checking to get feedback from participants to avoid
misinterpretation of the information they provided. Per Creswell and Miller (2000),
member checking is one of the most important tools for ensuring the validity and
credibility of a study, and was thus critical to this study. In this study, key participants
were asked to review the applicable interview transcript in the case study report in its

118
draft format, and make changes to the draft as needed to ensure validity. Only one
participant responded to the request and he stated that he was happy with the report.
Triangulation was also incorporated as a means of validation, utilizing four sources of
evidence to collect data to help to establish a chain of evidence (Yin, 2011) on the servant
leadership practices of the CEOs. These sources were semi structured interviews,
documentation review, a questionnaire, and non-participant observation. Data collected
from each source was used to develop convergent lines of enquiry (Yin, 2009) which
allowed for triangulation (Patton, 1999; Yin, 2009) of the data to ensure validity.
According to Yin (2009), efforts to obtain validation also include others reviewing the
data analysis, conducting field study to ensure interview questions are appropriate and
clear, and doing the interviews and non-participant observations. In this study, a field
study was conducted to ensure the interview questions were appropriate and adjustments
made to the original questions as a result. Interviews and non-participant observations
were conducted and recorded using a tape recorder for the interviews and notes and the
tape recorder for the observations. Every effort was made to set aside personal biases as it
relates to the libraries and their operation, thereby adding to the validity of the study.
Reliability
Reliability is another test applied to a study to ensure its quality. According to Yin
(2009), a study that is reliable is repeatable and should produce the same findings if the
same procedures are followed. This notion is debated extensively in the literature (Madill,
Jordan, & Shirley, 2000; Md. Ali, & Yusof, 2011; Miles & Huberman, as cited in Madill
et al., 2000; Sherrard, 1998; Stenbacka, 2001) as more applicable to quantitative studies

119
than qualitative. Patton (1999), and Yin (2011) offered suggestions as to how to ensure
reliability in qualitative research.
According to Patton (1999), a reliable study should be error-free and should
display little or no bias. This calls for complete objectivity, which seems impossible in a
qualitative study; however, this objectivity is required for the reliability of the study
(Patton, 1999). Yin (2011) also suggested that an error-free study increases reliability.
This can be obtained through the creation of a case study protocol. This document
provides a detailed documentation of procedures for the case study; it also contains
information on the instruments and rules in the case’s development, thus making it easily
repeatable.
Reflexivity was a concern throughout the study as a means of reliability.
Darawsheh (2014) described this concept as very valuable for the improvement of
qualitative research. This concept of reflexivity involves “the continuous process of selfreflection that researchers engage in to generate awareness about their actions, feelings
and perceptions” (Darawsheh, 2014, p. 561). Patton (1999) opined that reflexivity
involves recognition of “the cultural, political, social, linguistic, and ideological origins
of one’s own perspective and voice as well as the perspective and voices of that one
interview and those to whom one reports” (p. 65). In other words, the researcher must be
cognizant of the influence that may be exerted over participants during interviews and
non-participant observation sessions, and conversely, the influence the participants may
have on the researcher (Darawsheh, 2014). Since the researcher in this study worked
closely with each of the participants, it bears remembering that accurate and unbiased
reports are the outcomes of reflexivity and objectivity on the part of the researcher

120
(Patton, 1999). Thus, it was the researcher’s duty to ensure reliability by reducing the
challenge of reflexivity, utilizing unobtrusive objects such as collected documents,
artifacts, or other recorded materials (Yin, 2011) in addition to the interview data. There
are other aspects of the study that contributed to its reliability; these are discussed next.
Various other aspects of the study contributed to its reliability (Yin, 2011). For
example, an interview protocol assisted in making the study reliable, according to Jacob
and Furgerson (2012). Such a protocol for this study can be found in Appendix A. That
document incorporated not only the questions for the interview, it also includes
guidelines for the conduct of the interview, including suggestions for breaking the ice, a
script with information that needed to be shared with the interviewees, and several other
important reminders for the interviewer (Jacob & Furgerson, 2012).
A case study database also assisted with organizing and documenting the data
collected and therefore contributed to the reliability of the study (Yin, 2009). This case
study database consisted of two separate collections, one for the data or evidentiary base,
and the other for the researcher’s report. This is where raw data of this study will be held
in case of a later need. According to Yin (2009), not developing a database for a study is
a major shortcoming. As a means of strengthening the reliability of the data, the
researcher conducted and recorded a field test of the interview questions.
Data Collection and Management
In this qualitative case study, data collection was conducted through four
instruments: interviews, a questionnaire, documentation, and non-participant observation.
In relation to this, a field study was conducted at a volunteer library, selected because of
its geographical location and because it was not part of the study participant pool (Yin,

121
2011). The interview protocol intended for the CEOs was utilized in this field study. The
intent was to allow for a rehearsal of the data collection procedures to ensure clarity of
instructions and questions before administering the instrument. The result was that some
questions were changed to speak to the research questions more directly and also to avoid
causing the interviewee to feel as though she was repeating the same information over
and over. This field test also allowed for a more accurate perspective on the amount of
time needed for the interview.
Purposeful sampling (Acharya et al., 2013; Kandola et al., 2014) was used to start
the data collection process. Based on Acharya et al. (2013), purposeful sampling allowed
the researcher to select three library CEOs as the principal research subjects. Purposive
sampling allows a researcher to hand-pick participants for the study based on the
participants’ knowledge and experience (LoBiondo-Wood & Haber, 2013). In this study,
the purposive sampling method allowed the researcher to select senior level staff in all
three libraries based on the criteria that rendered them best suited to respond to the
questionnaire that addressed the servant leadership practices of the CEOs.
After selecting participants, including CEOs, each was asked to develop and share
alphanumeric identifiers of their own choosing to protect their identity and privacy. In
this way, no personal names ever entered the study, offering further insurance of
confidentiality. A meeting was convened with each of the 15 participants selected. They
were reminded of the purpose of the study, their right to back out of the study at any time
and for any reason without penalty, and the plan for ensuring confidentiality of their input
(DiCicco-Bloom & Crabtree, 2006; Gill, Stewart, Treasure, & Chadwick, 2008). That is,
all collected data had only the alphanumeric identifier on them to protect the identity of

122
the participant. The data was stored with the researcher’s confidential documents in a
locked file, and will be kept for no more than 3 years. The amount of time commitment
needed for participating was discussed as well as procedures for responding to the
questionnaire as well as the interview. The participants were asked to affix their
signatures on the informed consent forms (see Appendix C). Institutional Review Board
(IRB) approved the informed consent form, after which the data collection schedule was
created not only for the interviews but also for collection using other sources of data such
as non-participant observation and documentation. In the next section, is discussed the
collection of data utilizing each source.
Interviews. The interview protocol was used (see Appendix A) to guide the
discussions. However, because the intent was to collect deep, rich data for answering the
research questions, there were other questions inserted by the interviewer. The
interviewer applied “empathic neutrality” (Patton, 1999, p. 40) as the interviews
developed, so that active listening on the part of the interviewer occurred. Empathic
neutrality enabled the interviewer to balance involvement in the conversation so that she
was not aloof from the discussion, risking misunderstanding the participant; or becoming
so involved that judgment was clouded (Patton, 1999).
A protocol was prepared for each interviewee to ensure important data was
captured and recorded (Yin, 2011), and information for the participant was in place. This
included ensuring the prepared opening statement for use by the researcher was available
and there was a reminder to check if that interviewee had consented to be interviewed.
Steps included in the protocol were based on Yin’s (2011) suggestions and incorporated
information indicating date, time, place, setting, and the participant’s body language in

123
the notes the interviewer made as the interviews progressed. Member checking was
utilized to get interviewees to review the recorded and transcribed information for
identifying omissions and to suggest inclusions.
Thus, the first data set comprised responses derived from semi structured, open
ended interview questions presented to the library CEOs individually. The responses
indicated the experiences, opinions, feelings, and knowledge base of the CEOs (Adams,
2010; Mojtahed et al., 2014) as it pertained to their practice of the servant leadership
dimensions of Liden et al. (2008). The interviews were conducted at each of the three
public libraries at a place preferred by the CEO participant. CEO1 and CEO3 both
preferred their offices, while CEO2 utilized the library’s conference room. Each
participant’s permission was obtained to tape-record the interview. Each was reminded at
the end of the interview that data collected from the interaction and its analysis would
remain confidential. They were then asked to review the data captured in the interview
for clarification. A journal was kept for all on-site interactions, including any notes from
interviews. Analysis of the participant-approved data began very soon after. The
collected data was stored in a cloud-based file accessible only by a password known only
to the researcher for security purposes (Groenewald, 2004). Questioning ceased when
saturation was reached (Yin, 2009); that is, when the participants stopped providing new
information.
Per Rowlands, Waddell, and McKenna (2015), the concept of saturation is used
widely in interview based qualitative research, although a description is lacking as to how
this saturation state is reached. However, Rowlands et al. also posited that to accomplish
data saturation, the researcher is required to conduct interviews past the point where an

124
optimal range of interviews have been done, and redundancy of the data set begins to
happen. Saturation dictates sample size in most qualitative studies (Mason, 2010). Per
Dworkin (2012), qualitative studies are marked by smaller sizes compared to quantitative
studies because the qualitative study is focused on determining meaning and seeks to
obtain a deep, rich understanding of the phenomenon of interest. Thus, it was this
researcher’s belief that this small focused study could reach saturation utilizing 15
participants and that it would provide answers to all three research questions.
Organizational documentation. The second data set comprised data culled from
the search of organizational documents. These included program schedules,
announcements, and minutes of meetings (Yin, 2009); administrative documents such as
annual reports, progress reports, and mission and vision statements; and information
appearing in mass media such as newspapers, on the libraries’ websites, blogs, Facebook
pages, and Twitter sites. With permission to conduct this aspect of the research, it was
done as part of the 2 days spent at each site. This involved making relevant notes in a
diary specifically retained for this purpose. Copies of authorized documents were also
made for later review. The data collected in this set were reviewed for alignment with the
servant leadership dimensions of Liden et al. (2008). The data also helped provide
answers to the research questions and therefore complimented the responses to the
interview questions as well data from the non-participant observations.
Each documentary source was reviewed, making field notes, and copies as permitted,
including scanning documents. These documents helped to provide answers to the
research questions as they complemented the data gathered from the interviews. Yin
(2009) posited that for case studies, this form of data collection is the most important, as

125
it corroborates and augments data from other sources. Since this study was a case study,
this method of data collection was suitable for its conduct. Again, A protocol was used to
ensure pertinent information was captured. For example, the protocol gave guidance on
the various types of data that were gathered and provided space for recording date,
location, any observed information, and type of documentation reviewed.
Non-participant observation. The third data set consisted of data collected from
non-participant observation. This was an important method for complimenting other data
collection means because the data collected was not filtered by input from others but was
what the researcher saw and perceived with her own senses (Yin, 2011). Consequently,
while the CEOs were being interviewed, there was an opportunity to directly observe that
CEO’s office space to determine the climate or impoverishment of the organization (Yin,
2009). Activities were observed such as the interaction between study participants (CEO
and senior staff) and other library stakeholders such as staff and customers. The condition
of the building was also observed, such as posters and other notices on walls. Lastly,
there was an opportunity to observe the conduct of meetings in LIB1 (county library 1)
and CIL (city library).
Two full days were spent at each site making notes as needed. Because the data
collected was guided by the research questions, the focus was on gathering data that
related to organizational culture at any of Schein’s (2004) three levels of culture. There
was a successful effort to identify the application of the seven servant leadership
dimensions of Liden et al. (2008). Note was made that this method lent itself very readily
to the collection of data revealing the cultural operation of the libraries at the artifacts or
Schein’s first level, which was “easy to observe and very difficult to decipher” (Schein,

126
2004, p. 26). A protocol was used for this method to ensure the capture of pertinent data,
so responses could be obtained pertinent to the three research questions.
Servant leadership questionnaire. The last data set was a small quantitative
component of a mainly qualitative study, consisting of data gathered from responses to
the 28-item servant leadership questionnaire (Liden et al., 2008). This was a
questionnaire prepared specifically for the 12 senior level staff members of the libraries
in the study. The questionnaire was created in SurveyMonkey, an online survey
development, cloud-based tool. The 12 senior level staff were provided a link to the
questionnaire’s location in SurveyMonkey. The respondents’ electronic consent to
participate in the study triggered access to the site. The researcher, who was designated
“administrator” of the site, and who therefore had sole password access to the responses
provided by the participants, managed data collection during this process. The
participants were apprised of this questionnaire management procedure which ensured
the confidentiality and security of the responses. Furthermore, participants in the
questionnaire did not use their own names, but rather a coded name to which they were
asked to add a researcher designated code for their library. For example, one participant
named herself “Blondie,” to which the researcher coded identifier “lib2” was added to
represent the library. In the response, therefore this respondent was coded as
“blondielib2,” which provided further anonymity so that not even the researcher knew
who provided which response. All that was known was which library the response came
from. This was further insulation against disclosure of sensitive information. This
questionnaire gathered data from the selected senior level staff in each library regarding

127
their perceptions of the CEOs’ practice of the seven dimensions of servant leadership.
This helped in the triangulation of data needed for answering the research questions.
Marianne and Miemie (2014) suggested the need for a plan for managing data as
well as reducing it in a way that is meaningful. For this study, a case study database was
developed for managing the interview responses, the observation notes, and the
documentation material, utilizing the NVivo11 (QSR International Pty [QSR], 2015)
qualitative analysis software. This software therefore held coded data for thematic
analysis from all data sources, except the questionnaire, which the researcher analyzed
separately (Opdenakker, 2006). The researcher stored the information in this database in
a cloud-based site, accessible only by a password known only the researcher for security
purposes (Groenewald, 2004). The researcher stored the responses to the questionnaire in
a Microsoft Excel file also accessible only by a password. The raw data will be kept for 3
years after the research is completed and will then be deleted.
Data Analysis Procedures
This study was conducted to understand how the CEOs of three libraries in south
central Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their
servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance.
Utilizing a qualitative method and a single case study design, participants were selected
for the study that would enable a thorough understanding of the phenomenon of interest.
Three research questions guided the data collection. The first focused on gathering
information on how the practice of servant leadership principles enabled an
organizational culture leading to employee success. The second gathered information on
the CEOs’ perceptions of how this organizational culture enabled employee success. The

128
third was on how the success of the employees enabled organizational performance. Data
collection instruments included face-to-face interviews, organizational documentation,
observation, and a 28-item servant leadership questionnaire. To determine answers to the
research questions, two days were spent at each research site collecting data after IRB
approval. Based on the result of a field study (Yin, 2011) it appeared that it would take
longer than the interviewer expected, to administer the face-to-face interview questions
and acquire the rich data desired, utilizing the original interview questions. Furthermore,
the field study also revealed an insufficiency in the questions as it pertained to eliciting
responses that provided answers to all three research questions. The result was that some
questions were changed to speak more directly to the research questions. This field study
also allowed for a more accurate perspective on the amount of time needed for the
interview.
Interviews. Data collected through the interviews were first transcribed from tape
recordings to Microsoft Word documents on the researcher’s computer. A comparison
was conducted between the transcribed and tape-recorded document to ensure the
transcription was the verbatim words of the interviewees and that there were no errors.
After the researcher verified the transcription was the verbatim words of the interviewees,
the appropriate copy of the transcribed interview was returned to each of the three CEOs
for member checking. Only one CEO returned the document stating that although he
would change a few sentences to better express himself, his thoughts and ideals remained
the same so the transcript needed no change except of grammatical errors. The other two
CEOs did not respond so the researcher assumed they were satisfied with the
transcription. Only the interviews needed to be member checked (Jacob & Furgerson,

129
2012). After member checking - which verified data validity - was successfully
completed, the transcripts were next uploaded into the NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) qualitative
data management and analysis software.
It is considered a strong analytic strategy to utilize statistical analysis while
qualitative data is still central to the case study (Yin, 2011. In this study, while Liden et
al.’s (2008) pre-prepared, quantitative, analysis and scoring method was utilized for the
analysis of the 28-item questionnaire, the interviews, observation notes, and the
documentation were analyzed using the first three phases of Yin’s (2011) Five Phases of
Analysis (See Figure 1). In this figure, there are arrows depicting Yin’s five phases of
complete analysis. The diagram has arrows illustrating the sequencing among the phases
(Yin, 2011). Two-way arrows are utilized to indicate how researchers can go back and
forth iteratively between phases. This is an illustration of how analysis is likely to occur
in a nonlinear fashion (Yin, 2011). The phases included compiling a database as in phase
1, disassembling the data in phase 2, and reassembling the data in phase 3. The remainder
of this section describes the use of all these methods for analyzing data to answer the
three research questions posed in the study. A graphic depiction of Yin’s five phases
follows in Figure 1.

130

Figure 1. Yin’s five phases of analysis.
Adapted from “Exhibit 8.1 Five Phases of Analysis and Their Interactions” by R. K. Yin, 2011, Qualitative
Research from Start to Finish, p. 178. Copyright 2011 by Guilford Press. Reprinted with permission of
Guilford Press (See Appendix L).

The first phase of the analysis of the interviews, observation notes, and
documentation, involved what Yin (2011) described as “compiling.” In this phase, a
“database” was first created, which was a method of organizing the data (Yin, 2011), as it
was uploaded to NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) in categories. The process involved clicking on
the tab in the software for New Project on the NVivo11 initial landing page. This leads to
another page containing a tab named “sources”, which is one of three group buttons for
places in which project items can be stored. This button allowed for the opening of a new

131
project in one of two readymade folders it contains, depending on the type of data source.
If the source included books and other sources which cannot be imported into NVivo11,
then an “External” folder would be used in which would be loaded pre-prepared
summaries of the content of those items. In this study, the second folder named
“Internals” was used. This allowed for the uploading or import of items into the NVivo11
source folders, including the transcribed interviews and observation field notes, as well as
a table of organizational documentation created as a word file.
For this project, the source folders were named interviews, observation, and
documentation. Consequently, the transcribed Microsoft Word files containing data from
the interviews, were imported into the interview source folder, the observation and field
notes into the observation source folder, and the documentation table into the
documentation source folder in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015), to begin the compiling of the
data. According to Yin (2011), in this process the data is put in some order. For this
study, each transcribed interview was uploaded as a separate file into the interview
folder, so that there was a file for CEO1, CEO2, and CEO3 interviews. CEO1 represents
the CEO from one county library, CEO2, the second of the two county library CEOs, and
CEO3, the CEO of a city library. In the observation folder, there were also files
containing transcribed observation notes from the library of each CEO. The
documentation folder contained only one file comprising the summary documentation
table that was created to describe each piece of documentation collected from each of the
three libraries.
An additional button named “nodes” was also evident on the new projects page.
Nodes, according to QSR (2015), represents themes or ideas about the researched data

132
that the researcher wishes to be included in the analysis, and is another means of
compiling data for the analysis. In this study, nodes were created and named for each
research question using the names RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3. Because the study included
information related to Liden et al.’s (2008) seven dimensions of servant leadership as
well as Schein’s (2004) three levels of organizational culture, ten separate nodes were
also created for these. Nodes were created by selecting the option in the software for new
nodes and then naming them.
Yin (2011) states that the objective behind this first phase of analysis is to
organize the data systematically before the start of formal analysis. This was
accomplished for this study in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) through the creation of source
folders, nodes, and uploading data to them. The more orderly the data, the stronger the
analysis will be, leading to a more rigorous qualitative study (Yin, 2011). This
organization of the data, according to Yin, is the compiling phase of the analysis process.
In this phase, the data was read several times in order to clean it by checking on the
consistency and accuracy of the data. The process enabled familiarization with the data.
This leads naturally to the next phase, the “Disassembling Phase”.
The next phase in the analysis was the “Disassembling” phase (Yin, 2011). In this
phase, Yin (2011) states that the purpose is to break down the compiled data into smaller,
more manageable pieces or fragments. This is the phase in which coding of the data
began. For this study, this included using initial coding (Saldana, 2016) to identify data in
each source that corresponded with research questions, as well as identifying data that
pertained to one or other of Liden et al.’s (2008) seven dimensions, or Schein’s (2004)
cultural levels. The dimensions were emotional healing, creating value for the

133
community, conceptual skills, empowering, helping followers grow and succeed, putting
followers first, and behaving ethically. The three cultural levels were artifacts, espoused
beliefs and values, and underlying assumptions. Yin describes this second phase as
assigning labels to fragments. The phase also aligns with the coding practice called “open
coding” (Yin, 2011, p. 187), which is described as the process of generating categories
and their properties (Yin). The phase has also been described as a starting place for
finding analytic leads for further exploration (Saldana, 2016).
After reviewing the interview responses to each of the 13 questions used in the
CEOs’ interviews, several times, the responses were manually, (outside of NVivo 11,
QSR, 2015), color coded, indicating the research question (RQ) for which answers were
provided. For example, questions 1, 3, 4, 5, and 9 related to RQ1, which asked how
servant leadership practices of library CEOs enabled an organizational culture of
employee success. These questions were thus color-coded yellow. Interview questions 6,
7, 8, and 12 were color-coded blue because they related to RQ2, which asked how
organizational culture enabled employee success. Green was used to mark questions 10,
and 11 because they related to RQ3, which asked how employee success enabled
organizational performance. Questions 2 and 13 were not color coded because the
responses to those questions did not relate directly to the RQs.
Through its system of coding data, NVivo11(QSR, 2015) facilitated the
disassembling process (Yin, 2011). In this phase, data in the interviews were reviewed
and coded paragraph by paragraph (Saldana, 2016) to appropriate nodes by clicking on
the “interviews” link in the source folder in NVivo11, and opening the folder holding the
three sets of interviews. To code data to identify thematic information for answering

134
research question 1 (RQ1), the interview for all three CEOs was clicked, sequentially.
This opened each CEO’s interview responses one at a time, which had been color coded
before to mark which aspects of their responses related to individual research questions.
Thus, the CEOs’ responses to interview questions 1, 3, 4, 5, and 9 were read and re-read
and then coded paragraph by paragraph to RQ1, a node created for receiving coded
matter in answer to this first research question. This process was continued until all
relevant data in the three sets of interviews were coded to one or other of the three
research question nodes – RQ1, RQ2, or RQ3.
Yin (2011) describes this process as moving to a slightly higher conceptual level
that allows similar items to receive the same code. This allowed for a later examination of
the related data for similarities and dissimilarities. The same process was followed for the
observation field notes as well as the organizational documents, as was followed for the
interviews. Yin (2011) calls the codes resulting from this phase, “level 1” or “open
coding”.
Further disassembling or coding of data into nodes led conceptually to a higher
level of coding, as level I codes are further categorized. Yin (2011) describes this as
moving to a second level of coding. This allowed for the retrieval of demographic and
other details about participants in the study, through coding. For example, because
demographic classification was desired for each CEO, nodes were created for each, into
which information on the attributes of age, gender, occupation, and education (see
Appendix F) were loaded. For this the interview responses of each CEO were reviewed to
identify demographic information which was then coded to each CEOs’ demographic
case node (Appendix F).

135
Not only did the NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) software allow for the coding of the data
it also allowed the coded data to be analyzed for emerging themes and larger patterns.
These were related to the CEOs’ perceptions of servant leadership, and organizational
culture in their organizations. Yin (2011) describes this as the third phase in the analytical
cycle or the reassembling phase, at which codes are considered at level three or four. This
is the phase that calls for querying the data (Yin, 2011) which was done in NVivo11.
To accomplish the reassembling phase of the analytical cycle, the querying tool in
NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) was used. The research questions, the seven dimensions of servant
leadership model, the organizational culture model, other commonly occurring concepts
that emerged from the initial coding, were used to develop a list, comprising coded words
and phrases for analysis, as illustrated in Table 1, and which are also contained in the
codebook created by NVivo11 (see Appendix K).

136

Table 1
Sample of Coded Words and Phrases for Analysis from NVivo Created Codebook
Words

Codes

Descriptions

Emotional Healing

EH

Being sensitive to the needs or concerns of others

Creating Value for
community

CVC

Efforts put forth to provide services and products for enhancing
the community served

Conceptual Skills

CS

Possession of an understanding of the organization and tasks to
be accomplished to be able to assist and support others

Empowering

E

Encouraging and facilitating others, especially immediate
followers, in identifying and solving problems, as well as
determining when and how to complete tasks

Helping Others Grow and
Succeed

HOG

Demonstrating genuine concern for other’s career growth and
development by providing support and mentoring

Putting Followers First

PFF

Using actions and words to make it clear to others that
satisfying their work needs is a priority

Behaving Ethically

BE

Interacting openly, fairly, and honestly with others

Organizational Culture

OC

Sharing of meanings and assumptions that helps in an
understanding of how to operate within the culture.

Employee Success

ES

When employees become tolerant, open-minded, patient,
optimistic, proactive, and willing to learn [and grow];
accomplishment of established, performance goals and
objectives

Organizational
Performance

OP

The actual output or results of an organization as measured
against its intended outputs (or goals and objectives).

Challenges

CH

CEO identified challenges

Leadership Styles

LS

CEOs’ description of their style of leading

Organizational Change

ORC

CEOs’ references to changes needed or created in their
organization

Policies, Practices,
Procedures

PPP

Governance of the libraries based on CEO discussion

Servant Leadership

SL

Perceptions of the theory by CEOs

Setting an Example

SAE

CEO’s behavior as perceived by employees

Developing
Communication

DCOM

Attempts made by CEO to encourage communication with
employees

Having an Enriched Staff

HES

Efforts made by CEOs to ensure employee’s self-development

Working with Minimal
Supervision

WMS

Employees are a success as they respond to organizational
culture created by CEOs’ servant leadership practices

Collaborative Work

CW

Employees are able to work successfully together because of
organizational culture created by CEOs’ servant leadership

137
These words and phrases were utilized as a guide for further querying the data and
for a deeper level of coding (Yin, 2011) of that data. For example, the data loaded into
the research question nodes in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) which were coded there from the
interviews, observations, and documentation, were again reviewed to determine
relationship to the coded list. This led to further coding of the data in these RQs. New
nodes were created to which this data was coded as the list was compared to the RQs and
other sources of data. This was important for disassembling of the data for further
analysis.
Saldana (2016) suggested the creation of such a list was one technique for
harmonizing with the conceptual framework or paradigm of the study, thereby enabling
analysis that directly answers research questions and goals. The list also included words
or phrases identified as occurring frequently in the data and which have a relationship to
the phenomena of interest, answers to the research questions. The NVivo11 (QSR, 2015)
querying tool allowed for the identification of these frequently recurring words. These
words were used to create nodes so that information on the same topic were gathered in
one place. Many of these words were culled from word clouds created in NVivo11.
Words and phrases from the list were also utilized as themes for naming nodes in
the NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) software. Sub-nodes were also developed from some of the
newly created nodes. For example, the node, Creating Value for Community, had subnodes named promoting a sense of community, and internal, and external community
engagement. The node, Employee Success on Organizational Performance, had subnodes named productivity, going beyond, and engaged employees. These were
recognized as concepts relating to the main themes arising from the coding of the data.

138
The research questions were also entered as nodes with their own sub-nodes. For
example, the RQ1 node had sub-nodes named, practice of the dimensions, and
organizational culture, because this research question asked how the CEOs’ practice of
the seven dimensions led to the creation of an organizational culture which encourages
employee success. NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) identified nodes such as the research question
nodes as the parent nodes, and the sub-nodes as child nodes, in what was regarded as tree
nodes. The software also allowed for constant comparison of the data for similarities and
dissimilarities as text was selected and coded to nodes. This was an iterative process
which allowed movement back and forth between the phases to accomplish the coding.
This is the reason the arrows on Figure 1 point in both directions.
Thus, the data in various nodes and sub-nodes offered the opportunity to be
reassembled in visual formats such as charts and tables, to allow for the interpretation of
the data. This encompassed both phases 2 and 3 of the analytic cycle (Yin, 2011).
NVivo11 also used the coded information in the nodes to create a code book related to
the analysis (See Appendix K).
Non-participant observation was the second data source for this research that
was analyzed utilizing Yin’s (2011) first three phases. Bloomer, Cross, Endacott,
O'Connor, and Moss (2012) posited that there are distinct advantages to non-participant
observation on the part of the researcher, including being able to develop a productive
relationship because of outsider status. Both tape recorded and field notes were used for
this data collection method. The data was transcribed from the tape-recorded information
as well as the field notes into Microsoft Word documents, one for each of the three
libraries. The transcribed notes, the tape-recorded information, and the field notes were

139
compared to detect errors. The document was ready for coding and analysis after all
errors were corrected.
The transcribed data was uploaded to NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) for phase one coding
and analysis. As in the handling of the interviews, this is the first phase of Yin’s (2011)
three phases of analysis adapted for this study, so that this is the compiling and sorting
phase for the observation data. Thus, the transcribed observation field notes were loaded
into a source folder named “Observations” in NVivo11. Within this folder, the
observation notes were sorted into three, named individual files, one for each library.
Consequently, there was a CIL Observation and Field Notes file, a LIB1 Observation and
Field Notes file, and a LIB2 Observation and Field Notes file. CIL represented the library
of the city library CEO, LIB1 represented the library of one of the county library CEOs,
and LIB2 represented the library of the other county library CEO.
Phase 2 coding and analysis of the observation data source took place when the
three files were reviewed and data within them coded to various named nodes. In other
words, data from the observation source files were coded to RQ1, RQ2, or RQ3,
depending on which of the questions that data provided answers for, during the iterative
process of reviewing, coding, and analyzing of the data. Coding of the data continued
until all was coded to one question or another. This was the disassembling phase (Yin,
2011) which allowed items which seemed to be similar to be given the same code. For
example, after a thorough review of the transcribed observation notes, data from all three
libraries pertaining to motivating employees, was identified, selected, and coded to RQ2,
which asked how organizational culture could engender employee success. Thus, data

140
from each of the three observation files pertaining to motivation were coded under one
heading - RQ2.
Coded observational data was reviewed for emerging themes and larger patterns,
as was done with the interviews. Themes and patterns identified were related to the
manifestations of the seven servant leadership dimensions, and organizational culture
levels observed in the three libraries. Querying tools enabled the creation of visuals
illustrating relationships. In this phase, codes are at level three. Words and phrases from
the coded list (Table 1) were utilized as a guide for querying of the data and for a deeper
level of coding (Yin, 2011) of that data. The data loaded into the RQ nodes in NVivo11
(QSR, 2015) were again also reviewed to determine relationship to the coded list
(Saldana, 2016). This list harmonized with the research questions of the study, the servant
leadership model of Liden et al. (2008), and with the Schein (2004) organizational culture
model (Saldana, 2016). Thus, an iterative, inductive process was used to analyze this data
set.
Organizational documentation. A third source of data was organizational
documentation collected from each of the three libraries. For this source of data, there
was a review of varying documents to gather data for analysis. For example, the
organizations’ published list of values (Schein, 2004) such as mission and vision
statements revealing the culture of the organization at the artifacts level were reviewed.
Comparing findings from the documentation with the observations showed how well the
organizations lived up to their published values (Schein, 2004).
Various documents from each library, including fliers, articles, organizational
instruments such as mission and vision statements, and information copied from their

141
websites, were reviewed, and used to create a summary table in Microsoft Word. The
summary table was uploaded to NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) and loaded into the source folder
under the name “Documentation.” The data was analyzed by using NVivo11 coding and
thematic generating tools, as well as Yin’s (2011) four phases of analysis. Data from this
documentation source folder were coded to the RQs, or other named nodes, depending on
the content, again in an iterative way, moving back and forth between phase one and four
of Yin’s phases. For example, data from the table pertaining to library activities for, or in
the community, were coded to RQ1 which asked about the CEOs’ practice of the seven
dimensions. This was appropriate as these data related to dimension number 2 which
pertains to the CEO creating value for the community. For this source (documentation),
most of the items were coded to RQ1 because they were for the most part indicative of
library programs or services for the community. In the case of CEO1 and CEO2, a few
items were found that related to their interactions with staff such as training materials
used in the libraries. Overall, there were very few documents pertaining to staff.
Servant leadership questionnaire. A fourth source was the Liden et al. (2008)
servant leadership questionnaire. This source used a 7-point, Likert-like scale with the
Liden et al. servant leadership questionnaire to determine the senior level, library staff’s
perceptions of how their library’s CEO practiced the seven dimensions of servant
leadership. These dimensions are emotional healing, creating value for the community,
conceptual skills, empowering, helping followers, putting followers first, and behaving
ethically. The senior level staff ranked how often their CEO acted as a servant leader
using a scale in which 1 represented strongly disagree; 2 represented disagree; 3
represented disagree somewhat; 4 represented undecided; 5 represented agree somewhat;

142
6 represented agree; and 7 represented strongly agree. These rankings were used as codes
for the responses as the analysis proceeded. A comparison of the descriptive statistics
which resulted from the ranking, was done by determining the mean scores of the
participants’ responses. The rankings were compared and the resulting figures used to
illustrate the range of the responses and also to indicate the participant’s perspectives of
the CEOs’ practice of the seven dimensions. Full details of the analysis of this source will
be provided in chapter 4 of this document. This is one source that was not loaded to the
NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) software. Instead, the Liden et al. (2008) servant leadership
behavior scale (SLBS) guide was used, along with Excel spreadsheets.
Ethical Considerations
The ethical issues related mainly to the participants in the study. Of special
note was the fact that the senior level staff participants were subordinates of the CEOs.
They were therefore directly subjected to paycheck vulnerability and the potential for
coercion (Rose & Pieter, 2002). However, all participants were assured of the
researcher’s respect of their privacy, right to anonymity, and confidentiality of
disclosed information (Rose & Pieter, 2002).
The researcher tagged all collected data based on source and alphanumeric
identifier developed by participants in order to protect their personal identification,
their jobs, and the jobs of CEOs (DiCicco-Bloom & Crabtree, 2006; Gill et al., 2008;
Rose & Pieter, 2002). In addition, letters accompanying Informed Consent forms for
the authority in charge of each library made clear the employee’s right to nonparticipation. The researcher sent site authorization requests to the authorities in each
library. Apart from asking their consent to perform the study in their library, the

143
researcher asked each CEO to allow the use of private spaces to do face-to-face
interviews in their facility and time for senior level participants to do the
questionnaires. This ensured privacy and encouraged confidentiality during
interviews. The researcher informed the participants of procedures involved in the
handling of personal disclosures, and the authenticity and credibility of the
researcher’s report. The fact that there was no monetary gain for participation was also
explained in the letters.
The researcher submitted a research proposal for approval to the Institutional
Review Board (IRB) of the Grand Canyon University to ensure there were no
violations of ethical principles for the human subjects involved in the research. Each
consenting participant signed the informed consent form. The researcher provided an
explanation of the purpose of the study and its benefits to the library and community
to the participants.
For data management, the researcher created an electronic database. According
to Yin (2009), this is the best way to organize the data collected and to document that
evidence. All data from various sources, therefore, such as from the tape recordings,
were transferred to this document, making raw data available for independent
inspection (Yin, 2009). The data was also available if other researchers were interested
in replicating or simply studying the case. Types of data that were included in the
database were researcher notes, documents, photographs, transcription of interview
data from audio tapes, responses from the questionnaire, field notes developed because
of observation, and any other data gathered in the process of the study. Although no
personal information was attached to any of the recorded material, this file will be held

144
no longer than the three years required by GCU. The researcher stored this
information electronically in a cloud-based file accessible only to the researcher. Paper
editions of notes and responses to interview notes will be kept securely in locked files
at the researcher’s house. At the end of the three years, the researcher will destroy the
paper files and delete the data from the cloud file. In the next section, the researcher
will discuss the limitations and delimitations of the study.
Limitations and Delimitations
This study suffered from several limitations. First, the methodology and design of
a qualitative case study have inherent limitations. Because such studies researched the
meaning of people’s lives in their own words, a large quantity of descriptive data
emerged that was deep and rich. Therefore, the sample size was by necessity small. In
this study, the size was only 15 participants from among a target population of 240 CEOs
and their senior level staff; the 15 persons were selected from three libraries in the state
of Florida. This posed a limitation on the generalizability of the study. The sample was
not necessarily representative of the whole population, making its generalizability
limited. However, according to Green (2014), generalizing in qualitative studies is not
necessary, since the focus of the study was not on the whole population but rather on the
perspectives of the participants.
There were also limitations based on the instruments to be utilized in collecting the
data. For example, the use of interviews as an instrument can lead to an element of
researcher bias. According to Yin (2011), as such an instrument is used, the researcher
and interviewee enter into a conversation less structured than a formal survey or other
such instrument used in a quantitative study would have. Consequently, according to Yin,

145
data collection is very difficult and is even more so if the researcher who may be from a
different cultural background incorrectly interprets the participant’s meaning. This could
lead to questions of validity and reliability. However, this difficulty is unavoidable, as the
researcher needs to engender deep rich conversations with interviewees in order to get
needed data. To counter this issue, the researcher can have the participant to read reports
for correctness before a final draft is composed.
There was also a limitation with respect to the data collection process. Through
this process, interviewees recounted their experiences. This was to be captured on tape
and later transcribed for submitting to NVivo (QSR, 2015). However, the interviewee
was dependent on their memory for the details to be provided to the researcher. Per Miles
et al. (2013), a person’s memory of an event can be distorted. To counter this, the
researcher utilized probing questions that helped the interviewee not only share their
story but also recall specific, personal situations, clarified by the researcher and which
would therefore be more accurate (Miles et al., 2013).
Because the researcher was a CEO in a Florida public library, like the
participants interviewed, personal bias may have caused another limitation. However,
the researcher had no authority over any of the participants and operated a public
library far removed from the study sites. This helped to reduce biases that arose.
There were two main delimitations to this study. Delimitations are systematic
biases intentionally introduced by the researcher for the purpose of control (Yin, 2009).
In this study, the first delimitation introduced by the researcher related to the fact that
there were only three libraries in the study. This provided control over the demographic
sample. The second delimitation was the use of purposive sampling to select the sample.

146
This method led to a narrowing of the study with respect to generalizing to another
similar population. Because the researcher used a qualitative approach, expansive
demographic numbers were not required for reliability or validity. Qualitative studies
instead require a participant pool that was small but deep and rich in lived experiences
(Yin, 2011). Thus, it was this researcher’s belief that this small focused study would be
able to reach saturation utilizing 15 participants. If this was not achieved, snowballing
would be used with the participants to identify additional employees for completing the
servant leadership questionnaire.
Summary
In summary, Chapter 3 provided details on various aspects of this research which
sought to find answers to questions posed in the study. The following three exploratory
research questions emerged from the problem statement which posited that it was not
known how CEOs in libraries perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism
linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational
performance:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an
organizational culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
The alignment between these questions and the problem statement was evident. For
example, RQ1 addressed the servant leadership practices of the CEOs, seeking to
understand how those practices enabled a culture of employee success, reflecting the
aspect of the problem concerning the perceptions of CEOs as it pertained to their servant

147
leadership practices and organizational culture. The other two questions also spoke
directly to aspects of the problem statement rendering them totally aligned with that
problem statement. There was also alignment with the purpose statement as well since the
purpose statement was a direct copy of the problem statement. Because these questions
served as guidelines for the collection of data at the library sites and even influenced the
creation of questions for each data collection protocol (Yin, 2009) there was alignment
between them and the data collection procedures.
A qualitative approach was used for the study. Based on evidence from several
scholars including Yin (2011), this was an appropriate design considering the depth of
data needed to be collected, the tools for collecting the data, and the institution being
researched. The intent was to determine the perspectives of three library CEOs, based on
the problem statement and research questions of the study, in support of the qualitative
methodology. It was also an attempt to understand the context of the lives of the CEOs
and their senior level staff in the library as an organization, which was also a part of the
problem statement and reflective of the research questions, aligning these aspects of the
study. Additionally, the study used multiple means of collecting evidence for finding
answers to its research questions, which asked “how” questions, aligning them with a
qualitative approach (Casey & Houghton, 2010; Cronin, 2014; Yin, 2011). Thus, there
was alignment between the qualitative method, the problem statement, and the research
questions.
A single case study approach was utilized with respect to a research design (Yin,
2009). Although this was one type of design appropriate to a qualitative methodology,
this was the best choice for two reasons. First, case studies provide answers to “how” and

148
“why” questions (Cronin, 2014; Yin, 2009). In this study, the intent was to retrieve deep
rich information on how CEOs perceive organizational culture as a mediating link
between their own servant leadership practices and the success of employees and the
organization. Second, case studies seek to find in-depth answers to questions concerning
people in real-world context (Baxter & Jack, 2008; Casey & Houghton, 2010; Cronin,
2014; Guerra, de Oliveira Gomes, & da Silva Filho, 2015). The current study sought for
answers to the three research questions concerning CEOs in their real-world context in
the libraries they serve, making the case study approach the best choice for this research.
This also showed this research design as aligned with the research questions, which asked
“how” questions.
A small sample was selected for the study in alignment with the qualitative
methodology and case study design that the study followed. Yin (2011) suggested that the
complexity of the topic for study as well as the depth of the data collection needed should
serve as a guide to the researcher. Further, according to Cleary et al. (2014), a sample that
is too large is bound to produce volumes of unwieldy data, since the natural product of
the qualitative study is large quantities of rich, deep, data. Patton (1999) agreed,
suggesting that a focus on a small sample size, selected purposefully, would engender a
better understanding of the phenomenon.
For this study, the general population comprised approximately 13,500 librarians
with Master’s degrees working in public libraries throughout North America (American
Library Association, 2016), while the target population comprised 240 executive and
senior level public library leaders in 80 public libraries in Florida (Institute of Museum
and Library Services, 2008). From these 80 libraries, purposive sampling enabled the

149
selection of a sample (Acharya et al., 2013) comprising three CEOs, and four each of
their senior level staff in two county libraries and one city library in south central Florida,
for a total sample of 15 persons. This sample size was adequate based on the literature
(Crouch & McKenzie, 2006; Marshall et al., 2013; Mason, 2010) and guidelines for 10
participants suggested by Grand Canyon University for doctoral level qualitative case
studies.
In keeping with this methodology and research design, data collection instruments
were a semi structured interview, a questionnaire, non-participant observation, and
review of documentary sources (Yin, 2011). According to Yin (2009) and Casey and
Houghton (2010), the use of multiple data collection sources contributes to the validity
and reliability of a case study. This use of multiple data sources also allowed
triangulation of the data, another way of ensuring validity and reliability (Patton, 1999;
Yin, 2009). There was alignment between these collection instruments and the research
questions. For example, semi structured open-ended interview questions were
administered and recorded on audio tape with the participant’s consent. According to
Patton (1999), these interviews were ideal for understanding the perspectives of the
interviewees. These along with all other data collection tools were important for helping
to realize answers to the research questions. Because these instruments were specific to
the qualitative methodology and the case study design, which were aligned with the
research questions, the questions were also aligned with the instruments.
Data analysis was performed utilizing three different modalities. A pre-prepared
analysis and scoring method provided by Liden et al. (2008) was used for the 28-item
questionnaire. Additionally, the first three phases of Yin’s (2011) five phases of analysis,

150
along with NVivo11 qualitative data analysis software (QSR, 2015) was utilized for the
interviews, the non-participant observations, and the documentation. This software is
reputed to be among the best for this purpose (Walsh, 2003). Protection of participants
was ensured through following guidelines laid out by the International Review Board
(IRB) of the Grand Canyon University (Henkel, 2012). The requirement was that only
volunteers could participate in the study and each must be made aware that they may opt
out at any time. Each willing participant (see Appendix C) signed an Informed Consent
Form. This explained the details of the procedure to them, including their rights and risks
as participants. They were also allowed to develop an alphanumeric identifier to be
shared with the researcher to protect his or her identity. Data on the project was held in a
cloud based file accessible only to the researcher and will be held for 3 years. As soon as
analysis of the data was completed and recorded in this chapter, a report of the results
was provided in Chapter 4 which follows.

151
Chapter 4: Data Analysis and Results
Introduction
This chapter includes the procedures followed to collect and analyze the data
pertinent to this study. As seen in Chapter 3, the intent of the study was to understand
how the CEOs of three libraries in south central Florida perceived organizational culture
as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’
success as well as organizational performance. A comprehensive search of the literature
was conducted but no empirical research was discovered that indicated that this issue has
been previously studied.
In a prior study, Peterson et al. (2012) showed that CEO servant leadership
represented a predictor of firm performance. Liden et al. (2014), van Dierendonck and
Patterson (2015), and Peterson et al. (2012) confirmed these findings by also identifying
the need for future research on the role culture plays as a mediating mechanism, linking
servant leadership to organizational performance. However, no research was found that
examined ways in which specific CEOs, such as those in libraries, perceived
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism, linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success, as well as organizational performance. Therefore, the
purpose of this study was to seek an understanding of this matter. A qualitative
methodology was employed, utilizing a case study design.
This study was developed in response to three research questions:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?

152
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
Thus, the phenomena of interest were the library CEOs’ servant leadership practices and
organizational culture. The study’s aim was to explore the CEOs’ perceptions of ways in
which servant leadership principles helped to create an organizational culture that
engendered employee success and led to positive performance developments for the
organizations.
This chapter contains a descriptive summary of the data gathered in the conduct
of the research, as well as a description of demographics of the participants. It includes
data gathered from the face-to-face, semi structured interviews conducted with three
CEOs, as well as data culled from the responses of their 12 senior level staff to the
servant leadership questionnaire of Liden et al. (2008). The study also provides
information on data collected from non-participant observations, as well as from the
review of organizational documents. Following the descriptive summary of the data and
the demographics, is a description of the process utilized in the analysis of the data. This
discussion describes ways in which themes and patterns were framed, relevant to the
research questions. The results of the research are presented as answers to the research
questions. Analysis was conducted by applying the first three phases of Yin’s five-phase
analytic tool, and by coding data, utilizing NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) qualitative analysis
software to derive themes. Last, the chapter contains a summary of the key points
presented in this section and a transition to Chapter 5 in which is presented the findings,
interpretation of results, conclusions, and implications for further research and practice.

153
Descriptive Data
This descriptive data section includes an overview of participants in the current
study conducted in three libraries in south central Florida comprising two county libraries
and one city library. The CEOs in the study had responsibility for these libraries which
served a total population of approximately 445,692. Together, the libraries held a total
registered membership of approximately 227,440, more than half of the total population
served. There was a total of 12 libraries in the three systems from which the sample
came, encompassing one county library system comprising six libraries, another
comprising five libraries, along with a single city library (11 county libraries and one city
library).
Each library was actively involved in providing services to the community in
which it was located. These services included not only lending materials such as books to
the public but also providing a variety of age appropriate programs for the benefit of the
community. The services also included providing designated spaces in each facility for
accommodating age appropriate activities. For example, all three libraries had spaces
specifically designated for children. These spaces included collections of books, DVDs,
games of all sort, and other child friendly materials, reflective of servant leadership
dimension 2, creating value for the community. Each also provided spaces for regular
story time for very young children as well as spaces with computers and other technology
focused on teens and their interests. Of these three libraries, the headquarters of the two
county library systems were very close to major cities in Florida, and the city library was
45 minutes west of a major city.

154
Demographically, the ages of the participants ranged between 30 and 70, with all
participants having achieved at least a Bachelor’s degree, except for one senior level staff
in LIBI. The senior level staff participants of both CIL and LIBI all consisted of females.
Following is Table 2 which illustrates the demographics of the CEOs for each of the three
libraries.
Table 2
Demographics of Participants: CEOs Interviewed
Coded
Library
Age range Gender
Ethnicity
Years of
name
Location
service
CEO1
LIB1
50 - 60
M
Caucasian 23 years
CEO2
LIB2
45 - 55
M
Caucasian 20 years
CEO3
CIL
50 - 55
F
Caucasian 17 years
Note. CEO = Chief Executive Officer; MLS = Masters Library Science.

Education

Staff size

MLS
MLS
MLS

52
62
19

The CEO of CIL, directs a staff of 19, the CEO of LIBI directs a staff of 52, and
the CEO of LIB2 directs a staff of 62. These CEOs comprised the primary focus of the
study, which sought for an understanding of how they perceived organizational culture as
a mediating mechanism, linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success,
as well as organizational performance in the libraries that they lead. The participants’
years of service as librarians ranged between 15 and 23 years. As CEOs, the longest
tenure in that position was held by CEO1. Table 3 contains a demographic breakdown of
participants at the senior staff level.

155
Table 3
Demographic of Participants: Library Senior Level Staff Who Completed the
Questionnaire
Coded Library Name

CIL

LIB1

LIB2

No. of Senior Staff

4

4

4

Age Range

40-60

40-70

30-65

No. of Females

4

4

1

No. of Males

0

0

3

White

3

4

3

Hispanic

1

0

0

Black/AA

0

0

1

Other Races

0

0

0

Tenure

1-25 yrs.

1-26 yrs.

1-30 yrs.

Educational Level

BS to MLS

HS - MLS

BS-MLS

Note. CIL = City Library; LIBI = County Library 1; LIB2 = County Library 2; AA = African American; BS
= Bachelor of Science; HS = High School; MLS = Masters Library Science.

Based on Table 3 each library had four senior staff who participated in providing
answers to the questionnaire. However, whereas library CIL and LIB1 both had only
women participating, library LIB2 had three men and one woman. Whereas library CIL
and LIB2 both had three white staff members each, and one non-white, LIB1 had only
white participants. CIL had one Hispanic participant, and LIB2 had one African
American participant. Of all three libraries, LIB2 had the longest tenure among senior
level staff participants, and LIB1 had one senior staff whose highest level of education
was a high school diploma.
Data Analysis Procedures
According to the Encyclopedia of Evaluation (Mathison, 2005), analysis has both
a quantitative side which examines how much of something there is, and a qualitative
side which explores what something is. Deciding the best method of analysis is
dependent on the methodology that was utilized in the collection of the data for a study
(Byrne, 2016). If numerical data such as statistics in surveys were collected, then a

156
quantitative method of analysis needs to be applied. If, on the other hand, the data
collected was descriptive, textual material from sources such as interviews and
observations, then a qualitative method of analysis must be employed. In this study, the
data that was collected was primarily textual and derived from qualitative sources
including interviews, observations, and documentation, in addition to a questionnaire
evaluated using the guide prepared by its creator.
Conducting data analysis in qualitative research is equivalent to performing a
systematic search for meaning. It is a way of processing qualitative data to prepare that
data for communication to others (Hatch, 2002). This study utilized two different analytic
strategies which focused on the CEOs and their servant leadership practices in libraries in
south central Florida. The first was an analysis of the 28-item servant leadership behavior
scale (SLBS) (Liden et al., 2008), utilizing Liden et al.’s (2008) provided analytic guide
along with Excel spread sheets. The second utilized the first three phases of Yin’s fivephases analysis tool.
The data sources in the study included (a) responses to the Liden et al. (2008) 28item servant leadership questionnaire (used by permission, see Appendix D), hosted on
the online SurveyMonkey site, and made available individually to selected senior level
staff at each library; (b) semi structured interviews with the three library CEOs; (c) six
sessions of non-participant observation notes by the researcher; and (d) a review of
various organizational documentation from each library. What follows is a description of
how each of these sources was analyzed, starting an analysis of the servant leadership
questionnaire.

157
Servant leadership questionnaire. Liden et al. (2008) 28-item servant leadership
questionnaire responses were analyzed utilizing the analysis tool provided by Liden et al.
specifically for this purpose, along with an Excel spreadsheet. The process involved using
the guide to interpret the scored responses provided by the senior level staff to the 28items questionnaire. It also involved using the Excel worksheet with the scored data to
create visual illustrations for the analysis.
The servant leadership questionnaire was used to determine the senior level
library staff’s perceptions of their library’s CEO practice or exhibition of the seven
dimensions of servant leadership. These dimensions are emotional healing, creating value
for the community, conceptual skills, empowering, helping followers, putting followers
first, and behaving ethically. The scale allowed the responses of the participants to be
categorized based on their ranking of the servant leadership practices of the CEOs in their
library. The Likert-type scale used, ranged from 1= Strongly Disagree to 7 = Strongly
Agree.
The analytic tool provided by Liden et al. (2008) allowed for the analysis of the
responses derived from the senior level library staffs’ answers to the questionnaire, by
allowing for a clear connection between the responses and RQ1. The SurveyMonkey
software used to provide the 28-item questionnaire was also used to create a report based
on the responses. The result was a 29-page document. which was used to create a
summary table illustrating a comprehensive view of how each question was scored. This
table was downloaded to the researcher’s computer, and then uploaded to an Excel
spreadsheet, which allowed for a graphic representation of the responses. Those
responses were used to create a chart (Figure 2), which helped summarize and compare

158
how the senior level staff applied the scales to the servant leadership dimensions as
practiced by the CEOs. Participants’ responses to the 28-item servant leadership
questionnaire were based on the seven dimensions of servant leadership model. Score 1
represented emotional healing; Score 2 represented creating value for community; Score
3 represented conceptual skills; Score 4 represents empowering; Score 5 represents
helping subordinates grow and succeed; Score 6 represents putting subordinates first; and
Score 7 represents behaving ethically. CEO1 referred to the Chief executive officer of the
first county library; CEO2 to the Chief executive officer of the second county library; and
CEO3 to the Chief executive officer of the city library. Numbers indicate the degree to
which CEOs exhibit servant leadership dimensions in the perceptions of their senior staff.

Axis Title

Chart Title

SCORE 1

SCORE 2

SCORE 3

SCORE 4

SCORE 5

SCORE 6

SCORE 7

CEO1

20.5

26.75

22.5

16

16.25

17

24.5

CEO2

21

23.75

22.75

16

23

17.75

21.5

CEO3

25.5

27.5

23.75

26.25

24.5

22.75

23

Figure 2. Summary and comparison of senior level participant’s responses to servant
leadership questionnaire based on responses provided in Survey Monkey.
The dimensions were represented as scores in the chart. Score 1 represented the
scale for dimension number 1, emotional healing, and so forth, through scale 7, which
represented dimension number 7, ethical behavior. This illustrates how the senior level
staff perceived their CEO’s practice of the servant leadership behaviors or dimensions. It
allowed comparisons across the responses for each CEO with the others, as well as within

159
the CEO’s own responses. In other words, this figure facilitated the comparison of the
servant leadership practices of the CEOs in several ways. For example, it allowed a
comparison of one behavior as against the other for each CEO. Thus, for score 1
(emotional healing) CEO1 and CEO2 had ratings that were comparable, being 20.5 for
CEO1 and 21 for CEO2. On the other hand, CEO3 had a rating that was greater than the
other two, receiving 25.5 for this behavior. This is in comparison to score 7 (behaving
ethically), where CEO1 and CEO3 have elevated ratings, with 24.5 for CEO1 and 23 for
CEO3. This is in comparison to CEO2 who was rated at 21.5 for this dimension.
Comparing across ratings for each CEO it was evident that score 2, creating value
for community, was the strongest point for all three. CEO1 received a 26.75 rating, CEO2
received 23.5 and CEO3 received the highest rating with a 27.5. Comparing across also
revealed that whereas CEO3 received no rating below 22, the other two participants
received ratings as low as 17 and 16.
In the servant leadership literature, it was found that the conceptual model of
seven dimensions of servant leadership of Liden et al. (2008) was a useful guide for the
analysis. To this end, the scoring guide was utilized as a method of identifying specific
examples of practices that illustrated the CEOs’ enactment of the seven dimensions. The
scoring guide allowed for a juxtaposition of the servant leadership dimensions with the
CEOs’ practices, illustrating that all three CEOs (100%) demonstrated all seven
dimensions to a high or moderate degree (see Figure 2).
Utilizing the Liden et al. (2008) guide and re-examining the data set that emerged
for each CEO allowed for a deeper understanding of the practices of the CEOs in relation
to the seven dimensions and therefore to RQ1 which focused on the practice of these

160
dimensions by the CEOs. For example, the scoring showed the dimension “creating value
for the community” as the servant leadership dimension that senior level staff rated as
having the highest score for each CEO, while they rated “putting subordinates first” as
having moderate, but the lowest score among the CEOs (see Figure 2).
The interpretation provided by Liden et al. (2008) for understanding the results of
the responses, posits that the scores indicate the degree to which the various servant
leadership dimensions or behaviors are exhibited by the CEO. Thus, questions 1, 8, 15,
and 22 of the questionnaire provided the score for emotional healing; questions 2, 9, 16,
and 23 provided the score for conceptual skills; questions 3, 10, 17, and 24 provided the
score for conceptual skills; questions 4, 11, 18, and 25 provided the score for
empowering; questions 5, 12, 19, and 26 provided the score for helping subordinates
grow and succeed; questions 6, 13, 20, and 27 provided the score for putting subordinates
first; and questions 7, 14, 21, and 28 provided the score for behaving ethically (see
Appendix D for the questionnaire and Appendix M for the Dimensions).
In Figure 2, data mean scores were derived by finding the sum of each set of
scores for each dimension, then determining the average of each of those sets. This
provided a final score for each dimension for each CEO, which is evident in Figure 2. For
example, for behaving ethically, all ranked responses for items numbers 7, 14, 21, and 28
were added, and divided the total by 4 (for the four, senior staff) to determine a final
score for that dimension for CEO1, which came out at 24.5 (see Figure 2).
Figure 2 above also illustrated the range of the respondents’ answers. The mean
scores were ranked from highest to lowest representing the behaviors most associated,
and least associated with each CEOs’ servant leadership practice. This scoring was

161
performed for each CEO in the study. The high range included scores between 23 and 28;
the moderate range consisted of scores between 14 and 22; the low range included scores
between 8 and 13; and the extremely low range included scores between 0 and 7. This
was important for finding an answer for the research question. While CEO3 received
scores placing him in the high range for the practice of the dimensions, CEO1 and CEO2
received scores in the moderate range.
Use of an Excel spreadsheet also helped reveal the number of times the various rankings
or Likert-like scales were used for each CEO in response to the 28-item questions in the
questionnaire. This comparison of the ranking of the scales for each CEO helped
establish their senior staff’s perceptions of the degree to which the CEO exhibited servant
leadership behaviors. Figure 3. demonstrates the senior level participants’ use of the
seven Likert-like scales in assessing the CEOs’ practice of the seven dimensions of
servant leadership. Scale 1 was strongly disagree; Scale 2 was disagree; Scale 3 was
disagree somewhat; Scale 4 was undecided; Scale 5 was agree somewhat; Scale 6 was
agree; and Scale 7 was strongly agree. CEO1 was the chief executive officer of the first
county library; CEO2 was the chief executive office of the second county library; and
CEO3 was the chief executive office of the city library. Numbers on the vertical axis
represents the number of times a scale was selected for each CEO.

162

Figure 3. Summary of likert-like scale, coded responses for CEOs based on Survey
Monkey responses to questionnaire
Based on this chart, the measure of Strongly Disagree was selected five times for
CEO1, two times for CEO2, and not at all for CEO3. Additionally, although Disagree
was selected 10 times for CEO1, it was only selected one time for CEO2 and not at all for
CEO3. On the other hand, for CEO1Agree Somewhat was selected 30 times compared to
21 times for CEO2, and 18 times for CEO3. For the scale Agree, CEO1 received 28
points while CEO2 received 41, and CEO3 received 38, and Strongly Agree was selected
26 times for CEO1, 16 times for CEO2, and 49 times for CEO3. This helped to establish
the idea that for the most part, the senior level staff perceived the CEOs as exhibiting
servant leadership behaviors frequently. The analysis of the semi-structured interviews of
these CEOs follows.
Semi structured interviews. This section provides an analysis of the semistructured interviews conducted with the CEOs. Table 4 provides a summary of these
face-to-face interview events conducted with the three library CEOs in their libraries. It

163
includes information on the duration of the interviews, date of conduct, and number of
transcribed pages.
Table 4
Summary of Interviews with CEOs
Participant

Location

Date

Duration

Number of
transcribed pages

CEO1

LIB1

5/23/2016

168 minutes

27

CEO2

LIB2

5/20/2016

214 minutes

29

CEO3
CIL
5/17/2016
164 minutes
17
Note. CEO1 = Executive Director for one county library, LIB1; CEO2 = Executive Director of another
county library, LIB2; CEO3 = Director of the city library, CIL

After transcription into Microsoft Word documents, and importation into a new
project in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015), analysis of the data began. The first three phases of
Yin’s (2011) five phase analysis cycle was the strategy used, along with the NVivo11
software for data management and coding. The first phase involved the gathering and
sorting of data in what was called the “Compiling phase”. The second phase was the
“Disassembling phase”, during which the compiled data is broken down into smaller
fragments (Yin, 2011). The third phase was the “Reassembling phase”, which is where
themes and patterns are identified. Each phase of the analysis is next discussed, starting
with phase one, the compiling phase.
The process of analyzing the interviews began by utilizing the first phase of Yin’s
(2011) analytic phases called the compiling phase. This work involved reading the
interview data several times and organizing them into different categories, depending on
the CEO and library to which they belonged, by applying coded names to each. For
example, the transcribed interview for the first county library was labelled as “Interview
– LIB1 – CEO1”, so that there is identification of the data source, as well as of both the

164
CEO and the library involved. This is a method of creating what Yin describes as a
database, a necessary precursor to formal analysis.
After further reading and labelling of each interview was completed, this first analysis
phase involved uploading the interview data to NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) to be organized in
what NVivo11 called the source folder of the software. In this folder, the sources are
categorized based on their types. Thus, interviews were categorized separately from all
other sources and was labelled as “Interviews” as compared to the other two textual
sources of data, the observations, and documentation. Figure 4 is a screen shot illustrating
how the textual data was categorized in NVivo 11 source folders and named, based on the
source, such as documentation, interviews, and observations. This first phase was made
easy using the NVivo 11 software. It allowed the data to be organized in easily accessible
source folders and files in preparation for further analytic action, namely phase two of
Yin’s analysis phases.

165

Figure 4. Screen shot of NVivo 11 categorization of data sources into named source
folders
Phase two of Yin’s (2011) analysis cycle was named Disassembling. It involved
further categorization of the gathered data, so that there were, for example, individual
files created for each transcribed CEOs’ interview. In this process, the interview source
folder was accessed in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) and the “Create” button in the software
utilized to create three separate files in this one source folder for each CEOs’ interview.
The files were named LIB1 Interview, for the data from CEO1 of the first county library,
LIB2 Interview, for the data from CEO2 from the second county library, and CIL
Interview, for the data from CEO3 from the city library. The data was disassembled or

166
fragmented from the source folder into the newly created files by selecting the data and
coding it to the appropriate file in the interview source folder. This process saw the
interview of each CEO separated out into individual interview files. The screen shot at
Figure 5 illustrates this disassembling of the data for the interviews. Interview source
documents are further fragmented and categorized into individual files.

Figure 5. Categorization of interview source documents into individual files
This disassembling of the data was important so that the individual CEOs’ responses and
consequently their perceptions to the RQs could be easily identified and coded for
themes.

167
Coding of the data began in this second phase, the disassembling phase. This
involved carefully reading the data in each interview file and identifying the CEOs’
responses important to answering the RQs. The objective was to see connections and
patterns among the data relevant to each RQ and to code them appropriately. External to
this process, and during the first phase, the compiling phase, interview questions which
provided answers to the RQs were identified and color coded. Thus, questions 1, 3, 4, 5,
and 9 of the 13 interview questions were color coded yellow because they related to RQ1
and represented the CEOs’ responses that related to that question. The RQ asked how
servant leadership practices of library CEOs enabled an organizational culture of
employee success. Interview questions 6, 7, 8, and 12 were color-coded blue because
they related to RQ2, which asked how organizational culture enabled employee success.
Green was used to mark questions 10, and 11 because they related to RQ3, which asked
how employee success enabled organizational performance. Questions 2 and 13 were not
color coded because those questions did not relate directly to the RQs.
Three new nodes were created in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) and named for the RQs
so that there was an RQ1, RQ2, and an RQ3 to which the coded data was attached,
depending on the responses of the CEOs. For example, because RQ1 focused on Liden et
al.’s (2008) seven servant leadership dimensions, as well as Schein’s (2004)
organizational culture levels, the responses in the CEOs’ interviews that pertained, were
selected, coded, and added to the newly named node, RQ1, created in NVivo 11 (QSR,
2015). Nodes, according to QSR (2015), represents themes or ideas about the researched
data that the researcher wishes to be included in the analysis, and is another means of

168
compiling data for the analysis. The coding of data to each named RQ node was repeated
until all color-coded data was further coded to either the RQ1, RQ2, or RQ3 node.
Another NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) tool important at this phase of the analysis of the
interviews was the “Queries” option, which allowed word and phrase queries. For
example, as the interview data was reviewed in the files in NVivo 11, words and phrase
were identified which spoke to the three RQs. Consequently, more disassembling of the
data was done, using this tool. This contributed to the identification of many of the
commonly used words and phrases that appear in the codebook (Appendix K) as well as
Table 1 above in Chapter 3, which got coded to different nodes.
The gathering of data from the queries of the interview files into nodes began
next. For this phase, additional nodes were created as the data in the RQ nodes were read
carefully to identify words and phrases that were similar in each node. This is the third
phase of Yin’s cycle, called the reassembling of data in a different format, to bring likedata together in one place. Thus, as the data in the RQ nodes were examined and coded,
recurring themes could be identified in each, that were repeated by the three CEOs. For
example, through the query tool in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) it was discovered that the
word staff was used 80 times by CEO1, 69 times by CEO2, and 75 times by CEO3. This
is in contrast to the word “community” which was used by CEO1 46 times, by CEO2 61
times, and by CEO3 34 times. Appendix I provides a list of frequently appearing words
of importance to the study in the CEOs’ interviews, indicating their frequency. The
NVivo11 explore tool was also applied to the coded data in the interviews to allow for a
visual, illustrating a comparison of the coded data for the CEOs to determine common
themes. For example, an exploration of the interviews for CEO2 and CEO3 to illustrate

169
this point, showing similarities and differences that may exist in their perspectives, was
conducted as part of this phase. Figure 6 illustrates the image that was created in NVivo
11 (QSR, 2015) as a result. This is a comparison of the coding of the interviews of the
city library CEO and one of the county library CEOs. Blue circles represent nodes. Nodes
in the center indicate comments both CEOs made that were similar and were coded to the
same nodes. Areas of interest raised by the CEOs that were not held in common are
indicated on the right for the county library, LIB2 for CEO2, and on the left for the city
library, CIL for CEO3.

170

Figure 6. Example of comparison of coded interviews for CEO2 and CEO3 created in
NVivo 11.
Themes and patterns of meaning emerged because of coding within the data sets.
This occurred as the fragmented data was reorganized into different groupings in this
third phase (Yin, 2011), as illustrated by Figure 6 which is the result of using the NVivo

171
11 (QSR, 2015) explore tool on the coded data. This helped to provide answers to the
research questions in the study. For example, it is evident that both CEOs addressed each
of the seven servant leadership dimensions which was part of their responses to questions
pertaining to RQ1. However, they also brought in other matters that were important to
them such as the challenges discussed by CEO2 which was not mentioned by CEO3. On
the other hand, CEO3 discussed the concept of respect with both positive and negative
aspects, encouraging staff to make decisions, which CEO2 did not mention.
Not only were themes developed through coding, but also through familiarity with
the data, utilizing a rigorous process of constant reviewing. This contributed to the
depiction of the data in graphic and tabular form in this phase three, the results phase,
where there is a reassembling of the data. A priori coding was utilized in this study,
which allowed for the development of a list of pre-coded words and phrases (Table 1
above), and which can be found in the study’s codebook created by NVivo11 (QSR,
2015) (Appendix K). These words and phrases were used during phase 2, the
disassembling phase, as well as phase 3, the reassembling phase.
According to Impact Center for Evaluation and Research (ICER), (2012), a precoded list can have as little as 10 codes or up to 40-50 codes. These codes can be based
on the study’s conceptual framework, the research questions, the problem area, prior
knowledge of the subject matter by the researcher, or even the experience of the
researcher with the subject (ICER, 2012). In this study, the pre-coded list was based
mainly on the research questions, the theoretical foundation – Greenleaf’s (1970) servant
leadership theory, Liden et al.’s (2008) seven dimensions of servant leadership model,
and Schein’s (2004) organizational culture model - as well as additional themes which

172
emerged during phase two of the analysis, the disassembling phase (Yin, 2011), where
coding began.
Utilizing Yin’s (2011) three phases of analysis accommodated an inductive
approach to the analysis of the data in all three textual sources – interviews,
documentation, and observations. According to Thomas (2006), this approach is valuable
for three reasons. First it allowed the raw data to be condensed into a summary format. In
this study, this was accomplished in the compiling phase (Yin, 2011), where the raw data
was summarized into three source folders in the NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) software, which
were named interview, observation, and documentation source folders.
A second reason offered by Thomas (2006) for utilizing an inductive approach
was to provide a way of linking the raw data to the purpose of the study as part of the
findings. The purpose of this study was to understand how the CEOs of libraries in south
central Florida perceive organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their
servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance.
The RQs were designed to elicit answers which would help in understanding the CEOs’
perceptions. Thus, the creation of nodes for each of the RQs in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015),
and coding data to them in phase 2 (Yin, 2011) of the analysis cycle, was an important
step towards inductively linking the raw data to the purpose of the study.
For example, of the 21 references coded to RQ1 in NVivo11, one response by
CEO1 provided a strong link between the data and RQ1, and therefore the purpose of the
study. This CEO’s statement linked growth of employees (dimension 5), collaboration
(dimension 3), trust (dimension 7), and valuing individual capabilities (dimension 4) to
the creation of winning environments (or culture of success); one clear link between the

173
raw data from the interviews and the purpose of the study. He said, “Learning from each
other facilitates growth and enhances collaboration, trust in one another; and valuing the
capabilities and contribution that each person brings to the team develops pride and
creates a winning environment” (CEO1, Interview).
A third reason for using the inductive approach advanced by Thomas (2006) is
that it assists in the development of a framework or outline that helps in an understanding
of evidence in the raw data. That should be instrumental in demonstrating the underlying
structure of experiences of participants in the study. In this study, the use of multiple
sources of data helped to create a framework of evidence which enabled an understanding
of the CEOs’ experiences. These sources were the raw data, of their interviews, the
researcher’s observational notes, the primary documents collected in each library, and the
28-item servant leadership questionnaire responses by the senior level staff. All provide
an inductive means of understanding the CEOs’ experiences and perceptions in relation
to their servant leadership practices, the resulting organizational culture, and the impact
on employees and the organization.
As Nvivo11(QSR, 2015) files were opened in the interview source folders, the
thoughts and perceptions of these CEOs emerged, as they pertained to the phenomena of
interest. These phenomena are their own servant leadership practices, as well as the
organizational culture these practices encouraged in the libraries they led. As these
thoughts and experiences emerged through coding, they helped to create that framework
that provided an understanding of the CEOs’ perception of how the function of both
phenomena – organizational culture and servant leadership - in organizations, led to the
success of both employees and organizations (Latham, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012; Shin,

174
2012). This framework was developed at phase three (Yin, 2011) of the analytic process,
where reassembling of the data occurred.
Through this reassembling process, information in the RQ nodes were reviewed,
and coded matter from each of them, as well as from other nodes and sources, used to
create visuals. For example, in this third phase of the analysis, Yin posits that the
reassembling involves illustrating the data graphically or in tables. Nvivo11 (QSR, 2015)
was used to create many such graphic illustrations of the reassembling of the data. One
such visual was developed by utilizing Nvivo11 to create word clouds which helped to
identify frequently occurring words and phrases to be used for further coding of the data
and to tell the story of what the perceptions of the CEOs were as they provided answers
to the research questions. Figure 7 illustrates one such word cloud visual, culled from a
query of all interviews, and which included words found in the Nvivo11 created
Codebook (Appendix K). This word cloud was created in response to a request for the top
50 most frequently occurring words that have no less than 6 letters. It was accomplished
by using the stop words feature in the software, so that it prevented the inclusion of
words such as people, things, together, and such words as regularly occur in any writing.

175

Figure 7. Nvivo11 created word cloud from interview data
Here the most prominent word is “community”. According to Henderson,
Evergreen, Jarosewich, and Mountain (2015) this type of illustration provides
prominence to words that appear more frequently than others in source texts. For this
study, this is important as it is indicative of the interest of the CEOs in the communities
they serve. This point is also evident in other sources such as in the servant leadership
questionnaire where it was found that there were higher scores for the concept of creating
value for the community, than any other concept (Figure 2.) in the questionnaire. Other
visuals included for example, charts providing insights on the robustness of each
dimension and other themes in relation to each CEO’s interview.
Non-participant observation. The process of analyzing the non-participant
observation field notes began by utilizing the first phase of Yin’s (2011) analytic phases
called the compiling phase. This first step involved reading the transcribed observation
data several times and organizing them into different categories. These categories

176
received coded names depending on the CEO and library to which the observations
pertained. For example, the transcribed observation notes for the first county library was
labelled as “Observation – LIB1 – CEO1”, so that there is identification of the data
source (LIB1), as well as of both the CEO (CEO1) and the library involved (LIB1). This
is a method of creating what Yin describes as a database, a necessary precursor to formal
analysis.
After further reading and labelling of each set of observations was completed, this
first analysis phase involved uploading the observation data to NVivo11(QSR, 2015) to
be organized in what NVivo11 called the source folder of the software. In this folder, the
sources are categorized based on their types. Thus, observations were categorized
separately from all other sources and was labelled as “Observations” as compared to the
other two textual sources of data, the interviews and documentation. This is a low-level
cycling activity, characterized by Saldana (2016) as an initial coding process. This means
the data is separated into three folders, one for observations, one for interviews, and the
other for documentation. Figure 4 above is a screen shot illustrating how the observation
folder was compiled in NVivo 11 along with the other source folders, documentation, and
interviews. This first phase was made easy using the NVivo 11 software, which allowed
the data to be organized in easily accessible folders in preparation for further analytic
action, namely, phase two of Yin’s analysis phases.
Phase two of Yin’s (2011) analysis cycle was named Disassembling. It involved
further categorization of the gathered data, so that there were, for example, individual
files created for each transcribed library’s observations. In this process, the observation
source folder was accessed in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) and the “Create” button in the

177
software utilized to create three separate files in this one source folder, one for each
library’s observation notes. The files were named LIB1 Observations and Field Notes, for
the observation data from the first county library, LIB2 Observations and Field Notes, for
the observation data from the second county library, and CIL Observations and Field
Notes, for the data from the city library. The data was disassembled or fragmented from
the source folder into the newly created files by selecting the data and coding it to the
appropriate file in the observation source folder. This process saw the observations on
each library separated out into individual observation files. The screen shot at Figure 8
illustrates this disassembling of the data for the observations. Data in the Observation
source folder are disassembled or fragmented to form three folders containing
observational notes from each of the participating libraries.

Figure 8. Categorization of observation source documents into individual files in NVivo
11

178
This disassembling of the data was important so that the relationship between the
individual library’s environment, operations, and the RQs could be easily identified and
coded for themes.
Coding of the data thus began in this second phase, the disassembling phase. This
involved carefully reading the data in each observation file and identifying the
environmental and operational elements of importance to answering the RQs. The
objective was to see connections and patterns among the data, relevant to each RQ and to
code them appropriately.
There were three new nodes created in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) and named for the
RQs so that there was an RQ1, RQ2, and an RQ3 to which the coded data was attached.
For example, because RQ1 focused on Liden et al.’s (2008) seven servant leadership
dimensions, as well as Schein’s (2004) organizational culture levels, the observational
notes that pertained, were selected, coded, and added to the newly named node, RQ1,
created in NVivo 11. Nodes, according to QSR (2015), represents themes or ideas about
the researched data that the researcher wishes to be included in the analysis, and is
another means of compiling data for the analysis. The coding of data to each named RQ
node was repeated until all observation data was further coded to either the RQ1, RQ2, or
RQ3 node.
Another NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) tool important at this phase of the analysis of the
observations was the “Queries” option, which allowed word and phrase queries. For
example, as the observation data was reviewed in the files in NVivo 11, words and phrase
were identified which spoke to the three RQs. Consequently, more disassembling of the
data was done, using this tool. That is, the data in the RQ files were read and re-read and

179
additional coding done. This contributed to the identification of many of the commonly
used words and phrases that appear in the codebook (Appendix K) as well as Table 1
above in Chapter 3.
The gathering of data into nodes as a result of queries of the observation files,
began next. For this phase, additional nodes were created as the data in the RQ nodes
were read carefully to identify words and phrases that were similar in each node. This is
the third phase of Yin’s analysis cycle, called the reassembling of data in a different
format, to bring like-data together in one place. More importantly, this is the phase in
which themes are identified and used to help reorganize the data. Thus, as the data in the
RQ nodes were examined, themes could be identified in each which were applicable to
the three libraries. For example, through the query tool in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) the
observation files were described as using the word “customer” for a total of 87 times, and
the word “community” for a total of 200 times. Appendix N provides a list of these and
other frequently appearing words in the observation files.
The NVivo11 explore tool was also applied to the coded data in the observation
files to allow for a visual, illustrating a comparison of the coded data in the files for each
library. For example, coded observation notes for one of the county libraries and the city
library was explored, to help with an understanding of the presence of the seven servant
leadership dimensions, as well as the various organizational culture levels, in each
library. Figure 9 illustrates the comparison of two libraries, LIB1 and CIL. This is an
Nvivo11 created comparison of the coding of observation notes from the city library and
one of the county libraries. Blue circles represent nodes. Nodes in the center indicate data
on elements similar in both libraries that were coded to the same nodes. Areas that were

180
not held in common are indicated on the right for the county library, and on the left for
the city library.

Figure 9. Comparison of LIB1 and CIL observation notes created in NVivo 11
Themes and patterns of meaning to the study emerged because of coding within
the data sets. This occurred as the fragmented data was reorganized into different
groupings in this third phase (Yin, 2011), as illustrated by Figure 9 which is the result of
using the NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) explore tool on the coded data for two of the libraries,
for the sake of comparison. This helped to provide answers to the research questions in
the study. For example, it is evident that the servant leadership dimensions are practiced

181
in each of the libraries. This is evident in the visual where nodes in the center indicating
the areas of similarities in the libraries show that both libraries evidenced six of the seven
servant leadership dimensions, which pertained to RQ1. However, the illustration also
highlighted other matters that were important to the study, such as the evidence of
encouragement to make decisions seen in CIL, which was not evident in LIB1. This is of
interest because whereas in the interview data there was evidence of both CEOs allowing
certain employees to make decisions autonomously, there is no evidence of this in the
observation notes for LIB1. On the other hand, whereas LIB1 has two references to
organizational culture, there is none for CIL. There was however, ample evidence in the
documentation and interviews that CIL did have references to organizational culture.
These themes were developed through coding, because of familiarity with the
data, utilizing a rigorous process of reviews as data were disassembled and reassembled
in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). This contributed to the depiction of the data in graphic form in
this phase three, the results phase, where there is a reassembling of the data. A priori
coding was utilized in this study, which allowed for the development of a list of precoded words and phrases (Table 1 above), and which can be found in the study’s
codebook created through NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) (Appendix K). These words and
phrases were used during phase two, the disassembling phase, as well as phase three, the
reassembling phase.
Organizational documentation. Data from organizational documentation, used
to create one summary table of primary (Schein, 2004) sources gathered from each of the
three libraries (Appendix H), was also analyzed using Yin’s (2011) phases of analysis as
well as NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). However, a large percentage of the collected data

182
pertained to programs and services provided by the libraries for the communities they
served, illustrating a strong relationship between these documents and Liden et al.’s
(2008) dimension number 2, creating value for the community. A portion of the
organizational documentation also demonstrated the organizational cultural level at
which each of the participating library was functioning (Schein, 2004). This was in
addition to staff related documents that were identified in the libraries of CEO1 and
CEO2. The staff related documents all pertained to training but had application to
dimension number 5, helping others grow and succeed.
To begin the analysis, the documentation table was uploaded to NVivo 11 (QSR,
2015) in phase one of the analysis process, into a source folder called “Documentation”.
To analyze this data in this first phase there was a careful reading and re-reading of the
material to determine how it related to the RQs, and to see if any new insights were
emerging (Yin, 2011) that were different from those found in the analysis of the
interviews and observations. The recognition of the paucity of material relative to staff in
the libraries was found during this analytical reading. Conversely, it was also with this rereading and analytical review, that data pertaining to the levels at which the libraries were
functioning, was recognized.
According to Schein (2004) an organization’s published list of values reveals the
artifact level of an organization. In the participating libraries, these comprised the
organizational chart, and vision/mission statement. Espoused beliefs and values, at the
second level of Schein’s (2004) model also provided a framework for data gathering.
Since this level involves the strategies, goals, and philosophies espoused by the
organization, this type of data was also reviewed in the analysis of the contents of the

183
table. Libraries generally develop strategic plans as well as annual operational plans.
These are tools that were examined in the three libraries as part of the document
gathering activity and which were pivotal in helping to provide data in answer to the
RQs. According to Rappaport and Richter (2013), this is the level at which the shared
cultural values the members profess is visible. The next step in the analysis was to move
to phase 2, the disassembling (Yin, 2004) of the data.
Disassembling of data in phase two of the analysis could be accomplished in
many ways. One such method that was selected for this portion of this study was the
coding of words, phrases, and chunks of data (Yin, 2011) in the source folder in NVivo
11 (QSR, 2015) called “documentation”. Because answers were being sought for the
three RQs, the portions of data selected for coding in the documentation folder were
coded to nodes in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) which related to concepts inherent in one or the
other of the RQs. For example, RQ1 refers to Liden et al.’s (2008) dimensions, so data in
the documentation folder in NVivo which seemed to pertain to the seven dimensions
were coded to that RQ. On the other hand, data that related to employee success, which
was the focus of RQ2, was coded to the employee success node. Figure 10 illustrates this
coding pattern and helps provide an understanding of the areas of strength in the
organizations as it pertains to dimensions and other concepts. For example, data in the
documentation table resident in the NVivo 11 “Documentation” folder was coded to
various nodes represented in the chart to identify answers to RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3.

184

Figure 10. Coding by node in documentation table resident in NVivo 11
This coding also had the effect of causing data that were alike to be assigned the same
code (Yin, 2011) and gathered together in one place for easy comparison. Figure 10
shows that the rating for the seven servant leadership dimensions (Liden et al., 2008) was
larger than any other element in the documentation source folder in NVivo 11 (QSR,
2015). This demonstrated a relationship with RQ1, which questions the CEOs practice of
these dimensions. However, three of the seven dimensions are specifically indexed in the
figure as being also coded. They are creating value for the community, helping others
grow and succeed, and conceptual skills. While the dimensions received a rating of 70%,
the dimension “creating value for the community” received 53.65%, and “helping others
grow and succeed”, as well as “conceptual skills”, received 25.23% each. These three
dimensions were notable because of the number of elements observed that directly related
to them. For example, there were many fliers, posters, and even links on web pages

185
announcing programs and services provided by the three libraries for the benefit of the
community.
Organizational culture (Schein, 2004) is also prominent in the figure receiving a
rating of 36.55%. Employee success received a rating of 23.86%, in addition to the
positive aspects of this area which was rated at 19.07%, while organizational
performance is rated at 27.33%. Servant leadership was also rated in this chart at 19.07%.
This is valuable data for helping to find answers to the three RQs. This phase led to phase
three, which is the reassembling of data (Yin, 2011).
Phase three of Yin’s (2011) five phase analysis cycle was the phase in which
reassembled data, that is, data coded to different nodes, is used to create a new narrative.
This narrative is usually accompanied by charts and other types of visuals for illustrating
the narrative. According to Yin (2011) themes or codes can be used to reorganize the data
in this phase, and are the subject of the graphic rearrangement. Thus, Figure 11 is a
graphic illustration indicative of the fact that the documentation found in each library
comprised data that were pertinent to a wide variety of themes and were coded to
thematic nodes. This included Liden et al.’s (2008) seven servant leadership concepts as
well as Schein’s (2004) organizational culture levels which were themes listed in the preprepared list (Table 1 above) as well as in the codebook (Appendix K). All had
significance as it pertained to the RQs. Figure 11 displays the themes that emerged from
the coding of data in the documentation folder to various nodes, resident in NVivo 11.
Light blue circles are nodes representing themes.

186

Figure 11. Thematic nodes to which data was coded from the organizational
documentation folder
The NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) explore tool was used to create a comparison of the
data relating to the servant leadership dimensions “putting others first” and “helping
others grow and succeed” in all source files, folders, and nodes. The intent was to use
these dimensions to illustrate corroboration of data in all sources analyzed in NVivo 11.
The graphic created is presented in Figure 12, which illustrates corroboration between
data for the dimensions “putting others first” and “helping others to grow and succeed”,
and data in other sources analyzed in NVivo 11. Interviews refer to transcribed interviews
located in source folders in NVivo. Observation and Field Notes are data uploaded to
NVivo 11 Observation folder, from the transcription of observation and field notes. LIB1

187
and LIB2 are two county libraries, and CIL refers to the city library. The CEO is the chief
executive officer of each library.

Figure 12. Comparison of dimensions “Putting Others First” and “Helping Others Grow
and Succeed” in all sources analyzed in NVivo 11
According to Yin (2009) the most important use of documentation in a case study
is to “corroborate and augment evidence from other sources” (p. 103). In Figure 12, there
appeared to be direct corroboration between the dimension “helping others grow and
succeed” and data in the documentation table for the three libraries. Because the “helping
others grow and succeed” dimension also seemed to corroborate with data in the
interviews of each of the CEOs, as well as with the observations and field notes for each
of the libraries, the conclusion could be drawn that there was corroboration between these

188
sources and the documentation table for the libraries. The diagram also provides strong
evidence of corroboration between data in the “helping others grow and succeed” node
and data in the node for “putting followers first”. On the other hand, there seemed to be
no corroboration of the data in the “putting followers first” node and the data in the
documentation table for libraries, source. Neither did there appear to be corroboration
between the documentation table for libraries source, and the “putting others first” data in
the node. This has significance for the first RQ, demonstrating that there is evidence of
triangulation (Patton, 1999; Yin, 2009) in at least three sources in relation to data on two
of the seven dimensions.
Data from the face-to-face interviews, the non-participant observations and field
notes, documentation, and servant leadership questionnaire were read and analyzed
several times. Data for all the sources provided answers for the three research questions.
How these answers emerged from the analysis is discussed next, for each RQ.
RQ1-How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
For this study, transcripts of the CEOs’ interviews were reviewed to identify the
perspectives of each of the CEOs on the matter of servant leadership practices in the
organizations they served, and the type of organizational culture that emerged as a result.
The one-on-one face-to-face interviews conducted with the three CEOs involved the use
of 12 open-ended questions (Appendix E) to provide answers to the RQs. Questions 1, 3,
4, 5, and 9 were all specifically intended to solicit data indicating the CEOs’ answers to
RQ1 – their perspectives on their servant leadership practices as well as the type of
organizational culture such practices led to. For example, question 5 asked “How do you

189
utilize these dimensions in your position? Are these dimensions important in your
position? If you say yes, why and if you say no, why not? Are there any that are more
important to your library than others? Why?”
Because of the nature of these types of open-ended questions, the CEOs were
afforded the opportunity to freely express their opinions and ideas, allowing for deep,
rich answers to the questions. Responses therefore varied from one CEO to the other.
While one responded precisely to one part of a question, others provided overviews that
demonstrated their view points on other aspects of a question. For example, when the
CEOs were asked to describe how they utilized the servant leadership dimensions in their
organization and to describe the dimensions’ importance to them as leaders, CEO1’s
response spoke to the first part of the question. He stated:
It kind of has to be in the thread of what we do every day; working these elements
into our strategic plan; making it part of what we do. I don’t know if I used this
term yet, but making it an expectation.
CEO3’s response spoke to the last part of the question, the importance of the dimensions
and the impact on the success of the library. He stated:
They are very important …to make this whole library successful … If we can
create an environment where we are all preaching from the same pew and
understand why we do what we do, I think that’s important. In order to get to that
point, I think you need to go to these other points - the empowering, the skills,
bringing value to the community – knowing what we are doing here, why we
value what we are doing.

190
On the other hand, CEO2’s response to the same question was lengthier and spoke to
both Parts of the question. She opined:
I don’t know if there are any that are more important than the other since they are
all key. I think they work well together. I think if you pull one out you are almost
letting things . . . For instance, if you are behaving ethically and you are providing
guidance for number 7, you are also working with number 5 which is providing
support and mentoring. So, they work hand in hand and the relationships are
important.
Thus, determining how the CEOs applied the dimensions in the organizations was not
readily ascertained from their responses to question 5 of the interviews, even after
additional questions designed to steer them toward more specific answers. However, each
CEO did indicate that those seven servant leadership concepts were important to their
organization. These responses were important for creating an understanding of how the
CEOs perceived their servant leadership practices as a means of enabling an
organizational culture of employee success, another focus of the first RQ.
RQ1 also has implications for the concept of employee success. Each CEO
described employee success in a different way in their interview but were united in
describing it as pertaining to performance. For example, CEO1 described it by saying,
“They are successful because we are collaborative, we are participatory, we are doing
that and the whole is better than the sum of the parts. We accomplish more together.”
CEO2 defined the term as employees doing “an amazing job. They have won a state
award for it now with the Betty Davis Miller Youth award. They have won a local award
for keep (name) beautiful for recycling.” CEO3 on the other hand stated that the answer

191
rested in “Past performance, the potential of what they can do next, based upon how
successful they have been, based upon the extent of their task, of what is involved with
them.” Thus, it was clear from the response of all three CEOs to the interview questions
that the matter of performance was their hallmark of the success of their employees.
Scores from the servant leadership questionnaire administered to the 12 senior
level staff in each library also helped provide an answer to RQ1. They assisted in
identifying how the CEOs’ servant leadership practices contributed to the development of
a culture of employee success, or not. Ratings therefore indicated behaviors most
associated, and least associated with each CEOs’ servant leadership practice. From the
responses, it was evident that while CEO3 received a high score, strongly exhibiting
servant leadership behaviors regularly that helped create a culture of employee success
(see Figure 2), both CEO1 and CEO2 tended to exhibit this behavior in an average
(moderate) manner (see Figure 2 above). The high range included scores between 23 and
28; the moderate range consisted of scores between 14 and 22; and the low range
included scores between 8 and 13. While CEO3 received a score of 24.56, placing him in
the high range for the practice of the dimensions, CEO1 received one of 17.75, and CEO2
received one of 20.76, placing them both in the moderate range. Thus, based on the
scores representing the point of view of the senior level staff, the CEOs were practicing
the seven servant leadership dimensions from a moderate to high level. On the matter of
the second part of the question pertaining to employee success, this instrument was not
designed to provide this answer.
The observation and field notes also included data pertinent to answering the first
RQ. With respect to the first part of the question, which related to the practice of the

192
seven dimensions of servant leadership by the CEOs, the underlying assumption was that
any visible evidence of a serving culture existing in the libraries was to the creditable to
the CEOs’ leadership. Adopting such a position was based on Liden et al. (2014) research
which concluded that servant leaders create a serving culture that directly influences
organizational performance while enhancing individual attitudes and behaviors. A
serving culture was described as the “behavioral norms and shared expectations” of

placing a priority on helping others (Cooke & Rousseau, 1988, p. 255).
In this study, therefore, the data gathered, transcribed, and loaded to NVivo 11
(QSR, 2015) was reviewed several times to determine whether this serving culture
existed in the libraries, demonstrating some or all of the seven servant leadership
dimensions, in addition to Schein’s (2004) organizational levels. These dimensions were
included in the pre-coded list of words used in NVivo 11 to generate themes as the data
was coded. Table 5 provides a summary of the number of times each dimension was
coded as being recognized in each of the libraries during the non-participant observation
and note taking exercises.
Table 5
Servant Leadership Dimension Coded References in Observation and Field Notes
Lib.

Emotional
Healing

Creating
Value for
Community

Conceptual
Skills

Empowering

Helping
Followers
Grow and
Succeed

Putting
Followers
First

Behaving
Ethically

LIB1

2

10

1

4

7

2

0

LIB2

3

10

3

1

3

0

0

CIL

6

15

9

6

3

4

1

Note: LIB1 = First County Library; LIB2 = Second County Library; CIL = City Library. Numbers
represent the number of times the dimension was recognized in the library. The numbers were derived from
an NVivo 11 summary of coding in the Observation folders.

Thus, it was evident that all three libraries had ample instances of an emphasis on
Creating Value for The Community, since the dimension was recognized 10 times each in

193
LIB1, and LIB2, and 15 times in the CIL. On the other hand, only the CIL provided one
instance of the dimension Behaving Ethically. This is not to say that there were any signs
of unethical behavior in any of the other libraries, but only that there were no observable
instances of this dimension anywhere in the buildings. The one instance noted for CIL
came from field notes of what a staff member said to the researcher. There was also a
large disparity between the libraries as it pertained to Helping Followers Grow And
Succeed. While LIB1 displayed seven instances of this dimension, both LIB2 and the
CIL displayed only three instances. Additionally, while the CIL displayed six instances of
Emotional Healing, the LIB1 had only three instances and LIB2 had only 2. There was
also a huge disparity with respect to Conceptual Skills. While the CIL had nine instances,
LIB1 had one and LIB2 had three. With respect to Empowering, LIB1 had four instances,
LIB2 had one, and the CIL had six. Putting Followers First was observed two times for
LIB1, not at all for LIB2, and four times for the CIL. It can thus be said that for the most
part the dimensions were observed in the libraries to a greater or lesser degree, depending
on the library.
On the matter of Schein’s (2004) three levels of organizational culture, data was
gathered at each library through observation, that demonstrated how the servant
leadership practices of each CEO helped develop a culture of employee success. In the
interviews, each CEO described employee success as performance related. CEO1 said the
successful employee was collaborative, participatory, and accomplishing. CEO2 said it
has to do with being able to avert conflicts, have a sense of humor, play nice with team
members – how you perform. For CEO3 success was also about performance so he
described performance in terms of various employees who were promoted because of

194
performance and one who he personally thought should get his job when he retired
because of the way she performs.
Based on the responses of the CEOs, answering RQ1 as it pertained to a culture
that enabled the success of their employees, must involve identifying the artifacts, the
espoused beliefs and values, and the underlying assumptions (Schein, 2004) that they, the
CEOs’ create through their servant leadership practices. According to Chiniara and
Bentein (2016), the attention a servant leader bestows on employees that enhances their
development, will help those employees be more productive. They will therefore perform
well, because their basic psychological needs are met. This in turn leads to satisfaction, a
positive outcome. As the observations were conducted in each library, elements of the
CEOs’ servant leadership practices could be detected which may account for the positive
performance of staff, making them successful in the CEOs’ perspectives.
For CEO1, there was evidence that there was a focus on satisfying employee’s
needs, thus enabling them to be successful (Chiniara & Bentein, 2016). Liden et al.’s
(2008) seven dimensions of servant leadership includes five dimensions focused on
meeting the needs of employees. These are emotional healing, conceptual skills,
empowering, helping followers grow and succeed, and putting followers first. In this
library, instances of the CEO’s practice of these dimensions were observed and noted.
Emotional healing (being sensitive to the feelings of others) was one such observed
dimension. For example, there was a staff party celebrating the birthday of those born
that month. Although this was observed at the artifact level, it may be reflective of the
espoused belief expressed by the CEO in his interview that happy staff make for happy
customers. The fact that this was held monthly could also be expressive of the underlying

195
assumption that it’s Ok with the CEO for them to get together and celebrate. In NVivo 11
(QSR, 2015) this incident was coded as organizational culture in the observation folder.
Table 5 above provides a summary of the number of times each dimension was identified
in the observation folder and coded in NVivo 11.
Servant leadership practices relating to staff were also observed at the library of
CEO2, which seemed to help develop successful employees. For example, at a meeting
with a library committee where the researcher was a non-participant observer, an
employee gave a report of her activities as leader of the grant writing committee. It was
very well received and she was highly praised, even after she left. The CEO spoke of the
employee’s success and expressed regrets that the employee was leaving for another job.
The CEO had provided emotional healing and helped that employee to grow and succeed
by allowing her to oversee the committee that had responsibility for grant writing. What
was observed was the confident and assured woman, which was an outcome of the
support she received from the CEO. What was also observed were the cultural levels at
work. At the artifacts level, the hierarchical structure of the organizational governing
body was seen with the CEO at the top, the woman in charge of the committee below her,
and others that accompanied this woman were operating at a level below hers. At the
espoused beliefs and values level, it was observed that the CEO placed a great deal of
emphasis on the success of her staff and described each in terms of their successful
performance. Thus, it seems to confirm the CEO’s philosophy expressed in the interview
that good employee performance equals success.
In the library of CEO3, there were many observed instances of servant leadership
practices that positively affected the organizational culture and therefore employees’

196
success. Chiniara and Bentein (2016) posits that the attention a servant leader bestows on
employees that enhances their development, will help those employees be more
productive. They will therefore perform well, because their basic psychological needs are
met. In this library, the casual observer could see mementoes in and out the building
designed to help employees know they were appreciated. One such memento was a tree
in the yard by the parking lot that the CEO got planted in memory of a staff member who
had passed away. On the inside, there was a huge plaque to which the names of staff are
added as they are honored. This was at the artifact level but it could also be indicative of
the CEO’s philosophy, at the espoused beliefs and values level, that staff should know
that they are privately and publicly supported. Documentation sources also helped to
provide answers to the two aspects of RQ1 – evidence of the CEOs’ practice of the
servant leadership dimensions leading to a culture of employee success. Again, Chiniara
and Bentein (2016), states that the attention a servant leader bestows on employees that
enhances their development, will help those employees be more productive. They will
therefore perform well, because their basic psychological needs are met.
In the library of CEO1, two items were found that related directly to the
relationship of the CEO to his staff. The first was a copy of the new employee orientation
manual. Through this manual, new employees are introduced to the library system
including introduction to each department such as public relations, IT, administration,
project coordination, finance, and materials management. This is an important document
which had implications for the success of employees since it would help them to be more
comfortable in the job; adapt faster; be more effective, and productive; experience higher
retention; and enhance communication between the supervisor and the new employees.

197
This has implications for four of Liden’ et al.’s (2008) dimensions, which directly relates
to employees. They are emotional healing, empowering, helping others grow and
succeed, and putting followers first.
The provision of this manual also speaks to the type of organizational culture this
CEO created. At the artifact level, it represents an aspect of the organization’s published
list of values. However, it also had implications for the espoused beliefs and values of the
CEO as he provided documentation on the rules, norms, and the day-to-day principles by
which employees operate (Schein, 2004). This could easily lead to the basic assumption
as to “how to perceive, think about, and feel about things” (Schein, 2004, p. 31). Thus,
not only was CEO1 practicing the servant leadership dimensions, he was also creating an
organizational culture that made it possible for his employees to succeed, thereby
responding to RQ1.
In the library of CEO2 there was also a wealth of documentation that corroborated
with the interview of that CEO as well as with the observation notes and even the 28-item
servant leadership questionnaire. Of interest were two sets of training opportunities
named “Turn Up” and “Grow Me”. The “Turn Up” training sheet offered a schedule of
training for staff available in various branches. It covered topics such as safety and
security, money handling, and how to handle problem patrons. “Grow Me!” included
training on dressing to impress, office etiquette, goal setting, team work, and resume and
interviewing skills. This has implications for four of Liden et al.’s (2008) dimensions,
which directly relates to employees. They are emotional healing, empowering, helping
others grow and succeed, and putting followers first. The provision of these training
opportunities also speaks to the type of organizational culture this CEO created. At the

198
artifact level, they represent an aspect of the organization’s published list of values.
However, they also had implication for the espoused beliefs and values of the CEO as she
provided documentation on the rules, norms, and the day-to-day principles by which
employees should operate (Schein, 2004). This could easily lead to the basic assumption
as to “how to perceive, think about, and feel about things” (Schein, 2004, p. 31). Thus,
not only was CEO2 practicing the servant leadership dimensions, she was also creating
an organizational culture that made it possible for her employees to succeed, thereby
responding to RQ1.
For CEO3 no actual documentation was found that reinforced the idea of the CEO
practicing servant leadership dimensions that help develop a culture of employee success.
However, through the interview, the observations, and even the 28-item questionnaire
responded to by senior level staff, he was validated extensively as a servant leader who
cared for his staff. Thus, despite this lack, CEO3 not only practiced the servant leadership
dimensions, he also created an organizational culture that made it possible for his
employees to succeed, thereby responding to RQ1.
For RQ2, data was collected pertaining to how the organizational culture enabled
employees’ success. Thematic analysis was conducted on the interview transcripts to
determine alignment of the CEOs’ responses to Schein’s (2004) description of
organizational culture. The CEOs’ responses to questions 6, 7, 8, and 12 of the interview
questions shed insights on this alignment. For example, CEO3 referred to what he thinks
is a shared assumption by the community in which his library operates. He stated that the
community willingly agreed to pay extra tax to ensure quality library services. His
interpretation of this is that the library is obviously seen as a valued community

199
institution. His statement aligns with Schein’s (2004) description of an organizational
culture operating at the basic underlying assumption level. At this level, Schein described
the organization as having assumptions “that guide behavior, that tell group members
how to perceive, think about, and feel about things” (p. 31).
For CEO1, the answer to the RQ2 involved a few things including incorporating
the servant leadership dimensions in the organization’s strategic plan. In this way, he
thought he was operating at the artifact level. In fact, Schein, (2004) posits that an
example of an organizational culture at this level can be found in the published lists of
values of that organization. The strategic plan is one such published list of values. As this
CEO said, however, this is only the surface. To enable employee success the dimensions,
need to not only be written in the strategic plan, they also need to be shared values or
beliefs and then shared assumptions (Schein, 2004) of the group. CEO1 suggested he has
been striving to reach that goal for five years. He felt that its accomplishment will involve
a complete reversal of the current culture in the organization to one that involves more
participation and support of each other, while respecting each other’s strengths; sharing
each other’s knowledge; not focusing on each other’s weaknesses; and not practicing
exclusion of others.
CEO2 opined that the culture currently operative in her organization has already
begun to help staff be successful. In her opinion, RQ2 was evident in attitudes
administration had to staff, ensuring staff was thanked for the effort they put out and
ensuring a merit based performance assessment process was in place. Staff also received
encouragement because of the training opportunities available to them, which allowed
them to not only hone their own skills, but learn new ones and even begin to use those

200
skills for the benefit of other library professionals. In this way, CEO2 thought the
organization was operating at the artifact level. In fact, Schein (2004) posits that an
example of an organizational culture at this level can be found in the processes that
become routines for that organization. Thus, if this organization routinely provides
training for its staff it is operating at the artifacts level. The result was staff that went
beyond the expected to provide service to the public, including being willing to help
customers at their point of need instead of sending them to various designated places in
the building for assistance. It also included staff willing to work on days off as volunteers
and even take part in the costumed annual comic convention, despite age. Thus, this CEO
believed the practice of the servant leadership dimensions has already encouraged an
organizational culture that was enabling her staff to be successful.
The non-participant observation notes, included photos of the libraries as well as
descriptions of their settings, as a means of identifying an organizational culture
operating at the artifact level, with all the trappings in place that should lead to employee
success as additional cultural levels are attained. For example, in the observation notes
pertaining to LIB2, the prominence of the library building and the fact that it had received
distinguished awards several times, both locally and state-wide was noted. Thus, the nonparticipant observation data provided at least one piece of evidence of the organizations’
operation at the artifact level (Schein, 2004). At this level, Schein stated that an observer
can see these visible signs of prosperity but does not know the meaning of such things to
the employees in that library. Whether those accomplishments are important to the group
is not known. What is known is that this organization demonstrates success not only as an
organization but also individually through the many awards won by various staff

201
members. Chiniara and Bentein (2016), states that attentive servant leadership, results in
employees that are more productive. In this library, this is evident not only at the artifact
level where there are obvious signs of prosperity but also at the espoused beliefs level
where there is social validation such as the shared social experiences of the members of
the group (Schein, 2004). Thus, RQ2 seemed to be a realty in this library.
At the library of CEO1, determining an answer to RQ2 was achieved utilizing the
observation notes coded and analyzed in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). At the artifacts level,
there were six observations pertaining to organizational culture, three at the espoused
beliefs and values level, and four at the underlying assumptions level for a total of
thirteen coded observations. One such coded element included observation of the
obviously pleasant interaction between the staff and supervisors as well as between staff
and customers. For example, a birthday celebration was observed, where staff having
birthdays that month were celebrated. This appeared to be a happy occasion and seemed
to be one that was repeated monthly. Schein (2004) states that the visible behavior of the
members of an organization relates to the organizational culture. Furthermore, this
seemed to be an event sanctioned by the CEO since he was one of the celebrants.
Chiniara and Bentein (2016), states that the attention a servant leader bestows on
employees that enhances their development, will help those employees be more
productive. They will therefore perform well, because their basic psychological needs are
met. Thus, the joyful way staff was observed providing service to the public such as
during story time for pre-school children needs to be considered in determining employee
success. This CEO defines employees’ success as performing collaboratively, and being

202
participatory. Base on this definition and the observed activities of the staff it can be said
that the observation data does provide evidence of a response to RQ2 in this library.
In CEO3’s library a response to RQ2 was also sought, as in the other two
libraries, utilizing the notes from observation of this facility, uploaded to NVivo 11
(QSR, 2015). As the data was analyzed, fourteen references were identified in the coded
data relating to organizational culture in this library. At the artifacts level, there were
three observations, four at the espoused beliefs and values level, and seven at the
underlying assumptions level, which helped provide responses to RQ2. One such
observation was the very nature of the environment within which service was provided to
customers. For example, the desks at which staff were seated to provide assistance to
customers were designed to enable successful interaction between staff and customers.
The CEO indicated that these desks were deliberately selected for this process because
they were low and reduced barriers between the staff and those they serve. There were
also items in the environment specifically incorporated by the CEO for empowering and
encouraging employees. For example, there was a huge contraption mounted on the wall
in the staff area with photos of the staff and volunteers as a means of recognition of their
importance to the success of the organization. It must be noted that there is a huge
volunteer staff in this library and their photos on the contraption were not differentiated
from staff. At the artifact level Schein (2004) description of the architecture of the
physical environment would apply to this situation. The situation could also be described
as an organizational process by which behavior is made routine (Schein, 2004), since this
is how staff routinely interacted with customers in the case of information services.

203
One other observed cultural factor identified through the coding and analysis of
the data, which could also be considered as contributing to the success of employees was
how the CEO encouraged younger staff members to grow and develop leadership skills.
One meeting was attended, which was conducted by a young lady, who it was learned,
could do this because of her interest in the arts. The CEO as well as a few local artists of
renown and a newspaper editor also attended the meeting. The CEO never attempted to
take over the meeting and the young lady was given the power to drive the decisionmaking process in the meeting. This appeared to be a manifestation of that organizational
culture operating at the basic assumption level, where it seemed the group took it for
granted that this young lady had the capability to lead this meeting, probably because of
her prior success at what she was doing (Schein, 2004). This type of trusting, confidence
in the ability of staff to lead was observed in every department of this library.
The CEO’s definition of employee success is that an employee is successful who
has accomplished assigned tasks and more, in a creditable manner; that is, well, in the
CEO’s perception. Chiniara and Bentein (2016), states that the attention a servant leader
bestows on employees that enhances their development, will help those employees be
more productive. They will therefore perform well, because their basic psychological
needs are met. Thus, it does seem that the observed data culled from this library
contributes to an answer to RQ2. Few documentation data gathered for this study were
pertinent for providing a response to RQ2. The documents gathered primarily included
secondary archival data such as copies of the mission and vision statements of each
library, information from the library’s websites, exhibited fliers, and a few other printed
matter that pertained specifically to staff in two of them.

204
In NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015), data identified in the documents folder, which
pertained to this second research question, were coded to a node named RQ2, at which
was gathered all data from various data sets that seemed to provide answers to the
question. To determine aspects of the documents data set that responded to the question
involved reviewing the data from the set that was coded to this RQ2 node. Although there
was data in this node coded from the documents source folder that related to evidence of
organizational culture found in the library of CEO3, there was none that related to his
staff. For CEO1, there were two relevant coded items, while for CEO2, there was only
one coded item. Discussion on how the items that were found provided answers for this
second research question follows, and is therefore provided for only CEO1 and CEO2.
In the RQ2 node, there were two coded items from the documents folder which
pertained to the staff of CEO1, that could be used to examine a response to the research
question. One that was very important because of the significance of its implication for
employee success, was an employee orientation manual. Through this manual, new
employees were introduced to the library system including introduction to each
department such as public relations, IT, administration, project coordination, finance, and
materials management. This was an important document which had implications for the
success of employees since it would help them to be more comfortable in the job; adapt
faster; be more effective, and productive; experience higher retention; and enhance
communication between the supervisor and the new employees. Thus, it seemed this
CEO deliberately created an organizational culture that made it possible for his
employees to succeed.

205
The provision of the manual spoke to the type of organizational culture this CEO
created. At the artifact level, it represented an aspect of the organization’s published list
of values. However, it also had implications for the espoused beliefs and values of the
CEO as he provided documentation on the rules, norms, and the day-to-day principles by
which employees were expected to operate (Schein, 2004). This could easily lead to the
basic assumption on the part of staff as to “how to perceive, think about, and feel about
things” (Schein, p. 31). Again, according to Chiniara and Bentein (2016), the attention a
servant leader bestows on employees that enhances their development, will help those
employees be more productive. They will therefore perform well, because their basic
psychological needs are met. Thus, the provision of this manual by CEO1 demonstrates
his answer to RQ2.
In the RQ2 node, there was one coded item from the documents folder which
pertained to the staff of CEO2, which could be used to examine a response to the research
question. This item was evidence of training opportunities this CEO provided for her
staff. It comprised two sets of training plans named “Turn Up” and “Grow Me”. The
“Turn Up” training sheet offered a schedule of training for staff available in various
branches. It covered topics such as safety and security, money handling, and how to
handle problem patrons. “Grow Me!” included training on dressing to impress, office
etiquette, goal setting, team work, and resume and interviewing skills.
The provision of these training opportunities also speaks to the type of
organizational culture this CEO created. At the artifact level, they represent an aspect of
the organization’s published list of values. However, they also had implication for the
espoused beliefs and values of the CEO as she provided documentation on the rules,

206
norms, and the day-to-day principles by which employees should operate (Schein, 2004).
This could easily lead to the basic assumption as to “how to perceive, think about, and
feel about things” (Schein, p. 31). Again, according to Chiniara and Bentein (2016), the
attention a servant leader bestows on employees that enhances their development, will
help those employees be more productive. They will therefore perform well, because
their basic psychological needs are met. Thus, the provision of these training
opportunities by CEO2 demonstrates her answer to RQ2.
For RQ3, how does employee success enable organizational performance, the
CEOs’ definition of employee success as offered in the interviews was examined. Each
CEO described employee success in a different way, although each pertained to
employee performance. For example, for CEO1, employee success happens when staff is
performing collaboratively, and being participatory. On the other hand, CEO2 describes
this concept as good performance evidenced by awards received by the employee, such as
employee of the month. Also, CEO3 describes employee success as pertaining to an
employee who has accomplished assigned tasks and more, in a creditable manner; that is,
well.
Responses for each CEO were compared with available documentation from the
organization as coded in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). Among the data from CEO3’s library,
were found articles and program guides describing activities of employees. These
confirmed their success as described by their CEO, as they completed of tasks well, and
went beyond to indicate their motivation, community mindedness, and teamwork. These
were taken as indicators of the performance of the organization.

207
Among the data from CEO2’s library, were found documentation of employee
successful presentation of programs and services, and therefore organizational
performance, in newspaper articles and on the library’s website. Various plaques on the
walls of that library indicating awards for named employees also confirmed the CEO’s
definition, of success based on performance leading to awards.
There were also articles in the newspaper reiterating the successful performance
of staff in CEO1’s library. These were based on the staff working collaboratively to
produce successful programs and services, thereby demonstrating the performance of
their library.
Throughout the data collection and data analysis phases, techniques were
observed for ensuring credibility, dependability, and reliability. This involved the
employment of credibility and dependability techniques such as member checking to
increase the trustworthiness of the study (Creswell & Miller, 2000). Patton (1999) and
Yin (2011) both suggested that increased reliability of the study can be obtained through
an error-free study that is easily repeatable. This can be obtained through the creation of a
case study protocol. This document provided detailed documentation of procedures for
the case study; it also contained specific information on the instruments used in the case’s
development, thus making it easily repeatable.
Reflexivity in the document was ensured as another means of reliability.
Darawsheh (2014) described reflexivity as very valuable for the improvement of
qualitative research. The concept involves “the continuous process of self-reflection that
researchers engage in to generate awareness about their actions, feelings and perceptions”
(Darawsheh, 2014, p. 561). Reflexivity may also be attained through the incorporation of

208
information from documents created for reasons other than those being investigated by
the researcher (Yin, 2011). Reflexivity was therefore observed in this study to minimize
researcher bias through the researcher’s own conscious, self-reflection. Along with selfreflection, several documents from the University’s library sites, as well as other sources
such as Google Scholar were utilized. These documents were intended for one purpose
but were used here to reflect on the CEOs’ practice of the servant leadership dimensions
and for increasing the accuracy of cross-checked references.
There was constant immersion in the data during its collection to identify when
data saturation had been achieved. This was especially pertinent during the semi
structured interview of each CEO. After nearly 3 hours of discussion and 12 questions,
each CEO began repeating some of the same material in response. This was a sign of
saturation, after which no new information surfaced (Creswell & Miller, 2000).
Results
The findings for this study discussed here all emerged from the analysis of the
four sources of data employed in the research. Ten such findings emerged, because of
thematic analysis of the data in the sources. These findings were the direct result of
coding and analysis designed to find answers to the three research questions that drove
this study. Thus, the first five findings related to RQ1, the next two to RQ2, and the last
three to RQ3.
The first set of findings pertained to the CEOs’ practice of Liden et al.’s (2008)
seven dimensions of servant leadership to create an organizational culture of employee
success, which is the focus of RQ1. As such, once the data was collected and analyzed, it
was evident that while the CEOs all practiced the dimensions to a greater or lesser

209
degree, all focused heavily on dimension number 2, creating value for the community.
This was evident in the analysis of all four data sources, providing triangulation of the
data with respect to this finding. Surprisingly, the second finding emerged revealing that
all three CEOs were concerned with needed organizational change as part of the
development of an organizational culture that would lead to employee success. This was
not one of the servant leadership dimensions and was therefore an unexpected concept
introduced by the CEOs.
The next finding pertained directly to employees. Although the senior level staff
results from the questionnaire, indicated that the dimension of empowering was least
practiced from their perspectives, the CEOs themselves indicated that they perceived
themselves as working to empower their staff, to a lesser or greater degree. A fourth
finding related to conceptualizing skills, as it related to the CEOs’ understanding of their
organizations and what was needed to make those organizations successful. Last of the
five findings related to communication. The CEOs each spoke of how developing
communication enabled the creation of an organizational culture of success through
listening, open communication, and making themselves available. This too was not one
of the servant leadership dimensions, but was a concept introduced by the CEOs.
To provide answers to RQ2, the analysis produced two sets of findings. The first
pertained to the role CEOs played in encouraging staff to work autonomously within the
servant leadership organizational culture. The next finding related to the CEOs’ belief in
utilizing collaboration to engender employee success.
The first of the three findings that related to RQ3, which focused on
organizational performance, was the CEOs’ perception that successful employees were

210
productive. This related to the next finding which was that successful employees tended
to perform tasks beyond their job descriptions that contributed to an increase in the
overall organizational performance. This related very well to the last of the findings
which is that engaged employees are successful and contribute to the performance of the
organization.
Ten themes emerged from these findings. They are developing community,
organizational change, empowering staff, conceptual skills, developing communication,
working with minimal supervision, collaborative work, productivity, going beyond, and
engaged employees. Their significance rested in their relationship to the two phenomena
of interest to the study, as well as to the matter of providing answers to the three research
questions. It was also an expectation that the themes would help with a) an understanding
of the servant leadership perceptions of the CEOs being studied, and b) with a
recognition of their actual practice of the servant leadership dimensions as developed by
Liden et al. (2008), in creating an organizational culture which engendered employee
success and organizational performance.
Earlier research on servant leadership focused largely on CEOs who were servant
leaders in industries such as the restaurants industry (Peterson et al., 2012). In these
earlier studies, researchers reviewed employee success as an outcome of CEOs’ servant
leadership practices (Parris & Peachey, 2013; van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015).
Furthermore, researchers have also addressed research results showing CEO servant
leadership as a predictor of firm performance (Latham, 2013; Peterson et al., 2012). What
was not explored was how CEOs perceive culture as a mediating link between their

211
servant leadership practices and the success of employees and the performance of the
organization. This was the topic of interest to this study.
In a time when leadership was viewed as critical to an organization’s success or
failure, this was a call to examine the other side of the leadership coin. Schein (2004)
described this as examining how leaders create culture. In the context of this research,
this was an examination of how organizational culture serves as a mediating mechanism
linking the CEOs’ servant leadership practices to the success of both employees and
organization. This represents a contribution to addressing the identified gap that was
found in the literature.
The case study design allowed for an exploration of the servant leadership
practices of each CEO in their day-to-day world (Fraenkel, Wallen, & Hyun, 2012) as a
way of not only hearing them enunciate their perceptions but also seeing evidence in their
work environment. Consequently, each CEO was not only interviewed personally, their
work environment was also examined during the non-participant observation sessions.
Their senior level staff answered a questionnaire about the CEOs’ practice of the servant
leadership dimensions of Liden et al. (2008), and documents from their organizations
were scrutinized for evidence of the CEOs’ practice of those dimensions. Thus, the
thematic findings presented here all emerge from the analysis of the data from these
sources, and are illustrative of the practice and perceptions of the CEOs. Table 6 presents
a list of the dimensions along with descriptions of each. More importantly, the table
provides indications of which emerging theme (by number) was related to the various
dimensions.

212
Table 6
The Dimensions, Meaning, and Corresponding Theme Number
Dimension

Descriptions

Corresponding Themes

Emotional Healing

Being sensitive to the needs or
concerns of others

Themes 3 -empowering staff
Theme

Creating Value for
community

Conscious, genuine concern for
helping the community

Themes 1 – developing community
Theme 2 – organizational change
Theme 5 – developing communication
Theme 7 – collaborative work
and Theme 8 – productivity
Theme 9 – going beyond

Conceptual Skills

Possession of an understanding of the
organization and tasks to be
accomplished to be able to assist and
support others

Themes 5- developing communication
and Theme 6 – working with minimal
supervision

Empowering

Encouraging and facilitating others,
especially immediate followers, in
identifying and solving problems, as
well as determining when and how to
complete tasks

Themes 3 – empowering staff
Theme 6 – working with minimal
supervision
and Theme 7 – collaborative work

Helping Others Grow
and Succeed

Demonstrating genuine concern for
other’s career growth and
development by providing support and
mentoring

Themes 2 – organizational change
Theme 3 – empowering
Theme 5 – developing communication
Theme 6 – working with minimal
supervision
And Theme 7 – collaborative work

Putting Followers First

Using actions and words to make it
clear to others that satisfying their
work needs is a priority

Themes 3 – empowering staff
and Theme 8 - productivity

Behaving Ethically

Interacting openly, fairly, and
honestly with others

Themes 3 – empowering staff
and Theme 10 – engaged employees

Specifically, through this qualitative case study, the dimensions were used to find
answers to the three research questions. These questions were:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?

213
Responses to these questions helped to bring an understanding of the perceptions
of the CEOs, as it relates to their servant leadership practices and the resulting
organizational culture in their individual libraries. This was evident through the themes
emerging from the analysis as the data was coded in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015). Each
thematic discussion incorporated a presentation of the findings along with excerpts from
the data to support the results. These included direct quotes from the interviews, and
excerpts selected from various nodes in NVivo11.
These findings were generated in relation to the RQs as parent nodes, which were
created in NVivo11 (QSR, 2015) during the first coding cycle. They were generated as
well from child nodes in the RQs with names based on the pre-prepared list of codes and
themes, created by NVivo11 in the second coding, or Yin’s (2011) disassembling phase
of the analysis cycle. In this way, NVivo11 allowed related data to be gathered or coded
in one place, allowing for the recognition of additional themes and patterns. The themes
below were selected based on frequency of occurrence, so that the most significant theme
with the highest number of occurrences in NVivo11 is presented first. A summative table
of these themes is provided at the beginning of each thematic discussion. The end of this
section of the study includes a conclusion indicating ways in which these findings
addressed the research questions. The discussion of the recurring themes follows, in
relation to each of the three RQs.
RQ1: Servant leadership practices enabling organizational culture of
employee success. Data from the three sources loaded to NVivo11, that is, the
interviews, non-participant observations, and the organizational documentation, revealed
five themes related to the first research question. These themes demonstrated how the

214
CEOs linked organizational culture to employee success. The five themes included
developing community, organizational change, empowering staff, conceptualizing, and
strategizing, and developing communication. How the CEOs’ perceptions as revealed in
each theme relates to the concepts of servant leadership and organizational culture are
discussed below. A summary of the themes is presented in Table 7 indicating their
frequency of occurrence in NVivo11, revealed using the query tool in the software.
Table 7
RQ1: Servant Leadership Practices enabling Organizational Culture of Employee
Success, Summary of Themes 1- 5 Captured from NVivo 11
Theme Number

Themes

Frequency of occurrence

1

Developing Community

69

2

Organizational Change

48

3

Empowering

32

4

Conceptualizing and Strategizing

30

5

Developing Communication

13

RQ1: Theme 1: Developing community. In the analysis of the data it was noted
after re-reading and coding, that this concept occurred 69 times, between the interviews,
non-participant observations, and documentation, after utilizing Yin’s (2011) first three
phases of analysis and loading the data to NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). This concept of
developing community coincided with Liden et al.’s (2008) second dimension, creating
value for the community, which is described as “a conscious, genuine concern for helping
the community” (p. 162).
The data strongly demonstrated each CEOs practice of this Liden et al. (2008)
second servant leadership dimension. After cross referencing and verifying that the same
concept was being addressed in all these sources loaded in NVivo 11, it was discovered
to be also highly rated in the servant leadership questionnaire by the senior level staff.

215
Thus, CEO1 received a rating of 26.75, CEO2 got one of 23.75, and CEO3 got one of
27.50. According to Liden et al. (2008), a high range is a score between 23 and 28, and
means the CEO strongly exhibits this servant leadership behavior. In this regard,
community referred to the geographic areas served by each CEO participant in his or her
library. The four data sources provided triangulation and showed that each CEO was
practicing this dimension thus contributing to the answer for the first RQ.
Overall, the analysis revealed the CEOs were more concerned about this concept
than any other. The frequency of the occurrence of the concept in the sources loaded to
NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015), as well as the responses of the senior level staff to the servant
leadership questionnaire, attests to this. The CEOs shared how they led their staff to feel
encouraged to work with each other to develop programs that involved and supported the
local community they served. The CEOs cited three areas of interest along with this
theme: internal and external community engagement, promoting a sense of community,
and involved staff.
This Internal and external community engagement idea allowed for the
recognition of the ways in which the CEOs focused the physical structure of each library
in relation to the second dimension of servant leadership - creating value for the
community (Liden et al., 2008). In many ways, this characteristic contributed to the
development of the organizational culture needed to engender employee success. Each
CEO boasted of specialized room(s) and services in their library that developed from
partnerships with other community entities, and which enabled employees to perform
successfully. For example, in the city library headed by CEO3, low and open customer
service desks were incorporated to break down barriers between customers and staff.

216
They were purchased using funds obtained through community partnerships. Thus, an
inviting internal environment was created and external community entities were engaged
to help in its creation.
CEO1 summarized the idea of developing community within and outside of the
library by saying “We want the community to love us so they will support us, but it’s also
about the work we do. And, of course, we want staff to love working here. They do
actually make a difference to the community”. This CEO ensured the idea of developing
the community was entrenched in his library by incorporating the concept into the
strategic plan of the library, as seen in gathered documentation. A statement in the plan
that illustrates this said, “a clear mission [of this library] is to put education and the
pursuit of knowledge in the forefront and continue to provide the citizens with the
support, resources, and tools they depend on for learning and discovery” (LIB1,
Documentation). This CEO describes employee success in terms of their collaboration
and participation in the organization’s activities. Based on this perspective, the
employees of this library are successful, as they performed within the organizational
culture created by their CEO for valuing the community they served. Thus, CEO1 is also
saying employee success is based on performance.
CEO2 also was emphatic about the need to create value for the community
through internal and external engagement. To confirm this she clearly stated, “We have
really recognized that whatever we do, starts with community need, and so we are very,
very clear about learning from the community what those needs are” (CEO2, Interview).
In fact, to convey to the community how interested this CEO was in adding value
internally and externally, she worked with her staff to mount a huge community wide

217
campaign involving the creation of posters of their own community members which were
hung in the libraries of the system, full blown radio talking pieces on the campaign, press
releases about it, and even 15-second movie spots in 20 of the county’s neighborhood
theatres, promoting this community engagement campaign. That library, under the
direction of CEO2, received the state Library of the Year award for three consecutive
years, mainly because of the engaging work the CEO and her staff conducted in and for
the community. For CEO2, employee success was dependent on whether their
performance led to awards or not. Because her library won several awards under her
leadership, she perceived her staff was successful.
CEO3 stated his idea of how important the interaction with community was to the
library. He said, “one of the ultimate goals that I wanted, and I’ve used this phrase before,
is that this library should be a player at the community table” (CEO3, Interview). He also
said, “I think that what we have tried to do all the past 16 years was to make this more of
a community anchor of education and culture” (Interview). As a result, CEO3
deliberately created many community partnerships that benefited his library as well as the
community entity. For example, he became a member of the local Chamber of Commerce
and was eventually voted as its president for three consecutive years, many of its
breakfast meetings were held in the library, exposing the chamber members to the various
resources available to them at the library. This same CEO described employee success
based on their performance. Therefore, as employees provided services and developed
programs and projects that complimented the organizational culture created by the CEO’s
servant leadership practices, and which the community supported well, this CEO
perceived the employees to be successful.

218
The lived experiences of the CEOs, were corroborated in each data source,
demonstrating their focus on this second servant leadership concept, creating value for
the community, above all other concepts. For example, among the documents gathered
from each library was their vision statement. Each statement carried the same message of
commitment to the community. CEO1’s statement said, “The library is a welcoming,
community gathering place for families, cultural activities, and civic life”. In his
interview, CEO1 stated “one of our guiding principles is providing intentional value to
the community”. CEO2 said her vision for the library was that it was a place that would
“empower, encourage, and inspire by being the essential center of the community”. For
CEO3 his vision for the library was that it “aspires to be the definitive educational and
cultural destination for all members of the (NAME) community”. Thus, through
documentation and interviews the theme of community engagement was corroborated.
Through observations various services and activities which illustrated community
engagement could be seen. These included a children’s room attractively decorated with
life size animals as murals to create a friendly place for children of all ages; a learning
center of adults; and public access computers with internet access at no charge in the
library of CEO1. In the library of CEO2 community engagement was observed in the
physical arrangement of the second floor to accommodate chess playing on a large scale,
as well as the incorporation of a mobile kitchen, and the presence of a small business
incubation center. The library of CEO3 also highlighted several areas for community
engagement. These included their Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) and art maker spaces for children; a community sewing room; several rooms
reserved for literacy tutoring on a one-on-one basis each day; as well as its partnership

219
with the local Extension Services unit of the State University to provide space for
assistance to those needing help with growing healthy plants.
In the 28-item servant leadership questionnaire, the second dimension, creating
value for the community which coincides with this first theme of developing community,
was the item that received the highest score for all CEOs. CEO1 had a rating of 26.75.
For CEO2 the rating was 23.75. CEO3 scored the highest, with a rating of 27.05. These
ratings, which were scored out of a possible 28 points, represented the highest ratings
each of these CEOs received from their respective staffs in the servant leadership
questionnaire. Thus, there was triangulation of all four sources of data, as they each
corroborated the practice of this dimension by the CEOs.
This first theme, developing community, also included promoting a sense of
community, in the library. Participants emphasized the idea that having a sense of
community helped promote the organizational culture of employee success. CEO1 shared
his experience during his early days as CEO, when employees tended to segregate
themselves into cliques. CEO1 stated that it was difficult to eradicate the culture of
segregation; however, CEO1 also stated, “we have broken down some of those surface
barriers that used to be there. There used to be a culture of silos, a culture of exclusion,
and a culture of hierarchy, which we’ve really worked hard to try to break that down”.
CEO2 believed that having a common goal would promote a sense of community
among the staff. She said that the goal that bound the staff was all part of that grander
scheme. That grander scheme was about “being not just a gap filler but an encourager and
an engager of the community”, said CEO2.

220
On the other hand, CEO3 said that creating this sense of community resulted from
the careful choice of words. He said, “I am very, very careful with words I use with them.
I like plural words – we, us, together. I try to avoid I and me as much as possible”. In this
way, he expected his inclusive language to help create this sense of community among
his staff.
Having an involved staff is another contributor to the notion of developing the
community. CEO3 believed that to develop a community was to involve the staff. CEO2
discussed an employee who was involved in a project with teen volunteers. The ways in
which the project affected the community, the volunteers, and the employee became an
inspiration. CEO1 on the other hand mentioned staff involvement to be all the
programming done for the public but also the simple matter of being there to listen when
customers needed someone to listen to. He stated, “one of the unwritten kind of things is
those intangibles that we provide, is just being here and listening to people when they
come in. People are so happy to talk with staff”.
Schein’s (2004) three levels of organizational culture were at work in each library
for this first theme, as illustrated through some of the resources. For example, all three
had documentation at the artifact level; what Schein calls their published values. These
included copies of their mission and vision statements, as well as promotional materials
on their websites. At the espoused beliefs and values level, not only were strategies and
goals spelled out in the interviews, the non-participant observations also identified
various events in each library that confirmed the interview data. The philosophy of the
CEOs, presenting itself at the espoused beliefs and values level in the organizations were
also discovered through the study. According to Schein (2004), one characteristic of a

221
culture of an organization operating at this level can be observed through its philosophy.
All three CEOs were proponents of the philosophy that one of the most important roles of
the library was to act as a learning conduit for members of the community.
Schein’s (2004) third level, the underlying assumption level, was also met in each
library. The staff and CEO of all three, expressed sentiments that illustrated that they took
the philosophy of service to the community as an assumption. CEO1 stated this very well,
“if we are not helping the community then what are we here for?”.
Overall, the research findings as it pertained to this first theme relevant to RQ1,
demonstrated a positive relationship between the CEOs’ practice of the second servant
leadership dimension, creating value for the community, and the organizational culture,
which appears to be a serving culture, such as that described by Liden et al. (2014) as
well as Carter and Baghurst (2013). This first theme also revealed that there is a positive
relationship between the promulgation of this servant leadership practice of the CEOs,
and community engagement, promoting a sense of community, and having involved
employees (Carter & Baghurst). Schein’s (2004) three organizational cultural levels were
also identified through the CEOs’ activity pertinent to this first theme.
RQ1: Theme 2: Organizational change. In the analysis of the data it was noted
after re-reading and coding, that this concept occurred 48 times, between the interviews,
non-participant observations, and documentation, after utilizing Yin’s (2011) first three
phases of analysis and loading the data to NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). All three CEOs
expressed the perception that organizational change was an important part of how they
saw organizational culture affecting employee success, although this was not one of the
servant leadership dimensions. Since it was not one of the dimensions, it was not

222
mentioned in the questionnaire directly but indirectly, the dimension one - emotional
healing - is implicated, as each CEO showed sensitivity to the concerns of the staff as
they adjusted to the changes. The dimension five - helping others grow and succeed - was
also implicated, as the CEOs provided support and mentoring during the time of change.
In the 28-item questionnaire, out of a possible score of 28 points, employees rated
CEO1 with a 20.05, CEO2 with 21.00, and CEO3 with 25.50 for dimension one. For
dimension five CEO1 was rated at 16.25, CEO2 at 23.00, and CEO3 at 24.50. According
to Liden et al. (2008), a high range is a score between 23 and 28, and means the CEO
strongly exhibits this servant leadership behavior. There were no indicators of this
concept in the documentation or the observation notes gathered from each library.
The interview data strongly demonstrated each CEOs interest in this theme. After
cross referencing and verifying that the same concept was being addressed in each of the
interviews loaded in NVivo 11, it was discovered that it was not mentioned in any other
source directly. However, because it emerged so strongly from the interviews, the
decision was made to incorporate it as a theme.
The CEOs revealed in the interviews, that taking on the role of CEO allowed
them to share their ideas and plans for the organizations they led with their staffs.
Furthermore, implementing the plans engendered changes in the policies and even
procedures in their organizations. The CEOs all indicated that organizational change was
initially met with resistance or difficulty in coping. However, because they tried to
incorporate servant leadership practices (which they did not know or identify at the time
as such) and in some cases allowed subordinates to be part of the planning process,

223
organizational changes were gradually accepted. CEO1 made a comment which
encapsulated the idea. He said:
At first people don’t want to trust you. They don’t believe you that you’re gonna
change it. And then you start making some changes and some of them people like
and some of them people don’t but at least they are seeing that you are doing a
change and it’s not going to be like it was before.
Three areas of interest surfaced from this theme of organizational change. They
were adapting, setting an example, and promoting participation. In implementing
organizational change, each CEO indicated that they expected employees to transition
from previous policies and practices to new ones with some difficulty. CEO1 opined:
“Changing culture is one of the hardest things I think I’ve got to do. And, we’ve been
tapping away at it for 5 years now”.
This CEO further stated that he was dubbed “the king of second chances or king
of the benefit of the doubt” due to his understanding and accommodation of the
employees’ difficulties in adjusting. This maybe evidence of the organization operating at
the basic underlying assumptions level, where they take it for granted that the CEO will
be accommodating and provide second chances. This is however, evidence of the servant
leadership dimension 1, emotional healing, which relates to a leader who is sensitive to
the concerns of others. It is also evidence of his practice of dimension 5 as well, which is
helping followers grow and succeed. Additionally, it is also confirmation of Schein’s
(2004) theory of how difficult it is to create or change culture. However, CEO1 also
stated that he has had to ask an employee who refused to adapt, to vacate their position.
In such cases, CEO1 believed that the employee did not fit with the organizational culture

224
that he was trying to implement. He stated “sometimes – that was the hardest thing for
me – is recognizing that some people don’t come around. And that’s where you must, in a
positive way, help them see that maybe this isn’t the place for them”. One document
observed in CEO1’s library that could be evidence of the artifact level was the document
incorporating the details of the new strategic plans he was working on for the library.
CEO2 narrated an instance when as leader, she introduced change in the library
that impacted both staff (internal customers) as well as external customers. Tablets and ereaders were introduced in the library. CEO2 had noted before that staff was not as
helpful to customers as they should be. The staff members resisted the idea of change
which the new technology represented by giving the excuse that they did not have these
instruments personally and so they did not know how to help customers with their needs.
CEO2 obtained a grant, and used the funds to purchase tablets and e-readers for staff to
use in the library. She worked with her team to integrate this new technology in the
library, and ensured the staff received training to handle the gadgets. CEO2 stated:
Not only did they [staff] get them [the gadgets] to be able to practice on and learn
from, but they were also able to deploy them at a table to offer them to customers
who were interested in which one should I buy. Well, here you can try them out to
see which one you like.
Thus, CEO2 used training and a team approach to overcome resistance to change. She
utilized the servant leadership dimension of helping others to grow and succeed as well as
emotional healing as she showed sensitivity to the concerns of her staff. She also used
this opportunity to empower her staff so that they could be successful in assisting the
customers.

225
All three organizational culture levels were at work in this organization as a
result. At the artifacts level, the visible organizational structure was represented by the
processes put in place to not only train the staff but also to provide a procedure for
effectively helping the customers. The espoused belief level was at work illustrating the
CEO’s expressed philosophy of making both her staff and the customers knowledgeable
through educating them. By the time this research started, this provision for the
customers had become a well-established procedure, accepted, and taken for granted by
both staff and customers. This information was corroborated through data from the
interview of the CEO, as well as through documentation delineating the CEO’s
philosophy. Impact Center for Evaluation and Research Last, the senior level staff of this
organization did recognize the CEO for her efforts at helping them, giving her moderate
scores for emotional healing, or showing sensitivity to the concerns of others, and helping
others grow and succeed. The score she received from the staff for empowering was
however a low one.
CEO3 also had staff that was resistant to change. He spoke about a staff member
who was head of one of the departments in the library when he got to that library as its
director. This employee, he posits, was a good person but did not have the requisite skills
for the position she was in so he had to decide what to do about her. The decision this
CEO made eventually was characteristic of a true servant leader. He said:
What I decided to do since she was here for so long, I decided to remove her, take
her a notch down from manager, take her out of that position, transfer her as a
librarian to another department at the same pay level and give her some tasks that
I know that she wanted to do a lot.

226
CEO3 stated further that the decision was very hard because the employee was well loved
and was upset with him at first. However, she later came to love her new role and
blossomed in it. Thus, this CEO practiced the servant leadership dimensions of emotional
healing, conceptual skills, empowering, and helping followers grow and succeed.
The fact that the employee eventually accepted and grew in her position also
speaks to the culture of the organization at the basic underlying assumption level. Schein
(2004) states that when a solution to a problem works repeatedly, it gets taken for
granted, a reality, a strongly held belief in a group. This CEO made many such changes
which all worked for the benefit of the employees and the organization. As a result, the
employees expressed great confidence in his leadership. This was clearly reflected in the
results of the questionnaire where senior level staff gave this CEO scores for the Likertlike measurement of strongly agree that surpassed the same score for the other two CEOs.
Figure 3 above illustrates the point.
RQ1: Theme 3: Empowering staff. In the analysis of the data it was noted after
re-reading and coding, that this concept occurred 32 times, between the interviews, nonparticipant observations, and documentation, after utilizing Yin’s (2011) first three
phases of analysis and loading the data to NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). CEOs in this study,
appeared to believe this concept to be important for the success of their employees. In the
questionnaire, the senior level staff of both CEO1 and CEO2 rated this practice by their
CEO at 16 points, while the staff from CEO3’s library rated his practice at 26.25 points,
all scores being out of a possible 28 points.
Thus, while the CEOs spoke of this theme as an important one, the staff of two of
the CEOs thought their CEO practiced it at a lower level, compared to the staff of the

227
third CEO whose staff indicated their perception that he practiced this dimension at a
high level. According to Liden et al. (2008), a high range is a score between 23 and 28,
and means the CEO strongly exhibits this servant leadership behavior. CEO3 said it was
important to him and his staff confirmed through the questionnaire that they perceived
that he did practice that dimension often.
The CEOs emphasized how their servant leadership practices developed
empowered staff as part of their organizational culture. Two areas of interest surfaced
from this theme. They included employee’s professional, as well as their personal needs.
First, the CEOs addressed their employees’ needs, by incorporating the first servant
leadership dimension, emotional healing, into their leadership style. In this way, both
dimensions 1 and 4 worked in tandem for the creation of an organizational culture
engendering employee success. This provided a partial answer to RQ1.
CEO1 demonstrated servant leadership practices that involved empowering
employees through sensitivity to both their personal and their professional needs. He
stated, “As an organization, I think that we can’t create more value for our community if
we are not taking care of the people who are in the organization first”. Documentation
from his library revealed he caused language to be incorporated in the mission statement
for the organization that delineated a plan for the improvement of relations not only with
the public but also with his staff. Additionally, the observation notes indicated that in this
CEO’s organization, staff were not in designated leadership positions because of
educational level. Instead, staff without a first degree was observed as manager for a
department that included librarians with Masters degrees. It must be noted however, that
while this employee was motivated, and others without the master’s degree could be

228
hopeful of promotion to positions that normally required such a degree in a library, this
practice was questioned by other staff in the organization. There was also a level of
discontent noticed among staff. This would probably account for the relatively low score
of 16 out of a possible 28 that this CEO received from his staff in their responses to the
questionnaire, for the dimension of empowering. Thus, this CEO and his staff had
different perspectives as it related to his practice of the dimension of empowering.
This practice of the CEO had implications for the organizational culture in this
organization as it pertained to the practice of this dimension. At the artifacts level, there
were visible artifacts that indicated empowerment for the staff. This included the
promotion of the non-degreed department leader above others with degrees, as well as
documentation indicating the CEO’s desire to empower and grow his staff. However,
according to Schein (2004), what is visible is not necessarily an indicator of the reality of
that organization. To decipher meaning the espoused beliefs and values level must be
explored. In this organization, it is at this level the CEO’s philosophy was understood. In
the interview, he stated:
They had that reference librarian superiority attitude which didn’t jell well with
me at all. But I wasn’t aware of how it was impacting some of the staff and they
took offense when I would talk about things like collaborative work and learning
from each other.
Thus, this CEO created an organizational culture where he sought to empower,
while seeking to break down hierarchies based on educational levels. CEO2 also
indicated an interest in empowering her staff. There are two incidents that she mentioned
in the interview that indicated this. She narrated an incident involving a staff member

229
who needed to take care of her husband who had Parkinson’s disease. CEO2 tried to
understand the employee’s situation, and responded positively, in a way that would
empower the staff member to still be a success while taking care of her personal issues.
She granted the employee’s request to be relocated to another library in the system that
was closer to home. CEO2 stated, “So she could be successful and manage her tasks
knowing that if something came up she had access to take care of her personal life”.
Instead of losing an employee due to personal issues, CEO2 spoke with the employee,
and then found a way to address the need to take care of these personal problems, as well
as sustain the job at the library.
CEO2 also shared an experience with a long-time employee who was deaf and
legally blind in one eye. The employee seemed highly enthusiastic about customer
service and generally performed well; however, due to her disability, there were times
when she failed to notice a waiting customer. This led to customer complaints. To
address her issue, CEO2 stated, “she had been with us 28 years when she proposed to us
that she wanted to get a hearing ear dog and that she wanted it to be a 24-7 piece of her
world”. Because CEO2 felt that it would make her employee more successful
professionally, she granted the employee’s request to allow her service dog to come to
work with her. The dog received training in distinguishing library related sounds, so that
it could recognize when someone was trying to get the employee’s attention whether they
call her by name, or say, “Excuse me?” Or say, “Hey, library lady!” Or, “(Name).” It [the
dog] would nudge her with its nose and thus lets her know. She keeps the dog on a leash,
and the leash is affixed to her belt, so when she is walking around people can get her

230
attention. And, she feels that’s important because she really does love being a customer
service person.
CEO2 not only empowered her staff members by attending to their professional
needs, she also provided emotional healing, as she responded with sensitivity to their
personal needs. This servant leadership practice of this CEO was corroborated in other
sources besides interviews. For example, there was documentation which showed her
interest in empowering the staff through providing personal training for them that
prepared them to even leave her employ so they could get better opportunities elsewhere.
She stated in the interview that she realized how limited opportunities for upward
mobility were in her organization; that is why she ensured staff was well prepared if they
choose to leave her employ for promotional opportunities. Interestingly, she reported a
low staff turnover.
The matter of empowerment appeared to be also important to CEO3. He spoke
extensively of encouraging his employees, as he noted their need for professional
encouragement as well as personal support. To this end, this CEO incorporated several
observable artifacts into the fabric of the organization that contributed to the
empowerment of his staff. For example, to support and empower them on a personal
level, his staff reported during the observation, that he took a personal interest in them
and their families. One staff member stated that she thought he knew the names of the
family members of each staff. Additionally, while a staff member was out on maternity
leave, he was in touch with her and during the observation note taking, he mentioned the
need to speak with her as the staff member indicated the desire to speak with others in
addition to her husband while she was confined. CEO3 also had several plaques

231
dedicated to staff on the walls in the staff area of the library. There was one plaque which
had all staff members listed along with volunteers who play a huge role in the operation
of the organization. In consideration of personal issues on the job, CEO3 also stated:
I don’t want to micromanage, but if I see something getting a little bit out of
control, I will step in and say, “Do we need to talk about something or are there
some issues on your mind that we need to kick around?”
He stated that he would then use this opportunity to speak with the involved employee on
a one-on-one basis and would try as far as possible to help resolve the issue.
CEO3 also had an interest in empowering his staff professionally. He stated, “In
certain situations I will say I will be right out there with you and if you fall we fall
together. So, I don’t want you thinking you are going to fall on your own” (CEO3,
Interview). In fact, he allowed for the creativity of his staff as a way of empowering them
to the extent that they would present ideas for projects, and he would find a way to fund
them. This was very encouraging to staff. In the interview, he spoke of one of the
projects:
The schools have cut back on their art program so the library (his staff) wanted to
step up and a couple of my staff members said, “could we make a space for art for
kids in the library?”. I said sure, what’s your idea? So, they came together and we
got donations.
This space was identified in the observation notes as a very popular area. Only a
certain number of children were allowed in the space at a time (a maker space for
creation of content). Several children were queued up waiting their turn to enter the
space. It was interesting to see how much they took the rule seriously of knowing how to

232
spell their name and knowing their telephone number well enough to sign the required
contract to get in that space. As stated above, this CEO’s staff did recognize his efforts at
empowering them professionally and personally, and gave him a very high score for his
practice of this dimension – 26.25 out of 28 points in the questionnaire. Thus, CEO3 tried
to react sensitively to the personal needs of employees, as well as to their professional
needs.
That all three CEOs practiced this servant leadership characteristic of empowering
their employees through demonstrating sensitivity to their needs, was thus confirmed
through the four sources, providing triangulation of the data. It was apparent through
responses to the questionnaire, through the interviews, through documentation, and
through non-participant observations.
However, the results of the study also showed the CEOs demonstrating
empowerment in other ways. One such way was providing recognition of employees as a
way of empowering them. The study participants indicated that the staff appreciated
being recognized for the work they did. As a form of recognition, data from the nonparticipant observation noted that CEO1 and CEO3 had plaques and medals received by
the library employees displayed throughout the library. Aside from these visible rewards,
the CEOs’ words of praise often had a positive impact on employees also. CEO3 stated:
I think it’s important to also [say] that whenever you’re with a staff member,
make it a point to say something good about them. Just little things like, “Thanks
for what you did”.
CEO2 expressed the same sentiment. She stated that people in her organization told her
that for30 years nobody had ever said thank you for the work they did. So, to this CEO, it

233
was very important to tell her employees that what they did was important, and that she
was grateful for it. From the data, it was evident that the CEOs believed that empowering
staff also involved other actions they may take as CEOs. The findings showed that
recognition, autonomy, creation of a learning environment, and training all contributed to
feelings of empowerment, according to the CEOs. This was another strong indicator of
the CEOs’ practice of the servant leadership practices.
RQ1: Theme 4: Conceptualizing and Strategizing. This theme arose from the analysis as
being important, as it occurred 30 times between the interviews, observations, and
documentation. The theme was equivalent to Liden et al.’s (2008) conceptual skills,
which described this dimension as pertaining to the possession of an understanding of the
organization and the tasks to be accomplished to be able to assist and support others.
Under this theme, the CEOs discussed how planning affected the organizational culture
of employee success. Each discussed the programs they conceptualized and implemented
in their organizations and ways in which these programs related to the staff. One such
program was introduced by CEO3 who planned to purchase a model, free standing
kitchen, so that the library could offer cooking classes. One of his staff members, who he
described as a millennial, was very close to getting her culinary degree and was willing to
be involved in the cooking program. Through this program the CEO hoped to work with
this staff member to create partnerships in the community, such as with restaurants.
Because of the CEO’s understanding of his organization and the community he served,
they already planned a class to bake cookies for Santa. In addition, a partnership was
formed with a member of his board who was a cooking editor for the local paper.

234
Based on his understanding of his organization, CEO1 also approached the matter
of programming in his library as part of conceptualizing and strategizing but from a
different angle. He recognized a need to better coordinate the creation and promotion of
the programs they offered. Consequently, he developed a quarterly planning process that
had everyone on the same page so that they all knew which programs were going to be
done, in which library in the system, and at what time. By doing this he created a better
understanding for all, of what was going on in each other’s branch. This was not only
helpful to the CEO but also to the managers and supervisors in each branch.
In addition to organizational programs, CEO1 said that conceptualizing helped in
analyzing worker needs. In his interview, he recounted how the deep understanding he
had for his organization led him to reclassify one position in the library. He told how he
had a position for an operations manager which was occupied by one staff member for a
long time. When that person retired, instead of trying to hire another operations manager,
he recognized the need for a projects manager and decided to change the position
classification to that title. As a result, he said, “there were some specific things I wanted
to accomplish in the organization, and to do that, I needed help.” The employee in this
new position has been a success, helping the CEO and other library leaders bring a
chaotic projects program into a more orderly affair.
That this CEO practiced this dimension was also corroborated by three other data
sources. Observation and field notes was one such source. For example, there was a note
coded to the conceptual skills node in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015), which stated, that the
appointment and placement of staff indicated a knowledge of the tasks to be
accomplished and the most suitable persons for them. Documentation was a second

235
source of data coded to the conceptual skills node for this CEO. This also illustrated the
CEO’s awareness of the importance of practicing this concept. Additionally, in the third
source, the 28-item questionnaire, the conceptual skills was one of seven that was utilized
for rating the CEOs’ practice of these servant leadership characteristics. Thus, all four
sources of information captured the lived experiences of CEO1 as it pertained to this
theme.
CEO2 also contributed to the emergence of the theme of conceptual skills as a
means of practicing servant leadership dimensions that enable a culture of success for
employees. In this regard, she shared that her knowledge and understanding of the
organization helped to achieve a common goal. She stated that, with her team, they culled
concepts from surveys, focus group, and town hall meetings conducted before she took
office to determine community needs. She stated this conceptualizing helped them
develop programs that would engage customers, such as their life-size chess and checkers
board and pieces, which was noted by the researcher in the non-participant observation of
the library. The result was the development of one of the busiest areas of the library,
where the program offers chess playing tips from a maser chess player. It has become a
place for intergenerational games. Staff also successfully decorated the large game pieces
and used them for another game, Star Wars Reads, with Darth Vader and other characters
to attract readers.
Thus, CEO2 also practiced this servant leadership domain, conceptual skills,
which helped her staff successfully provide programs for the public. This data was noted
in the observation notes, in fliers for promotion of the program, and in her interview. In
the 28-item servant leadership questionnaire, her staff gave her a moderately high rating

236
of 22.75 out of a possible rating of 28 points. Thus, there was corroboration and
triangulation of data to demonstrate how the fourth theme of conceptualizing and
strategizing emerged from the four sources of data for all three CEOs. However, in the
28-item questionnaire, while the senior level staff of CEO1 rated his practice of the
dimension at 22.50, the staff of CEO2 rated her practice at 22.75. On the other hand, the
staff of CEO3 rated his practice at 23.75 points, all scores being out of a possible 28
points.
RQ1:Theme 5: Developing communication. This theme arose from the analysis
and occurred 13 times between the interviews, observations, and documentation.
Although this did not register as large a number as the preceding four themes, the
researcher thought it was significant enough to be included. The participants each spoke
of how developing communication enabled the creation of an organizational culture of
success. Three areas were identified under developing communication. They included
listening, open communication, and availability. All three participants shared how
listening helped improve communication within the library. The participants intimated
that listening was integral to the emotional healing dimension of servant leadership
practices.
In his interview CEO1 stated that in his leadership role, he advised supervisors and
managers to be quick to listen to their subordinates as a way of engendering effective
communication with them. This CEO believed that the mere act of being heard had an
impact on the employee. Furthermore, CEO1 believed that conflicts typically arose from
miscommunication due to a failure to listen. He made the point that if people felt heard,

237
then it made them feel they had a level of importance or just respect. “The type of respect
that’s enough to stop what you are doing and listen to me” he stated.
His interest in communication, he stated, was based on the experiences he had before
becoming the CEO of the organization, where he saw and felt slapped if an attempt was
made to have open communication with the then CEO. Now, as the new CEO he felt it
was important to impress on his staff his desire to have open communication with them.
He said that he wanted his staff to feel that “we’re gonna communicate openly and it’s ok
if I say these things and I’m not gonna have my hand slapped if I try something new or
different” (CEO1, Interview). He pointed out the fact that to communicate openly where
people felt free to have discussions without feeling judged or that their opinion didn’t
matter or for them to feel comfortable, throwing themselves out there and know that they
were not going be judged, still required constant tending to.
In the documentation data CEO1 referred to the importance of communication,
and listening, as a means of staff success by incorporating the concept into the new
strategic plan developed for the organization. The plan stated that efforts would be made
to inspire a culture of quality, specifically directed at strengthening team members and
involved learning to listen to meet their needs. The plan also spoke of the need to
communicate openly.
A search for the words communicate or communication or even listen and
derivatives had no hits for this CEO in the observation field notes. The 28-item
questionnaire also had no ratings for the terms since this instrument was created
specifically to measure the CEOs’ practice of the seven servant leadership dimensions

238
and these terms were not dimensions. Thus, this theme emerged as a strong point for
CEO1 based on data gathered from interview and documentation notes.
CEO2 addressed this matter in the interview briefly, opining that everyone had a
voice and that all those voices were important and that they (her staff) had to be made to
understand that their voices were important. Interestingly, this CEO never used the words
communicate in her interview, although statements such as the foregoing, were coded as
being related to communication. When a textual search on the word was done in the
interview file for this CEO using the parameter of the exact match there were no hits.
However, when the search was done in the nodes in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015), listening as
a factor of communication was identified in the interview. There were no hits for either
communication or listen[ing] in the documentation and observation folders for this CEO.
Because communication was not one of the dimensions, there were no ratings for this
CEO in the 28-item questionnaire. Therefore, while this theme emerged strongly for the
other two CEOs, it was a weak one for this CEO2.
Communication for CEO3 involved trying to remain aware of occurrences within
the staff and keeping the staff informed. To this end, he stated in the interview that he
was always e-mailing the staff, constantly pushing information out. In this way he
opined, “they know I am aware, and I want to know what they are saying”. When he
hears things second hand, which he attributes mainly to the whole idea of boss, he
became conscious of the need to be more aware. He would address the matter by bringing
some of those things as a generic item to a staff meeting, as something the staff needed to
take care of.

239
Thus, communicating openly also contributed to CEO3s’ concept of developing
communication as a servant leader. He stated, “I don’t want my staff to read what we are
doing here, in the newspapers” . He further intimated that not only did his staff need to
hear what was going on “from the horse’s mouth”, they also needed to understand why.
CEO3’s contention was that staff would not always agree with decisions but they needed
to understand why the decision was made. This, he posits was good communication and it
needed to be fostered. His intent was to have high quality communication that expressed
itself in staff who would walk into his office simply to bounce something off him.
In the observation data for CEO3’s library, note was taken of staff speaking to
with each other in what seemed to be a pleasant manner. The CEO indicated in the
interview that he operates on an open-door policy. Note was taken during the observation
visit. One note in the observation folder relating to this theme said “the open-door policy
is an indication of the CEO’s willingness to communicate openly. The fact that the door
was open to all, showed a willingness to be fair to all. Also, his encouragement of all to
be creative and innovative showed fairness. The documentation folder in NVivo had no
data pertaining to this CEO’s communication, nor would the questionnaire because its
focus was specific to the senior level staff and their perceptions of the CEO’s practice of
the seven dimensions. Thus, between the interview and observation data, it was found
that this CEO incorporated positive aspects of communication in his leadership of the
library, in his attempt to create an organizational culture conducive to employee success.
All the CEOs believed that honesty and voicing ideas and opinions were helpful
in striving for an organizational culture of employee success. Thus, CEO3 could state:

240
I never want a staff member to be embarrassed about anything, so if they are in a
situation, and I am not there, they can easily explain why we do what we do or
why we shouldn’t do something.
CEO1 shared the same opinion stating, “I am a big believer in open and honest
communication” (CEO1 interview). CEO2 did not use the term communicating openly,
but she did speak of the need for honesty in relationships in the library. She said, “If we
are not open and we are not honest we will have to pay the piper for that”.
All three CEOs supported the idea of communicating openly, and saw this as one
factor in their servant leadership practices that should enable the development of an
organizational culture of employee success. Although not speaking directly to the topic of
servant leadership, Graham (1991) recognized communication as a leadership
characteristic of effective leaders. Thus, while communicating openly is not one of the
servant leadership dimensions identified by Liden et al. (2008) and utilized in this study,
the CEOs raised it in the research as an important factor in their leadership of their
organizations. It is one of the practices the CEOs perceived that they were utilizing to
enable an organizational culture of employee success.
CEOs also acknowledged “engendering a sense of availability” as contributing to
the development of open communication. Each CEO reiterated that being visible and
available to the staff encouraged the staff to share with them. They also all believed in the
open-door policy, except in the case of a confidential conversation in their offices. CEO2
stated that during the early days as a CEO, she took on roles at the reference desk to seem
more approachable/available to the staff. Similarly, CEO3 indicated, “I tell my staff to
interrupt me, tell me. You may be assuming I understand something, and I don’t know”.

241
CEO1 has the same attitude about making himself available to his staff. He stated, “I
have such an open-door policy I’m always willing to stop what I’m doing to help”
(Interview).
In summary, all CEOs expressed a belief in creating organizations that
incorporated a culture engendering success for employees. These expressions were found
in the interview data from which five related themes emerged as data was coded. Such
data was not always found in the other two data sources loaded to NVivo11 (2015). Nor
was there direct support for themes that were not specifically related to Liden et al.’s
(2008) servant leadership dimensions in the questionnaire, such as organizational change,
and developing communication. What was found however, generally, was rich data
describing the lived experiences and the perceptions of CEOs who believed in practicing
servant leadership dimensions to create an organizational culture that supported the
success of their employees.
RQ2: Organizational culture enabling employee success. The themes in this
section emerged from the second research question regarding organizational culture and
employee success. Per Armenakis et al. (2011), this organizational culture should be
described in relation to Schein’s (2004) cultural elements framework. As part of the
theoretical framework of this study, Schein’s model did provide guidance in linking this
second research question to answers from the data. The question asked, “How does
organizational culture enable employee success?”
According to Schein (2004), when the leader’s assumptions become the
assumptions of followers (employees) the organization is operating at the assumptions
level, where followers have assumed the values of the leader, thus enabling employee

242
success as described by the leader, or CEO as in this study. Interestingly, in this study the
different CEOs described one part of employee success as having the ability to work with
minimal supervision, as well as being able to complete work collaboratively. The study
identified these as two themes because of the frequency of occurrence in the coded data.
Table 8 summarizes information on the themes that pertain to RQ2.
Table 8
RQ2: Organizational Culture Enabling Employee Success, Summary of Themes 6 - 7
Theme Number

Themes

Frequency of occurrence

6

Working with minimal supervision

8

7

Collaborative work

7

RQ2: Theme 6: Working with minimal supervision. All CEOs agreed that it is
the role of leadership to create a work environment which encourages autonomous
employees who could work well with minimal supervision. What follows is a discussion
of this theme as found in data related to each of the four data sources, starting with data
from the interviews.
In the interview material loaded to NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) CEO3 posited that as
the director of his library, a principal goal for him as soon as a new hire was on board
was to do whatever possible to help that new hire, be so prepared that they could leave
the current library and get something better elsewhere. In other words, CEO3 believed in
helping employees become so knowledgeable they will have no difficulty working
without supervision, and will grow so much they will want to find opportunities for
promotion in the organization or elsewhere. Through the practice of at least three of the
servant leadership dimensions—conceptual skills, empowering, and helping others grow

243
and succeed—this CEO was in fact creating the organizational culture that helped his
employees to be a success.
CEO3 also believed that the organizational culture that he helped to build could
develop an employee who had the potential to succeed him; that is, work well without
supervision and even perform at his level. CEO3 opined, “One of them, I see now, has
the potential of succeeding me here as Library Director if she sticks around here long
enough”.
CEO1 had a similar view on empowering employees to work independently. He
posited that empowering others was a way of taking a burden off a few people and
allowing others to help carry that load. In other words, he stated “You don’t have to
worry about that thing anymore because they’ve come along now; they got it”. He gave
an example of a male employee who worked very well independently with very little
supervision and who provided leadership to other employees, even though his position
title does not make him an appointed leader. CEO1 believed that managers and
supervisors and all other employees should realize their potential to perform leadership
roles. Of the young male employee, CEO1 stated:
He leads because now other people in the organization look to him on how to
promote something, or how to design something, or how to phrase something. So,
he is providing leadership in the organization through his work that he doesn’t
probably realize as a leadership role.
CEO1 named several of his employees who worked very well with minimal supervision
and who exercised leadership, many without titles designating them as such. In fact, one

244
of his senior staff members didn’t even have a Bachelor’s degree, in an organization
whose hall mark is leadership primarily by librarians with Masters Degrees.
CEO2 also provided insights on how to help employees succeed through
empowering them to work without supervision. To that end, this participant has enabled
employees to receive training from various entities. She described the opportunity thus,
“we want to be sure that staff are confident and have all the training they need to be
successful, whatever they chose to do”. To give them opportunities she therefore made it
possible for staff to receive training involving certification through the county system.
However, she has also worked internally to develop quality training for her staff which
she believed would be helpful for their growth. For example, she encouraged paraprofessionals (those without library degrees) by sending them to the county’s leadership
academy because she, like the other two CEOs, believed that leadership comes from
every level in the organization and she wanted to be sure that if somebody was in fact
showing an interest or demonstrating that they at least had some passion she would help
them move forward on that. Thus, based on the data from the interviews, all three CEOs
determined that being able to work with minimal supervision was a sign of success
among employees and each CEO took the time to create the organizational culture that
encouraged the employees’ success.
Few references were found to this theme in the other two sources loaded into the
NVivo11 software (QSR, 2015). During observation in the library of CEO1, three
instances of employees who seemed to be operating with minimal supervision were
identified. The first was the employee who was conducting story time for the children.
This employee was very engaging and had the attention of all 12 children in the program

245
as well as that of their parents or grandparents in some instances. The observer was told
that this employee was not a supervisor but was responsible for the preparation and
presentation of her program. The second observation related to CEO1 who took every
opportunity to encourage a new hire to assume a leadership role even though his position
was not a leadership one. The third instance related to the secretary/accountant of the
library. This lady was introduced to the observer as always working autonomously. The
CEO pointed out that she was doing a job he was not as equipped to do so he said he gave
her whatever she needed then got out of her way.
In the library of CEO2, there were also three instances indicative of how
employees work with minimal supervision. The first, as noted in the field notes from
observations stated, “staff have permission to be creative in programming, so many staff
members create very interesting programs that are award winning”, Observation and field
notes). This implied a level of autonomy handed to staff by the CEO that paid huge
dividends. For three consecutive years this was an award-winning library because of the
work of staff. The second was a young woman who attended a board meeting the
researcher attended as a non-participant observer. This young woman confidently gave a
report of her activities on a highly successful project. She projected an aura of strength
and assertiveness that suggested she was accustomed to working with minimal
supervision. The last observation that spoke to this concept in the library of CEO2 related
to an encounter with a part time young woman responsible for the creation of the
library’s internal training program. Not only did she also have this aura of selfpossession, the CEO commended her to the observer for the marvelous job she was
accomplishing on behalf of administration in that library.

246
CEO3’s library had many examples of staff that seemed to work autonomously.
Two are discussed here. The first was the circulation department supervisor. This young
woman, whose first language was not English, not only managed this department, she
was also responsible for coordinating volunteers in the building. This was quite a feat,
considering that library boasts a group of over 300 volunteers. This young woman was
working with minimal supervision. The second person was observed in a meeting with
the CEO and a few persons from the community. It was later learned that the person
conducting the meeting was one of the youngest on staff and had not been with the
library for a long time. Furthermore, she was not in a supervisory position at that time.
Yet, she conducted the meeting ably and led the group to make decisions and plans for a
special program she had responsibility for executing. She exuded an air of confidence and
as she spoke, the impression was given that she was accustomed to working
autonomously with the blessing of the CEO. This confirmed the CEO’s thoughts on the
matter. He stated, “this is part of my mantra – find the right people, match them up with
the right task and then just get out of their way and let them do their job”.
Thus, all three CEOs not only espoused the idea of empowering staff to work with
minimal supervision but as observed, they encouraged it. This is reflective of several of
Liden et al.’s (2008) servant leadership dimensions. This included empowering, through
which they facilitated and encouraged followers to problem solve and to determine when
and how to complete their assigned tasks. It also included helping followers grow and
succeed, where they demonstrated genuine concern for the growth and development of
their employees. They also demonstrated putting followers first by helping followers to

247
understand that the satisfaction of their work needs was a high priority (Liden et al.) for
the CEO.
Documentation sources supporting this concept of minimal supervision were
found in the data for CEO1 and CEO2 but not for CEO3. For CEO1 this comprised the
orientation manual developed by the CEO and his team for enabling new hires to be able
to understand the library system, including each department such as public relations, IT,
administration, project coordination, finance, and materials management. This was
important for the success of employees since it would help them to be more comfortable
in the job because of their knowledge of it; helping them to adapt faster; be more
effective, and productive, and therefore more autonomous.
For CEO2, there were two sets of training materials that were designed to help
employees develop autonomously as result of the knowledge and skills gained from the
training. They were named “Turn Up” and “Grow Me”. The “Turn Up” training sheet
offered a schedule of training for staff available in various branches. It covered topics
such as safety and security, money handling, and how to handle problem patrons. “Grow
Me” included training on dressing to impress, office etiquette, goal setting, team work,
and resume and interviewing skills. These two sets of materials had implications for
enabling employees to have sufficient knowledge and skills as to be able to function
autonomously.
Because the 28-item servant leadership questionnaire was designed to specifically
measure the CEOs’ servant leadership practices, it would not provide data on this theme.
RQ2: Theme 7: Collaborative work. The participants also believed that an
organizational culture promoting collaborative work was significant to employee success.

248
To this end CEO1 summarized his perception of employee success through collaborative
work. He opined that his staff was successful because they were collaborative and
participatory. Thus, he believed that they accomplished more together. This was not to
diminish individual accomplishments but was his attempt at recognizing the important
role collaboration played in the success of the individual and the organization. For
example, through a collaboration between employees and a community entity the library
could create a hugely attractive mural with life sized wild animals on the walls of the
children section in the main library, to help children understand these animals and their
habitats. The section was thus named “The Wild Things”. Only by being collaborative
would they have found the funding and the expertise to successfully acquire and mount
this mural.
CEO2 believed that the collaborative work should involve community and
customer engagement, and senior staff mentoring new hires. To this end CEO2 discussed
the matter of collaborating with community entities to accomplish goals for the
organization. This meant employees were encouraged to seek out community entities that
would be willing to work with the library for their mutual benefit. CEO2 recognized that
many customer needs were best fulfilled this way. Furthermore, in an organization
always short on funds, collaborating with community entities was the best way to be able
to fulfill its role as the essential center of the community. As a result, this CEO could
work with staff to present major programs that involved a large segment of the business
community and which won that library the Library of the Year award. An individual
employee on her team also won the Lifetime Achievement award because of the work he

249
had done over 37 years mentoring other employees, including new hires. CEO2 declared
“all those folks, he’s mentored along the line is a great, great measure of success”.
CEO3 also associated collaborative work with employee empowerment. He
opined that by empowering staff to grow as individuals, as professionals, they will not
just be helping themselves, they will also be helping the library, and they will be helping
each other. This he saw as also helping the whole profession of librarianship wherever
these employees go. CEO3 also stated that there were many divisions in his library, but
he promoted an organizational culture that involved collaborative work. CEO3 also
expressed concern at finding employees who thought they worked with one department in
the library. This he described as “Wrong, wrong, wrong. You work for (name) library.
You just happen to be working in that department”. There was a lot of divisions in this
library. He felt that one of the most important things was to bring everybody together.
The three CEOs therefore had a common idea of what it takes to engender
employee success. By practicing various servant leadership dimensions such as
empowering, and helping others to grow and succeed, they have been able to create the
organizational culture necessary to accomplish that end. They did this either through
helping their employees work with minimal supervision or through collaboration.
Evidence of employees’ collaborative work resulting in success for them as well
as for the organizations they served was found in the documentation gathered from each
library. Each demonstrated collaboration with publishing organizations, mainly local
entities such as newspapers. The newspapers were instrumental in not only calling
attention to the work of the employees in the library, they also provided a conduit for the
libraries to highlight happenings in their libraries. Thus, staff was collaborating internally

250
to present programs and services but they were also collaborating with local papers to
inform the public of the upcoming and past activities of the libraries. The work of each
was also presented on their websites. However, CEO1’s library included on the website a
section named “From our Community Partners” which were really advertisements for
community entities that the library collaborates with. There was even a promotion for a
shoes and socks drive for remembering and responding to 9/11.
CEO2’s documents, other than those they had in common with the other two
libraries, included statistical reports on the organization’s performance for the past 3
years. These demonstrated the results of the collaborative work of the team. It also
included a narrative report from the CEO, of the organization’s activities for the past
year, which also gave insights into the work of the staff in making that library the success
it was.
For CEO3’s documents, the website had information on entities the library
collaborates with such as non-profit entities including the chamber of commerce, the
historical museum, as well as the food pantry; and a list of supporters of the library.
Through these documents there is evidence of the CEOs’ belief and appreciation of
collaborative work on the part of their staffs which illustrates the performance success of
the staff and therefore the positive performance of the organizations as well.
Non-participant observation and field notes also provide evidence of collaborative
work among the staffs of the three libraries. In the library of CEO1, the first observed
sign of collaboration occurred at the circulation desk of the library. The observation notes
specifically mention the peculiar nature of the service desk in this area. The desk was
round and occupied a large area of the section. It didn’t seem to have one specific area for

251
customers to approach for service. Thus, employees are forced to work collaboratively to
service the many requests coming at them from varying angles. This arrangement seemed
peculiar to an observer but the staff were very pleasant and seemed to work together very
well there. The next observed activity that seemed collaborative was that of two ladies
working on a cart filled with book which they were apparently re-shelving. What was
peculiar about this was that they were working together on something that normally only
one person handles. They seemed very happy performing the task together. Later, it was
discovered that one of the ladies was a volunteer who was assisting a staff member. Thus,
not did staff work collaboratively together, they also collaborated with volunteers.
For CEO2, several things stood out as collaborative in the observation notes. One
example is provided here. This had to do with a method of providing assistance to
customers that seemed outstanding in its collaborative nature. The library had what they
called “roaming reference” which means a librarian is available physically on a research
floor but the person is also available by telephone. One such librarian was seen on the
second floor while it was being observed. Shortly after the observer arrived, this librarian
answered a call and headed towards a section of books on a shelf. Then another librarian
appeared on the same second floor, with a customer in tow. The “roaming reference”
librarian came away from the shelves of books she had gone to, with a book in her hand
which she handed to the customer. Apparently, the other librarian called ahead and
brought the customer up to get his book. By collaborating, they saved the customer time,
they prevented him from wandering around trying to figure out where to go, and they
really made him feel taken care of. The observer dubbed this as excellent customer
service through collaboration.

252
CEO3’s library also had several observed activities involving collaboration. One
is described here. In one section of the library there were on the walls, several plaques
indicating appreciation for public assistance in building collections. One such collection
was the music collection. This collection included not only sheet music, which is
common in libraries, it also included a collection of musical instruments. These
instruments included stringed, wind, and percussion instruments. What is collaborative
about this is that staff worked together with community entities to build this collection.
Then they worked collaboratively with many parents to help them determine the best
instrument to purchase for their children. The parents can borrow the instruments, take it
home for the child to try out and then make decisions on whether to spend their money on
that instrument or not depending on the child’s reaction. The observer was made to
understand that this is a hugely popular collection.
Although collaboration was not one of the seven dimensions included in the
servant leadership questionnaire, there are aspects of this instrument being applied or
practiced by the CEOs as they encourage collaboration in their libraries. For example, by
encouraging collaboration the CEOs were providing emotional healing to staff. As the
CEOs recognize the strength to be gained in working together and allow this to happen
among their staff they are demonstrating sensitivity to the concerns of the employees.
These actions to a large extent benefit the community the library serves so the second
dimension creating value for the community is practiced. Allowing the free collaboration
of staff for accomplishing tasks also demonstrates the CEOs’ practice of conceptual skills
and they are in fact empowering the employees to become problem solvers and therefore
successful employees. Through this effort the CEOs are also engendering growth and

253
success for their employees, the fifth of the dimensions. They are therefore helping
employees to understand that the satisfaction of their work needs is a priority with them
the CEOs. As they therefore put their followers first. Last, as the CEOs interact openly,
fairly, and honestly with employees, as collaborative work is done, they are practicing the
seventh dimension.
RQ3: Employee success enabling organizational performance. These last three
themes include the findings on the third research question on employee success and
organizational performance. The participants believed that the creation of a positively
performing organization depended largely on the internal customer, the employees. When
employees are satisfied and successful, then the organization experiences high
organizational performance. The three themes that emerged demonstrating employee
success that enabled organizational performance included productivity, going beyond,
and engaged employees. Each is discussed separately and are summarized in Table 9.
Table 9
RQ3: Employee Success Enabling Organizational Performance, Summary of Themes 810
Theme Number

Themes

Frequency of occurrence

8

Productivity

9

9

Going beyond

7

10

Engaged employees

5

RQ3: Theme 8: Productivity. The CEOs perceived that successful employees
demonstrated productivity. It is a general consent that the customer is always right.
However, as CEO3 believed, keeping the staff “happy” resulted in heightened
productivity. This in turn, resulted in “happy” customers. What follows is a discussion on
how each CEO perceived productivity among their employees, and how this was

254
demonstrated through the four sources of data, starting with CEO1. CEO1 revealed in his
interview that he believed that an employee’s success resulted in that employees’
enthusiasm at providing services, which promoted the organization’s performance. CEO1
stated that he personally thought that his library was high performing and that it was
because of the large number of programs that library provided to the public. They do a lot
based on what customers want and ask for because they were trying to be responsive to
what the community wanted. At the same time, staff was trying to do these programs in a
way that made them feel engaged and part of it, enabling the library to increase their
programming without a lot of extra burden. Staff does not feel like they must do these
things. They want to do them.
In the interview, CEO2 reported that her staff was encouraged to be productive as
a result of the awards they won, and her library was the recipient of several of these
awards. At the time of her interview for this study, her library had recently received
awards from two different professional library associations. She subsequently recognized
an increase in the overall organizational performance. She stated that different individuals
in her library had received employee of the month from the county five times in the last 3
years. Her library also won a team award for the IT team, from the county and they also
had an award for an employee got the hero award for preventing a suicide in the library.
CEO2 also stated that she noticed that the number of customer incident reports had
decreased, the number of customer’s complaints went down, while the customer
satisfaction percentages were going up. Additionally, the library was experiencing
success with programs that supported the community, such as their fine amnesty
programs that really welcomed people back to the library. Through this program the

255
library successfully got many of its materials back on its shelves. In addition, the library
provided support to many local shelters, and attended to the needs of many of the people
in the community. Thus, CEO2 saw these outcomes as a definite relationship between the
productivity of the staff and the awards the library received.
Based on the interview notes coded and analyzed in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015), for
CEO3 the productivity of the staff resulted in an organization that performed.
Consequently, in the employee/ customer relation he believed that the employee should
be considered first. His reasoning was that the customer was not always right. In fact,
CEO2 opined that if staff was happy, the customers would be happy because the staff
would pass on their feelings of happiness to the customers. When staff was not happy, he
contended, all patrons would pick that up. CEO2 felt it was his responsibility to ensure
staff was happy on the job. He stated, “I need to do whatever I can to make them want to
come to work. They can feel like they are contributing and give them that public
recognition” (CEO3, Interview). To this end, CEO2 has developed several strategies
designed to foster a happy staff. This included ensuring the staff was well informed on
any decisions he was making. He said he did not need them to learn about what he was
doing through the newspaper. He therefore kept open, constant communication with the
staff through frequent e-mails and short informal meetings to share and strategize briefly
each day. He also operated an open door and kept items such as candy on his desk which
staff are free to come in and get at any time. He also shows concern for the staff and their
situations, including one staff out on maternity leave who he talked with because she
needed someone other than her husband to talk with.

256
Apparently, his strategy worked because his staff was very happy with him. In
fact, several staff members expressed this sentiment to the observer. One member out on
leave came in on her day off to ensure she got a chance to get her happy feelings about
her CEO into this study. Another reminisced on the fact that when she bought her first
house, this CEO was the only person who brought her a house warming gift. The
productivity of his staff was evident everywhere in the building as well as in the
programs they provided for the public. The productivity of the staff of each CEO, and the
positive effect on the organizations they serve was reflected in the many newspaper
articles written about them, and gathered as part of the documentation for this study. The
productivity was also obvious in the many fliers produced by each advertising the
programs and services of the libraries. Additionally, the website of each declared the
readiness of the library to serve under the hands of its staff, as announced in the
documentation table mounted into NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015). Various observed artifacts in
the libraries also testify to the productivity of the staff. Example, the learning center in
the library of CEO1 which had a class on the matter of file management in computers for
adults which was in progress; the librarian offering “roaming reference” in the library of
CEO2; and the busy maker space being utilized by the children in the children’s area of
the library of CEO3. The word productivity is not one of the dimensions of Liden et al.
(2008) servant leadership characteristics and so would not be rated in the questionnaire.
RQ3: Theme 9: Going beyond. The CEOs believed that employee success
reflected in organizational performance, often went beyond the requirements of the
employees’ job descriptions. Successful employees tended to perform tasks out of their
way and increased the overall organizational performance. CEO1 explained that his staff

257
had the opportunity to do things above and beyond the ordinary as they got engaged in
the Branches. He believed that 8 out of 10 of them were enjoying doing that. This CEO
utilized the standard evaluation to determine whether his staff was going beyond. He
explained the scale used as a one to five scale. A three was average. It was doing what
was in the job description, and getting it done. The language in the four and the five
measures, however was different. It described going beyond. It was over the top, working
at a higher level with people.
CEO2 shared an experience she had with an employee which demonstrated what
she thought this theme meant. She told of wanting to create a one stop place for job
seekers in the library but since it was while she was transitioning into her new role as
CEO, she realized, she couldn’t possibly manage it. She threw the challenge to the entire
staff, saying “I need someone to step up into this and to take this one,” (CEO2,
Interview). Someone totally unexpected stepped up and very shyly said that although she
was a children’s librarian she was willing to give it a try if the CEO wanted her to do it.
She gave her the chance and according to CEO2, this person “ended up rocking. In fact,
about 6 months later the children’s librarian gave CEO2 a card with that said “Timmy fell
down the well. Thank you for saving me from the well”. CEO2, believed that going
beyond meant going beyond your comfort zone to do things that are uncharacteristic.
CEO3 on the other hand saw that staff went beyond if they were treated right and
were happy in their position. He opined that people want to be treated the way anyone
else would want to be treated. He insisted that he was sure that if staff feels that they are
being treated in the right way, that feeling will come through to their customers also and
this will allow staff to go beyond. CEO3 considered it a natural progression.

258
RQ3: Theme 10: Engaged employees. This theme included having engaged
employees. The CEOs perceived that employee success facilitated having engaged
employees, which increased organizational performance. For CEO1 being engaged was
being sensitive to the needs of the customers as they walk in through the door. This
sensitivity enabled the staff to be able to address those identified needs. CEO1 also
opined that if the servant leadership dimensions were worked into the every-day life of
those serving the public, then engagement would be automatic and customers would
recognize the service they were receiving as genuine. Then customers would recognize
that staff was there to serve them and that it was not just for the paycheck, this CEO
stated. CEO1 felt that was already happening in his library as he saw customers com in
that staff knew by name.
CEO2 said she viewed engaged employees as it related to the attitude of staff to
customers. She opined that the staff in her library valued customer service and were
aware that keeping a position in the library was not just checking books in and out of a
warehouse. She needed to have employees who were engaged. She was expecting a staff
that thought nothing of doing overtime; who recognized that the customer service concept
was that every desk in the library could be used to check items out, and help customers
find materials. This she noted called for a huge shift in the perceptions of staff, as they
would now be practicing what was considered point of contact service, so customers were
helped wherever they were in the library.
It was observed that in the city library, headed by CEO3, the staff greeted several
customers by name and engaged in conversation, which appeared to please the customers.
CEO3 believed that this was the type of culture needed to be created which would

259
involve engaged employees. He believed the senior staff needed to help create that
culture, along with him as CEO. That would be a culture which staff could buy into and
become ambassadors for the library as part of their engagement, he thought. These
responses from the CEOs were all from the interviews.
Case study summary. A descriptive case study design was appropriate to
examine the perceptions of library CEOs as it pertained to their practice of servant
leadership dimensions for creating an organizational culture conducive to employee
success and organizational performance. Through a case study design, it is possible to do
an in-depth exploration of the research problem in a real-world setting (Baskarada, 2014).
Furthermore, a case study was appropriate for the exploration of the contexts believed to
be pertinent to the study of the phenomenon, in a way that does not manipulate the
behaviors of the participants, when clarity is needed about the phenomenon and the
context in which it is operating (Baskarada, 2014; Yin, 2014). A case study summary is
here provided as a way of contextualizing the findings. According to Baskarada (2014)
and Yin (2014), this type of summary should provide sufficient information to the reader
that would enable an understanding of the researched phenomenon, bringing closure to
the findings.
To understand how library CEOs perceived their servant leadership practices as
engendering an organizational culture enabling employee success and organizational
performance, and to bring closure to the findings, data were collected and synthesized
from individual face-to-face interviews, non-participant observation, documentation, and
a 28-item servant leadership questionnaire. These led to the development of ten thematic
categories that were instrumental in the identification of the key concepts, important to

260
the understanding of the phenomenon of interest. Each major theme played a role in
helping with a broad understanding of how library CEOs saw their practice of the seven
dimensions of servant leadership contributing to the creation of an organizational culture
of employee success and organizational performance.
The first of these ten themes was developing community. The CEOs shared how
they led their staff to feel encouraged to work with each other to develop programs that
involved and supported the local community they served, as a way of not only
establishing an organizational culture of service but also as a way of enabling their
employees’ success. The CEOs cited three areas of interest that would develop this theme
and provide the outcome they expected: internal and external community engagement,
promoting a sense of community, and involved staff. These provided more in-depth
information on how the CEOs’ practice of servant leadership concepts created the
organizational culture necessary for employee success and organizational performance.
These CEOs discussed how engaging both staff (internal community) and the public
(external community) allowed for the recognition of the ways in which they, the CEOs,
focused the physical structure of each library in relation to the second dimension of
servant leadership - creating value for the community (Liden et al., 2008).
In many ways, the focus on this dimension contributed to the development of the
organizational culture needed to engender employee success. The CEOs also emphasized
the idea that having a sense of community helped promote the organizational culture of
employee success. Furthermore, CEOs posited the belief that to develop the type of
community they envision must include staff that can successfully be involved with the
public they serve, even it means a listening ear for this public.

261
The second and third themes were organizational change and empowering staff.
The CEOs discussed how important it was for them to change things in the libraries they
served at the onset of their tenure as CEO. Through these changes they felt they were
better able to empower staff to be a success, this contributing to the organizational culture
needed to engender not only the employees’ success but also the organizational
performance. Although organizational change was not one of the servant leadership
dimensions, it did provide opportunities for the CEOs to practice aspects of the
dimensions as they worked with staff. Empowering was one of the dimensions and CEOs
stated the importance of this concept to them. Data from the observation notes as well as
the documentation provided collaboration. The questionnaire provided the staffs’ view of
their CEOs’ practice of the servant leadership dimensions. Its ratings did not always
coincide with the CEOs’ stated concept of how they practiced the dimensions.
The fourth and fifth themes were conceptualizing and strategizing and developing
communication. The CEOs shared how through their thorough knowledge of the
organizations they served, they articulated a vision that led to working with staff to
develop ideas for programs and projects, beneficial to the community, and which enabled
their staffs to perform successfully. The other sources of data such as the observation and
field notes, the documentation, and even the questionnaire collaborated with their views.
Thus, the first five themes provided responses to RQ1 and helped with an understanding
of how the servant leadership practices of the CEOs enabled an organizational culture of
employee success.
The sixth and seventh themes were working with minimum supervision and
collaborative work. The CEOs all agreed that it was the role of leadership to create a

262
work environment which encouraged employee success that encouraged employees to
work autonomously, and well, with minimal supervision. They believed in helping
employees become so knowledgeable they will have no difficulty working without
supervision. Incorporating servant leadership practices such as conceptual skills,
empowering, and helping others grow and succeed would help make this a reality for
employees. This would involve training the employees as well as providing guidelines
from the start of their hire, such as orientation manuals, that would help guarantee their
success. Documentation sources supporting the concept of minimal supervision were
found in the data for CEO1 and CEO2 but not for CEO3. However, collaboration for the
concept was found in observation notes for all three CEOs. The 28-item questionnaire
was not relevant to this concept directly as this was not one of the dimensions. The CEOs
also discussed their belief that an organizational culture promoting collaborative work
was significant to employee success. Although each CEO had a different idea of the
details of what was involved with collaboration, the basic understanding was that
employees could be successful as they learned to work well together internally, as well as
with external entities, as they provided programs and services that were appreciated by
the customers they served. The questionnaire was not critical to the analysis of this
question but there was concrete evidence through the observation notes and
documentation material, of staff in the libraries working collaboratively. These two
themes provided the CEOs’ responses to RQ2, demonstrating how the organizational
culture enabled employee success.
The eighth, ninth, and tenth themes were productivity, going beyond, and engaged
employees. The CEOs discussed their belief that the creation of a positively performing

263
organization depended largely on the internal customer, the employees. They also
expressed the belief that when employees were satisfied and successful, then the
organization experienced high organizational performance. They perceived that
successful employees demonstrated productivity and that although it is an accepted idea
that the customer is always right, according to one of the CEOs, keeping the staff
“happy” would result in heightened productivity. This in turn would make for “happy”
customers. These CEO also believed that employee success, reflected in organizational
performance, often went beyond the requirements of the employees’ job descriptions.
Successful employees tended to perform tasks not asked or expected of them and thus
they increased the overall organizational performance. The CEOs perceived that
employee were successful as they were engaged, which increased organizational
performance. Engagement involved sensitivity to both internal and external customers
and started as soon as someone walked into the library through the door. Thus,
engagement was viewed as a customer satisfaction need, regardless of who the customer
was. Again, the questionnaire was not relevant for answering this third RQ but in addition
to the interviews by the CEOs, the observation and documentation materials provided
examples that corroborated the CEOs’ views. These all provided an answer to RQ3, and
helped with a better understanding of how the CEOs perceived employee success
enabling organizational performance.
Overall, the study findings revealed that when library CEOs practiced servant
leadership dimensions, they enabled the development of an organizational culture of
employee success. Furthermore, when such a culture is in place employees will be
enabled to be successful and work well autonomously, with little supervision. They will

264
also work collaboratively among themselves in the organizations as well as with external
entities for the good of all. The study also found that the success of the employees in the
library had an impact on the performance of the library itself. If employees are
productive, are willing to go beyond their job descriptions, and are thus engaged with
sensitivity to the customers’ needs, they will be successful, and that in turn will lead to an
organization that performs.
Summary
Fifteen library employees, including three CEOs and twelve of their senior level
staff, who worked in three libraries in south central Florida participated in this study.
Four sources were used to triangulate the data including face-to-face interviews, a nonparticipant observation and field notes, documentation, and a 28-item questionnaire. Data
from the interviews, observations and field notes, and the documentation were analyzed
using the first three phases of Yin’s (2011) five phase analytic tool, and initial coding to
help develop categories and establish themes. A pre-prepared analytic tool for the
questionnaire was also utilized.
From the data sources, ten thematic categories emerged, which could be aligned
directly to the research questions. The first five thematic categories (developing
community, organizational change, empowering staff, conceptualizing, and strategizing,
and developing communication) were used to answer RQ1. An answer to RQ2 was
provided through two thematic categories (working with minimal supervision, and
collaborative work). Three thematic categories (productivity, going beyond, and engaged
employees) were used to answer RQ3.

265
The results from the study identified how the CEOs of libraries in south central
Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant
leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. The
results revealed that a) the servant leadership practices of library CEOs were instrumental
in enabling the development of an organizational culture of employee success; b) this
organizational culture enabled employees to be successful; and c) the success of
employees enabled organizational performance.
There was a major limitation to the study which affected data analysis, in addition
to other limitations referenced in Chapter 3. Themes which emerged from the analysis
were based only on the thoughts and intents of three library CEOs and 12 of their senior
level staff, out of a possible population size of 240 CEOs and their senior level staffs in
the state of Florida. The small sample size selected was dictated by the qualitative
methodology and case study design utilized in the study, which predictably elicited a
large quantity of rich, deep data from the participants. Consequently, the analysis
produced results that were not generalizable to the whole population but which were
limited to the 15 participants. Green (2014) pointed to the idea that generalizing in
qualitative studies is not necessary, since the focus of the study is not on the whole
population, but rather on the perspectives of the participants. Another limitation was the
demographic makeup of those who participated in the study. For the main participants,
the CEOs, there were two males and only one female. However, for the senior level staff
participants there were nine females and only three males. For the whole study, out of
fifteen participants, thirteen were white and two non-whites. Thus, the study was not
equally represented based on gender or race.

266
Overall, data analysis showed that the servant leadership practices of the library
CEOs did promote an organizational culture of success. Results were considered
meaningful in revealing how employee success and organizational performance can be
enhanced through the application of the servant leadership dimensions in creating the
appropriate organizational culture. In the following chapter, a summary of the findings
and conclusions are provided, as well as recommendations for future research and
practice.

267
Chapter 5: Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Introduction
The study of leadership as a subject continues to be of great importance. Not only
is this demonstrated by the many scholarly works on the topic, but also by the widescale
preoccupation with it, especially with ethical leadership (Wu et al., 2015). It is so
significant that Jones (2005) posited that nothing else—not technology, or even
finances—impacts the competitive advantage of any organization as this factor does. The
many scandals that have surfaced recently regarding the unethical practices of many of
our leaders are also confirmation of the fact of the importance of the topic. This has
brought attention to the need for quality leadership in organizations (Wu et al., 2015) as
well as information on the type of organizational culture that would be created
consequently.
Researchers have created several models of leadership, including the servant
leadership model, with a heavy gravitation toward servant leadership as the most viable
answer to unethical organizational leadership. Jones (2012b) contended that this model is
the popular answer to the need for leaders who are more efficient, principled, and
employee focused. Heaphey (2006) and Yarnetsky (2013) posited that these are
characteristics that should also be important to leaders in public libraries. As a librarian
herself, the current researcher considered the topic in the context of libraries and
addressed the matter from the perspectives of the libraries’ CEOs.
According to Peterson et al. (2012), CEOs are responsible for setting the tone of
the organization they lead, by way of the vision they share, decisions and policies they
make and implement, and areas of importance that they focus on. What they measure and

268
provide rewards for are indicative of the culture of the organization (Schein, 2004).
Peterson et al. (2012) stated that this has direct implications not only for employee
performance but also for the performance of and direction of everything else affecting the
success or failure of the organizations they lead. Consequently, in the face of the many
scandals rocking many prominent organizations, businesses look to these officers for
ethical leadership (van Dierendonck, 2011). This was of importance to the study at hand,
since it explored matters pertaining to CEOs and their servant leadership practices in
libraries.
The results of the study should help leaders understand how to create an
organizational culture that encourages followers to grow, continually learn, and reach
their full potential. This will benefit both the employees and the organizations served by
such CEOs (Armenakis et al., 2011). Similarly, Liden et al. (2014) noted that a serving
culture will turn the organization’s leadership pyramid upside down, and will enhance
performance among units. This study will also be important for assisting in understanding
the perceptions of CEOs regarding the practice of servant leadership and organizational
culture, employees’ success, and overall organizational performance. Further, the
findings of this study will add to the body of knowledge on servant leadership as a
leadership style, an insufficiently researched practice (Parris & Peachey, 2013).
For the library as a public institution, this study is very important for the practical
value it may provide for the real world of libraries as service organizations. Although it
might provide future researchers with new directions for studying libraries as
organizations in which servant leadership may be practiced, CEOs responsible for these
entities, as well as the communities they serve may benefit significantly. The study may

269
provide helpful, empirical information for the CEOs that can be utilized in improving the
overall performance of their libraries, while obtaining success for employees. Thus, the
study of the servant leadership model may demonstrate this leadership style as a viable
model for libraries as service organizations (Anzalone, 2007; Heaphey, 2006; Yarnetsky,
2013).
The problem statement that drove this study was that it was not known how the
CEOs of three libraries in south central Florida perceived organizational culture as a
mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as
well as organizational performance. The purpose of this qualitative, multiple-case study
was to understand how the CEOs of three libraries in south central Florida perceived
organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant leadership
practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. Based on the
problem statement and the purpose of conducting this study, three research questions
were developed:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
All three questions have direct bearing on the problem statement, and each speak
to different parts of the problem that needed exploration. In Chapter 5, the study is
summarized, findings are reviewed and conclusions provided. The chapter also provides
recommendations for future research and practice, as well as a final section discussing
implications.

270
Summary of the Study
The literature on servant leadership indicated a gap in the research on the role that
culture played as a mediating mechanism linking servant leadership practices to
organizational performance and employee success (Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al.,
2012). This was critical because leadership was vital to the success or failure of any
venture (Banerjee, 2015). Parris and Peachey (2013) posited that there is a paucity of
empirical research on servant leadership in specific organizational settings. Thus, there
was a need for further understanding of how servant leadership determined organizational
and employee performance (Liden et al., 2014; Peterson et al., 2012), as well as a need to
expand the research to varied organizational types (Peterson et al., 2012) including
libraries. Identification of these gaps provided the opportunity for further in-depth study
of the phenomena of servant leadership and organizational culture in relation to CEOs in
organizations.
This study added to the existing body of knowledge by opening up a
comprehensive understanding of how library CEOs perceived their servant leadership
practices impacting the culture of the organizations they served, and in turn, the success
of their employees and the performance of the organizations. The results obtained
provide new insights for library administrators, educators, and researchers, interested in
advancing the body of knowledge on servant leadership generally, and its practice in
libraries specifically.
Three questions drove the research:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?

271
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
Responses to these questions uncovered findings that revealed the perceptions of the
CEOs involved, regarding the way their servant leadership practices assisted in creating a
specific organizational culture. This culture had a stimulating effect on employee success,
which in turn enhanced the performance of the organizations they worked in. A summary
of each chapter of this study follows.
In Chapter 1 of this study, the gap in the literature leading to the research problem
was highlighted. The problem was that it was not known how the CEOs of libraries
perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism linking their servant
leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational performance. In this
chapter, there was background information on the phenomenon of servant leadership and
organizational culture. There was also information on the purpose of the study based on
the identified gap in the literature, and which in turn, along with the qualitative method,
descriptive case study design, and conceptual models determined what the research
questions would be like. There were also descriptions of how the study would advance
scientific knowledge, and its significance. The chapter also provided a definition of terms
as used in the study and discussed identified assumptions, limitations, and delimitations
of the study. It closed with a summary of the chapter, described how the whole study was
organized, and provided a transition to Chapter 2.
Chapter 2 of the study contained the literature review of other studies pertaining
to servant leadership and organizational culture. The chapter also contained the
theoretical framework for the study, which was based on Greenleaf’s (1970) servant

272
leadership theory; the seven-dimension servant leadership model of Liden et al. (2008),
and Schein’s (2004) organizational culture model. In addition, there is an examination of
the methodology and design of the study and information is provided on the interviews,
non-participant observations, documentation, and questionnaire used to gather data for
the study. The review of the literature conducted in this chapter covered topics such as
leadership defined, historical background of servant leadership, servant leadership and
transformational leadership, servant leadership and CEOs, servant leadership and
organizational impact, and servant leadership and the effect of organizational culture. A
summary of the whole chapter and a transition leading to Chapter3 are also included.
In Chapter 3, more in-depth information is provided on the methodology used in
the study. As such, there is a is reiteration of the problem statement and the research
questions. There is a thorough description of the qualitative research methodology, as
well as of the case study research design utilized in the study. The use of purposeful
sampling enabled the selection of a population of fifteen participants, comprising three
library CEOs and twelve of their senior level staff. The sources of data were individual
interviews, observation and field notes, documentation, and a 28-item questionnaire.
The analytical approach used in the study to code and analyze the data included
the use of the first three phases of Yin’s (2011) five phases of analysis. The qualitative
analysis software tool, NVivo, was used to help in the management and coding of the
data. Ethical considerations, and limitations and delimitations were also discussed in this
chapter, which ended with a summary of the chapter as well as a transition to Chapter 4.
In Chapter 4, there is a description and demographic data on the participants.
Additionally, there is an unbiased, systematic analysis and summary of the data gathered

273
in the study. This includes a description of the results of the analysis, findings of that
analysis, and the themes and concepts which emerged from it. The chapter ended with a
summary of the case study, a general summary of the chapter, and a transition to Chapter
5. The final chapter in the dissertation is chapter 5. It contains a summary of the whole
study as well as concluding statements. In this chapter, recommendations are presented
for further study, and implications discussed for the study.
Summary of Findings and Conclusion
This exploration of the phenomena of servant leadership and organizational
culture in libraries was conducted to answer the three research questions. They were:
RQ1. How do servant leadership practices of library CEOs enable an organizational
culture of employee success?
RQ2. How does the organizational culture enable employee success?
RQ3. How does employee success enable organizational performance?
Ten themes emerged in response to the questions. They were:
•

developing community

•

organizational change

•

empowering staff

•

conceptualizing and strategizing

•

developing communication

•

working with minimal supervision

•

collaborative work

•

productivity

•

going beyond

•

engaged employees

274
These ten themes were validated through the triangulation of the data (interviews,
observation and field notes, documentation, and questionnaire) as well as through data
convergence.
RQ1. This first question explored how the Servant leadership practices of library
CEOs enabled an organizational culture of employee success. Five themes emerged from
this first RQ. These themes were, developing the community, organizational change,
empowering staff, conceptualizing, and strategizing, and developing communication.
Theme 1: Developing community. There are three areas in the findings that relate
to this theme: internal and external community engagement, promoting a sense of
community, and involved staff. CEOs engendered internal community engagement in a
few ways. There were those aspects that affected the physical structure of the libraries
and those that pertained to the staff. Physically, all three libraries boasted specialized
spaces for assisting the community. For example, spaces were created either in response
to community needs—as in the changes CEO2 and staff accomplished on their second
floor and the mural created in the children’s section of CEO1’s library—or in spaces
developed from community sponsorship to meet community needs—such as the various
maker spaces in the library of CEO3.
From this theme of developing community, the data revealed the CEOs
involvement in developing a sense of community. For CEO1, this involved the deliberate
development of plans and activities designed to break down barriers staff may put up.
CEO2 thought she could in fact develop a sense of community among staff by developing
common goals with them. CEO3, on the other hand, expressed confidence that it would
be built because of his carefulness as CEO, to address staff, using inclusive language that

275
would help employees have a sense of unity not only among themselves, but also with
him, as CEO. This is evidence of an organizational culture operating at a specific level
(Schein, 2004). In the following discussion, this matter is considered.
Schein (2004) stated that the culture of an organization relates strongly to its
leadership and this culture affects everything in that organization (Schein, 2004). How
these CEOs determined to develop their library community shows a direct connection to
Schein’s ideas. They were building based on their own ideas of what would work; but as
the CEOs of the organizations they had the right to determine the culture using whatever
means they deem appropriate. According to Peterson et al. (2012), CEOs are responsible
for setting the tone of that organization by way of the vision they share, decisions and
policies they make and implement, and areas of importance that they focus on. As servant
leaders, the CEOs in this study reported that they practiced the servant leadership
dimensions number two (creating value for the community), number four (empowering),
and number six (putting followers first). There were observation, documentation, and
questionnaire data that collaborated with the views of the CEOs’ as expressed in their
interviews.
Theme 2: Organizational change. In response to Research Question 1, the CEOs
identified organizational change as another way of engendering the development of an
organizational culture of employee success. Three areas under this sub-theme were
identified, emanating from the data. They are adapting, setting an example, and
promoting participation. The CEOs expected difficulties as employees transitioned from
previous policies and practices to new ones. CEO1 equated the difficulty to changing
culture, and viewed this as a very hard thing that is taking him 5 years to accomplish.

276
Schein (2004) confirmed the difficulty of creating culture and refers to the process as
being involved in helping a group to adopt the same espoused beliefs and values, which is
an adoption of a culture. According to Schein, however, once the group takes joint action
and observes the outcome, it becomes a shared basis for determining whether the leader’s
idea will turn out right. Until the results are positive, what the leader proposes is a value
to be “questioned, debated, challenged” (Schein, 2004, p. 28). CEO1 believed that it is
important to persevere to reverse the culture that they had before and to one that is more
participative, supportive, and respectful of each other. CEO1 cited his willingness to
understand and accommodate employees having difficulty in adjusting. This is an
evidence of the first dimension of servant leadership, emotional healing, which relates to
a leader who is sensitive to the concerns of others (Liden et al., 2008).
The change CEO2 discussed involved helping staff accept and learn new
technology to help customers who have problems learning how to use the same
technology. To help her staff, CEO2 obtained grant funding which allowed her to buy a
full array of the technology for each of her library branches. She worked with a team to
provide staff with hands on training on the various technology. Thus, not only was she
able to help staff manage the change, but the staff turned around and helped customers.
CEO3 also found that his staff was resistant to change. He overcame the difficulty
in one instance by making changes to staff assignments. Although this was not favorably
received at first, the situation worked itself out and the staff member whose position was
changed is now happy with the changes. Changes are inevitable in any organization, but
how the CEOs manage that change impacts the outcome.

277
Theme 3: Empowering staff. The findings accentuated how the CEOs see their
servant leadership practices engendering empowered staff. This theme that emerged
offered two ways in which the CEOs perceived this happening in their organizational
culture, thereby creating employee success. Attending to the employees' professional and
personal needs, are the ways in which the CEOs see this culture of success being
developed in response to their servant leadership practices.
With respect to attention to employees’ needs, CEO3 offered a comment, positing
that employees can only do their job well when they have the proper tools. Those tools
might include political aid, money, time off, a need to make a purchase, or anything for
which an employee voices a need. According to CEO3, the employees’ success is
dependent on the CEOs’ support of the employees’ professional endeavor. This
perception aligns with Arkin’s (2004) ideas that addressed the positive difference
between empowerment as a result of the practice of servant leaders compared to nonservant leaders. According to Arkin, empowerment in MBA textbooks is about
controlling employees while for the servant leader it is about how to serve the employee.
Results from Latham’s (2013) research also confirmed CEO3’s perception that
employees were empowered when the CEO provided the right leadership.
Overall, the findings showed that all three CEOs expressed sensitivity to
employees’ personal and professional needs. All three indicated that they were practicing
the servant leadership dimensions’ number one (emotional healing), number four
(empowering) and five (helping followers grow). All three CEOs indicated a desire to
serve by being sensitive to the needs of their employees. Based on data gathered from the
questionnaire, the staff of each library confirmed this interest of their CEO, with CEO3

278
receiving a higher rating from the questionnaire for this area than the other two, who both
received the same rating. The observation and field notes as well as documentation from
the libraries also confirmed the CEOs’ interest in attending to the needs of their
employees.
From the data, it was evident that the CEOs believed that empowering staff also
involved other actions they may take as CEOs. The findings showed that recognition,
autonomy, creation of a learning environment, and training all contributed to feelings of
empowerment, according to the CEOs. These findings are in keeping with Greenleaf’s
(1970) theory that posits that leaders empower their employees by serving them.
Jaramillo et al. (2015) also confirmed this and posited that employees are empowered
because of the critical role servant leaders play in facilitating positive employee
performance.
Theme 4: Conceptualizing and strategizing. The findings for this theme revealed
that the participants deliberated the effect of planning and its impact on employee
success. CEO3 discussed purchasing a freestanding kitchen for cooking classes, which
would assist an employee one semester shy of receiving a degree in culinary arts, and an
advisory board member who once was a cooking editor. In addition, it would also help in
collaborating with the community and restaurants. CEO 1 had a different viewpoint
regarding strategy. He voiced his concerns about persistently “chasing our tails” to ensure
promotion of their programs and getting all staff members on the same page to make sure
they knew which libraries were hosting which programs. This was especially important
for coordination with other branch libraries. He focused on the aspect of strategizing and
conceptualizing that emphasized helping to analyze the organization’s needs and thus

279
being able to assist employees. The CEO mentioned the fact that this concept, which is
related to Liden et al.’s (2008) dimension three, conceptual skills, assisted in the task of
creating a project coordinator position to replace an obsolete operations manager job
which was no longer relevant to the organization. CEO2 spoke of conceptualizing as a
tool to develop programs to involve customers, one of which utilized a life-size
chess/checker board, and coordinated with a chess master who offered advice and classes
on how to play chess.
The findings showed that values based servant leadership is evident in these
scenarios because of the impact on leader effectiveness they displayed, the organizations’
performance, and the unleashing of the employee’s power to create, innovate and
increase their productivity (Russell, 2001). For example, the personal values expressed by
the three CEOs created a level of trust in these organizations, which were indications of
sound personal relations (Rezaei et al., 2012). Ruiz et al. (2011) found that this form of
leadership inspires followers, triggers confidence, and empowers employees to perform at
higher levels. In this study, these employees were encouraged to act with authority,
assume responsibility, and employ the concept of teamwork (Ruiz et al., 2011).
Theme 5: Developing communication. The results of the study identified CEOs’
perceptions on three areas supporting their idea of developing communication as a means
of enabling an organizational culture of employee success. They included listening, open
communication, and availability. All three participants shared how they used listening to
help improve communication within the library. The participants intimated that listening
was integral to the emotional healing dimension of servant leadership practices. CEO2
spoke of the importance of recognizing the fact that each person had a voice; this

280
participant emphasized that it was critical to allow the individual voices to be heard.
CEO1 reported that he engendered listening through his instructions to supervisors and
managers, who he advised to be careful to listen to subordinates. For CEO3, listening
meant connecting with the employees constantly using e-mails, the traditional office
communication tool, as well as secondhand sources such as third-party information.
Whatever the method, all three CEOs agreed on the importance of listening as a means of
enabling an organizational culture of employee success.
This position is one confirmed in the literature. Spears (2002), who summarized
Greenleaf’s servant leadership work into 10 characteristics, named listening as a
characteristic of a servant leader. Drucker (1966) described this factor as a characteristic
of an effective leader, as did Kouzes, and Posner (2007).
Open communication is another factor of the theme developing communication.
Each CEO said that they believed that honesty and voicing ideas and opinions were part
of this theme; it would be helpful in striving for an organizational culture of employee
success. This may relate to the third dimension of servant leadership: conceptual skills
(Liden et al., 2008). This dimension speaks to the servant leader’s possession of an
understanding of the organization and the tasks to be completed in such a way that they
can help subordinates. CEO1 reported that he believed very strongly in open
communication. He voiced the opinion that not fostering open communication led to
mistrust, gossip, and back-talking, which was unhealthy for the organization.
CEO2 looked at this from the point of view of honesty. She identified honesty as
a vital part of any relationship and declared that success in any organization was
dependent on the honesty of its members. CEO3, on the other hand, reported that he

281
sought to protect staff from embarrassment in open communication, although he does
embrace the concept of openness. He wanted employees to be comfortable as they
communicated, giving reasons for doing what the organization does/not do. This CEO
believed in creating an environment that encouraged this openness where there is
common understanding of not embarrassing employees. Thus, this was one of the
practices that all the CEOs perceived that they were utilizing to enable an organizational
culture of employee success.
Availability was also a part of the concept of developing communication that the
CEOs utilized to engender an organizational culture of employee success. Each CEO
addressed the concept from the point of view of visibility and availability to staff. The
CEOs believed that this encouraged staff to share with them. They also all related
availability to an open-door policy except when a confidential conversation was
necessary in their offices. CEO2 showed the extent of her willingness to be available by
speaking of how she worked in her libraries when she was first appointed to the CEO
role, as a way of breaking down barriers and showing herself accessible to staff. CEO3
indicated his willingness by inviting his staff to interrupt him at any time, saying, “I tell
my staff to interrupt me, tell me.” CEO1 noted that he invited his employees to come in
through his open doors at any time.
Based on the data collected and the literature, therefore, it was found that these
CEOs were practicing servant leadership dimensions that created a culture conducive to
employee success.
RQ2. This second question, organizational culture enabling employees’ success,
revealed that servant leadership methods help inspire workers to integrate, promote

282
teamwork, and grow, which are essential organizational ingredients that influence
employee success (Russell, 2001). Participants in the current study commented that
promoting employee success resulted in having employees who worked with a minimum
of supervision, which is theme 6 of this study, and collaboratively, which is theme 7.
Each is discussed separately below.
Theme 6: Working with minimal supervision. CEO3 perceived that he built a
culture within his organization, which could develop an employee to succeed him. CEO1
voiced similar perceptions regarding employee supervision, where there was no need for
concern because employees “got it,”; that is, they understood what needed to be done and
would do it. This he opined, lightened the load so everyone can help carry it. He stated,
“That’s empowerment.” Further, CEO1 believed that in addition to managers and
supervisors, empowering staff to work autonomously helped to disseminate leadership to
employees at all levels of the organization. CEO2 like the other two CEOs, believed in
growing her staff so they can be autonomous. She has enabled employees to receive
training from various entities. She described the opportunity thus, “We want to be sure
that staff are confident and have all the training they need to be successful, whatever they
chose to do. Thus, she encouraged para-professionals (those without library degrees) by
sending them to the county’s leadership academy because she believed that leadership
should come from every level in the organization.
The data collected from three of four sources corroborated the findings that these
three CEOs not only spoke of providing opportunities for their employees to develop and
work autonomously with minimal supervision, but it was apparent to the observer in each

283
of the libraries. There was also documentation from the libraries, except that of CEO3
that complemented the CVEOs’ interview materials.
Chiniara and Bentein (2016) posits that the practice of servant leadership in
organizations engenders the fulfilment of an employee’s basic psychological needs,
including to be autonomous or allowed to work with minimal supervision. This
employee, Chiniara and Bentein, argue, is autonomous because of a servant leader who
fostered his or her growth and development, especially through the process of satisfying
the need of the follower. As the CEOs in the three libraries practice servant leadership
principles, followers (employees) will grow and will succeed in self-management,
requiring minimal supervision (Liden et al., 2008; Mayer, 2010). This will engender the
development of a positive organizational culture engendering employee success. (Liden
et al.).
Theme 7: Collaborative work. The findings from the study showed that the three
CEOs espoused comparable thoughts regarding collaborative work and how leadership
and organizational culture influenced the totality of the organization (Schein, 2004).
According to Schein, leaders instill the culture in organizations, which produce positive
outcomes such as employee success. The findings from the questionnaire confirmed this,
assigning scores to each CEO that for the most part fall in the high range of exhibiting
servant leadership dimensions or behaviors. For example, all three CEOs received high
scores for the dimension “creating value for the community.” With a high ranged score
measuring between 23 and 28, a moderate range score between 14 and 22, and a low
range score between 8 and 13, CEO1 scored 26.75; CEO2 scored 23.75; and CEO3
scored 27.5 for this dimension.

284
Mehta and Pillay (2011) found a significant connection between servant
leadership and employees’ satisfaction with their jobs, due to the leader’s focus on
serving, values, vision, teamwork, and empowerment of all. This contributed to
collaboration in the workplace, which is one theme emanating from RQ 2. The CEOs in
the study thought an organization that promoted collaborative work made a significant
impact on employees’ success, especially as it concerned the mentoring of new hires.
CEO2 noted that with respect to the customer’s perspective and needs, collaborative
work also concerned community as well as customer engagement. This CEO also spoke
of one individual with a 37-year employment history who mentored countless librarians,
taught reference classes to customers, and improved staff development as a significant
measure of success. CEO1 reiterated the same idea, positing that his staff was successful
because they were collaborative and thus accomplished more together.
CEO3 also acknowledged his interest in collaborative work in his library. He
stated that there were many divisions in his library when he first became CEO there, but
he personally promoted an organizational culture that involved collaborative work. This
CEO also expressed concern at finding employees who thought they worked with one
department in the library. This he described as “Wrong, wrong, wrong. You work for
(name) library. You just happen to be working in that department”. He felt that one of the
most important things to be accomplished in the library was to find a way to bring
everyone together and thus engender collaboration.
In addition to the data from the interviews, observation notes confirmed evidence
of collaborative work in each library. In the library of CEO1, employees were observed
working together at the circulation desk as well as on the shelves. There was also

285
evidence of staff working together to produce the schedule of events. In the library of
CEO2 there was evidence of staff working together to produce programs, and services
that enabled one staff member to hand off a customer to another for easy access to needed
materials. In CEO3’s library there was evidence of corroboration between employees in
the children’s section, as well as in the technical services area where staff seemed to have
no trouble assisting each other. There were also several pieces of documentation which
corroborated this concept.
RQ 3. The third question explored how employee success enabled organizational
performance. Based on the data collected, it was found that the participants perceived that
employee success enabled organizational performance. The organizational culture created
by the servant leadership practices of the CEOs encouraged the success of employees and
they in turn provided the organization with high levels of output. This phenomenon is
explained in the literature. As servant leaders focus attention on employees, with the
intent of engendering their development, they are able to fulfill the three basic
psychological needs of the employees. These needs are autonomy, competence, and
relatedness (Chiniara & Bentein, 2016). As these needs are met, one response of
employees is to be more productive, increasing their task performance (Chiniara &
Bentein, 2016). Consequently, it is not surprising that the concepts emerging in response
to this question were productivity, going beyond, and engaged employees. These results
confirmed the findings of Liden et al. (2014), Parris and Peachey (2013), and Peterson et
al. (2012), who found that servant leadership impacts employee success and therefore an
organization’s performance in a positive fashion. Further, this study provided support for
a previous study that suggested that servant leadership may serve as a mediating

286
mechanism linking employee success to organizational performance (Peterson et al.,
2012).
Theme 8: Productivity. As it pertains to productivity, the findings of the study
showed that the CEOs believed that successful employees worked productively. This is in
keeping with ideas presented by many researchers including Chanhoo et al. (2015), Jones
(2012a), Khan et al. (2015), Mehta and Pillay (2011), Peterson et al. (2012), Udani and
Lorenzo-Molo (2013), and Weinstein (2013). Additionally, as CEO3 opined, having a
happy staff increased productivity. This productivity in turn leads to happy customers.
Umlas (2013) also demonstrated this based on the Southwest Airline brand of servant
leadership.
CEO2 said that her organization received several prestigious awards because of
the productivity of the employees, which improved the organization’s performance.
CEO3 mentioned that attending to the needs of the internal customer—his staff—before
being concerned about the external customer, as well as allowing for staff creativity and
enthusiasm seemed to inspire productivity among that staff. Documents from that library
confirmed that the staff was indeed productive, providing proof of many programs and
services created for the community. Newspaper articles and organizational statistics
provided information on the public’s response to the programs, thus testifying to their
success and therefore the organizations positive performance. CEO1 stated that his
organization’s successful performance was the result of the employees’ eagerness to
deliver quality services to customers, because they felt engaged in the decision-making
process. CEO1 added that staff did not feel that they had to perform these activities, they

287
did it because they wanted to. Thus, the findings revealed a positive relationship between
employee productivity and organizational performance.
Theme 9: Going beyond. Research findings for this theme was illustrated in data
from all three organizations. The concept applies to employees exceeding normal job
requirements. The CEOs attributed this occurrence to the success of employees in one
way or another, which encouraged them to contribute to positive organizational
performance as the result. CEO1 noted that eight out of 10 employees embraced the
opportunity to go beyond normal job descriptions and enjoyed it enormously, in his
library. CEO3 inferred that if employees are treated as they want to be treated, it boosts
their confidence and gives them the feeling that they are being treated in the right way.
The outcome is a staff willing to go beyond the call of duty in their service to the
customers. This outcome is reflective of that found in other industries where servant
leadership is practiced such as TD Industries (Faloon, 2011) and Southwest Airlines
(Umlas, 2013).
Theme 10: Engaged employees. Employees with a high degree of job
engagement represented the third element of the employee success on organizational
performance segment of the study, and impacted the extent to which they increased
performance in their organizations. In the library headed by CEO3, employees greeted
some customers by name and engaged in conversation, which produced a pleasing effect
on the customers. CEO3 stated that the culture helped, and the senior staff who had buy
in, supported, and spread the word. Thus, the customer culture meshed with the culture
created from the trenches by his staff. CEO2 stated that her staff valued customer service,
and performance consisted of more than checking books in and out. The staff really cared

288
about the customers and frequently did more for them than asked, including coming to
the library to help with programs on their days off.
In the literature, researchers indicated that servant leadership has gained
recognition as a method to establish good leader and follower relationships (Bambale,
2014; Carter & Baghurst, 2014; Lachman et al., 2014; Parris & Peachey, 2013; van
Dierendonck & Patterson, 2011). There was an additional need to create studies that
examined the concept of organizational culture as the mediating mechanism that bounded
servant leadership to employee success, leading to enhanced organizational output
(Peterson et al., 2012). According to Schein (2010), culture is the result of embedded
ideas that are either created or evolved over time, and imposed on the group by the
founder or leader. Through this study, a better understanding is provided of how the
organizational culture, created by the CEOs, played the role of mediator, linking the
CEOs’ servant leadership practices to employee success and organizational performance.
This could be applied to other service operations. A connection was made between the
Liden et al. (2008) servant leadership model and the Schein (2004) model of
organizational cultural levels as they pertained to these libraries. In other words, the
senior staffs’ perceptions of the CEOs’ practice of the dimensions provided a very good
idea of the fact that these dimensions were for the most part, culturally embedded in the
libraries, since none was scored lower than a moderate range, which meant they were at
least evident in the culture. This, Schein describes as operating at the underlying
assumptions level. Table 10 illustrates how the CEOs were rated by the senior level staff
in terms of their use of the servant leadership dimensions in the libraries.

289
Table 10
Senior Staff Scores for CEOs’ Use of Servant Leadership Dimensions
Dimensions

CEO1

CEO2

CEO3

Totals

Emotional Healing

20.5

21

25.50

67

Creating Value

26.75

23.75

27.50

78

Conceptual Skills

22.5

22.75

23.75

69

Empowering

16

16

26.25

58.25

Helping Subordinates Grow

16.25

23

24.5

63.75

Subordinates First

17

17.75

22.75

57.5

Behaving ethically

24. 5

21.5

23

69

Totals

143.5

145.75

173.25

462.75

Note. CEO = Chief Executive Officer of each library.

•

The scores above were interpreted as follows, based on the
findings, and based on interpretations provided by Liden et al. (2008):
High range (score between 23 and 28): CEO strongly exhibits this servant
leadership dimension;

•

Moderate range (score between 14 and 22): CEO tends to exhibit this
dimension in an average way;

•

Low range (score between 8 and 13): CEO exhibits this dimension below
the average or expected degree;

•

Extremely low range (score between 0 and 7): CEO not inclined to exhibit
this dimension at all.

Based on the above Table 10, “creating value” was the dimension most exhibited
by the three CEOs. All three scored a high range on this dimension indicating that this is
a strong point for each CEO. However, CEO3 has the highest score with 27.5, followed
by CEO1 with a 26.75. CEO2 had a score of 23.75. Both CEO1 and CEO3 have high
scores for “behaving ethically” as well, with CEO1 scoring 24.5 while CEO3 scored 23.

290
For this dimension CEO2 scored a 21.5. The total score for this dimension was 69.
However, “conceptual skills” also had a total score of 69, although only CEO3 had a high
score of 23.75, while CEO1 scored 22.5, and CEO2 scored 22.75. Thus, these two
dimensions tied for second place as the most highly exhibited by the CEOs. The next or
third highly exhibited dimension was the “emotional healing” dimension. For this one,
whereas CEO3 received a high score of 25. 5, CEO1 received a score of 20.5 and CEO2
received one of 21.
The next or fourth highest score was for the dimension “helping subordinates
grow.” For this dimension, CEO3 received the highest rating with 24. 5, followed by
CEO2with 23, and then CEO1 with a moderate rating of 16.25. For the fifth highest rated
dimension “empowering,” CEO3 still had a high rating, receiving a score of 26.25. Both
CEO1 and CEO2 received the same score of 16 each.
For the last dimension “subordinates first” no CEO scored in the high range. All
three received moderate ranges with CEO3 receiving a 22.75 while CEO2 got 17.75 and
CEO1 got 17. Thus, while all three CEOs exhibit usage of all seven of the servant
leadership dimensions, CEO3 was perceived as utilizing them more than CEO1 and
CEO2, from the perspectives of the senior staff. It must be noted that whereas both CEO1
and CEO3 had all female senior staffs rating them, CEO2 had a predominantly male
senior staff rating her. Whether gender had an impact on the scores is not obvious from
the findings.
There was also a tracking of the frequency of the Likert scale measure responses
as seen in Table 11.

291
Table 11
Frequency of Likert Scale Measure per CEO
Scale indicator

CEO1

CEO2

CEO3

Totals

1 – Strongly Disagree

4

2

0

6

2 – Disagree Somewhat

10

1

0

11

3 – Disagree

6

16

1

23

4 – Undecided

7

10

3

20

5 – Agree Somewhat

29

21

19

69

6 – Agree

28

40

38

106

49

90

7 – Strongly Agree
26
15
Note. CEO = Executive Director, one for each of three libraries.

Under Strongly Agree, CEO3 scored 49 points compared to 26 for CEO1 and 15
for CEO2. Additionally, for Undecided, CEO2 scored 10 points, compared to 7 for CEO1
and 3 for CEO3. CEO2 also scored 16 points under Disagree, compared to 6 for CEO1
and 1 for CEO3. CEO3 received 0 points for both Strongly Disagree and Disagree
Somewhat. CEO1 received 4 scores of strongly disagree, while CEO2 received 2. CEO1
received 10 disagree somewhat scores, while CEO2 had only one.
Conclusion
This study served to broaden the understanding of how the CEOs of three libraries
in south central Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating mechanism
linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as organizational
performance. The CEOs’ servant leadership practices were considered the predictor and
the employee and organizational culture the criterion of the study. The population
affected was the CEOs and senior staff of libraries in south central Florida. Studying the
phenomena of servant leadership and culture among this population served to extend the
research on a leadership model that has been shown to affect employee success and
organizational performance (Liden et al., 2014; Parris & Peachey, 2013; Peterson et al.,

292
2012). More importantly, the study shed light on how the library CEOs perceived
organizational culture and its effects on their organizations.
Library CEOs are responsible for overseeing employees as well as the daily
operations of a library. A Master's degree in library science is generally required for this
position, and some states require state certification. Because libraries are service
organizations, the job responsibilities of the CEOs directly align with the seven servant
leadership dimensions of Liden et al. (2008). Data from the interviews done for the study
showed that the CEOs themselves believed that their leadership philosophy are in line
with these dimensions. The organizational culture resulting from their application of
Liden et al. (2008) servant leadership dimensions was illustrative of the levels of
organizational culture described by Schein (2004).
These alignments, however, were not necessarily because of training or great
familiarity with the principles of servant leadership or the theory of organizational culture
development. Rather, the practices of these participants were the natural outgrowth of
their desire to serve those they lead. This is probably why so many of their responses to
the interview questions were congruent with each other’s. This is also like Greenleaf’s
(1970) description of the servant leader who “begins with the natural feeling that one
wants to serve, to serve first. Then conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead” (p. 6).
Servant leadership has been receiving some attention, but there is room for far
more research on the matter (Bambale, 2014; Barbuto & Wheeler, 2006; Kool & van
Dierendonck, 2012). In fact, most researchers examining leadership impact on employee
and organizational performance have focused on transformational and charismatic
leadership (Liden et al., 2014). Thus, there was a need to do further research to

293
understand the impact of servant leadership on organizational and employee
performance. Moreover, few scholars have addressed the role of CEO servant leadership
in obtaining positive outcomes for employees and the organization.
The role culture may play in the improved performance of both employees and
organization also needed to be researched. Peterson et al. (2012) recognized this need and
suggested a further study on the matter within the context of servant led organizations.
Specifically, the role of culture in mediating positive results in servant-led organizations
needed to be studied (Peterson et al., 2012). Hence, this research provided further study
on servant leadership and culture in organizations. In addition, it provided further
understanding of the subject of servant leadership, by exploring the mediating role of
culture in the relationship between library CEOs as servant leaders, and their employees
as well as their organizations’ performance.
If servant leadership is to be considered as a viable leadership model for library
CEOs, it was also important to determine how closely the leadership characteristics of
library CEOs align with the servant leadership characteristics. From the responses
provided during the interview process, the questionnaire responses by senior level staff,
the non-participant observations, and documentation gathered, it can be determined that
there is alignment between Liden et al.’s (2008) seven servant leadership dimensions and
the leadership practices of the three library CEOs in this study. Thus, it was concluded
that the CEOs participating in the study were servant leaders. The many examples of
servant leadership practices demonstrating the ways in which CEO1, CEO2, and CEO3
fulfilled their role as leaders of their organizations confirm this conclusion. Of the seven
dimensions examined, the top four were creating value for the community, behaving

294
ethically, conceptual skills, and emotional healing, based on the questionnaire.
Interestingly, based on the documents entered in NVivo 11 (QSR, 2015) the top four
were creating value for the community with a score of 69, followed by helping
subordinates grow with a score of 44. This was followed by empowering with a score of
32, followed by conceptual skills with a score of 30. Thus, while both senior level staff
and CEOs agreed that creating value for the community was the pre-eminent dimension,
and that conceptual skills were among the top four, they disagreed on the placement of
the other dimensions. Again, while the CEOs thought that empowering and helping
subordinates grow were important to them, the senior staff did not think that these two
dimensions were among the most exhibited ones by their CEOs. CEO3 was the
exception. He was rated by his staff as exhibiting all the dimensions highly, except for
dimension number six, which they rated him as exhibiting moderately or in an average
way.
There were only 15 participants in the study, working in three different libraries.
The existence of the servant leadership characteristics in these libraries was based on the
perceptions of the CEOs of these libraries. These happened to be public libraries, as
against other types of libraries such as academic, law, medical, or even prison libraries. A
study of CEOs in any of these other types of libraries—or even in other public libraries
that may have different philosophies than these CEOs about leadership—may produce
different results. Therefore, additional research is needed to determine if servant
leadership is a viable leadership style for libraries across the board.

295
Implications
The purpose of this qualitative, case study was to understand how the CEOs of
three libraries in south central Florida perceived organizational culture as a mediating
mechanism linking their servant leadership practices to employees’ success as well as
organizational performance. In the literature review of Chapter 2, questions were raised
about several gaps identified in the empirical offerings regarding servant leadership and
organizational culture. Among them was the question of how servant leadership could
affect positive outcomes for employees as well as organizations. While many researchers
had reiterated the positive impact servant leadership had on organizations, few had
addressed the matter of how this phenomenon occurred. In addition, few scholars had
addressed the role of CEO servant leadership in obtaining positive outcomes for
employees and the organization. There was also a need to explore the role that culture
may play in the improved performance of both employees and organizations. Peterson et
al. (2012) recognized this need and suggested further study on the matter within the
context of organizational culture. Through the current study, the aim was to help fill this
gap in the research. Although the study was specific to three public libraries, it was
identified that while CEOs practiced servant leadership principles, their employees
enjoyed success in providing programs and services to the community they served. It was
also found that the success of the employees was beneficial to the organization enabling
its performance and by implication, its relevance to the community. This has implications
for any library or CEOs who may have an interest in developing servant leadership
practices in her or his organization.

296
Within the framework of the literature review in Chapter 2 and the findings
presented in Chapter 4, this study has significance for the practical value it provides for
the real world of libraries as service organizations. It might also provide future
researchers with new directions for studying libraries as organizations in which servant
leadership may be practiced.
Theoretical implications. This study was based on the theoretical foundations of
Greenleaf’s (1970) servant leadership theory, the seven dimensions of servant leadership
model of Liden et al. (2008), and Schein’s (2004) organizational culture model. The
study therefore contributes to the knowledge available on these subjects, by providing
insights that are especially pertinent to the research questions which were themselves
based on the tripartite theoretical foundation. Greenleaf’s theory states that any great
leader is first a servant, essentially capturing the essence of this theory, which pertains to
leadership in organizations resulting in employee success and positive organizational
performance. The model of Liden et al. offered a viable framework for measuring the
leadership of library organizations that have service as their main business. The
dimensions provided specific characteristics by which to explore servant leadership
practices among the CEOs in this study. Schein’s model became a method of determining
the impact of servant leadership in bringing success to the individual organization and its
members, to the extent that success was an assumption. Responses to the research
questions illustrated how these three foundational principles impacted the study.
The first two questions of the study illustrated this thought, calling for reflection
on the role of the CEOs in the three libraries as practicing servant leaders creating culture
and success. The first question focused on how the servant leadership practices of the

297
CEOs enabled an organizational culture that could lead to employee success, while the
second asked how that culture enabled employee success. The third question specifically
questioned how the successful employees could improve organizational performance.
The data collected from interviews, questionnaires, non-participant observation, and
documentation all illustrated that these CEOs practiced servant leadership principles,
which helped create a culture in which their employees were successful; this, in turn,
contributed to their organizations’ performance. The abundant evidence provided
illustrated how these, the employees of three libraries, were successfully serving their
communities rendering their organization as true service entities. This has implications
for the foundational theories when applied in libraries or any other service organization.
Practical implications. There is abundant evidence in the research literature on
the positive effect of the practice of servant leadership on organizational performance as
well as on employees (Chen et al., 2013; Liden et al., 2014; Overstreet et al., 2014;
Peterson et al., 2012). The review of the literature in Chapter 2 also revealed evidence
confirming the effect of the organizational culture on various aspects of organizations,
depending on its leadership (Harwiki, 2013; Mujeeb & Ahmad, 2011; Pikturnaitė &
Paužuolienė, 2014; Schein, 2004). This study adds to the literature that shows that the
servant leadership practices of leaders can influence the creation of a culture in an
organization enabling employee success as well as organizational performance. In the
current study, there was no exploration of how different the impact would be on the
organization and employees if the leader was trained in the principles of servant
leadership and organizational culture. None of the CEOs in this study had training in the
principles of servant leadership. None of the participants were very conversant with the

298
concept, even though they were practicing its tenets. This aligns with the conclusion of
Yarnetsky (2013) that there are many librarians who practice the servant leadership
principles unaware. This, however, weakened the study. If these CEOs were more
conversant with the matter, it is believed that they would have received higher scores on
many of the servant leadership dimensions.
This study also has practical implications for the field of leadership, exploring
aspects with no evidence of empirical research to date. The model of servant leadership
by Liden et al. (2008), and Schein’s (2004) model of organizational culture, are topics
explored separately in the leadership literature. However, there is no evidence of these
two models being utilized together to explore the perceptions of library CEOs. More
research is needed in this area.
Future implications. Definitions of leadership have been proffered in terms of
impact on followers. McCall (2002) stated that leadership is “an achievement term that
denotes some degree of success in eliciting collective behavior from others in pursuit of a
goal to be achieved” (p. 133). Bennis (2006) also reflected this idea, seeing leadership as
the leader’s effort at helping followers realize meaning as part of their work situation.
This principle applies to servant leaders as well.
The findings in this study indicate a need for further research into the advantages
of servant leadership as a method of creating improved organizational culture for
employee success. Even though this study consisted of a small number of participants
limited to three libraries, it produced information that gives credence to previous research
and created a curiosity for what needs to be accomplished in the future, even in libraries.
Since servant leadership is values based (Rubio-Sanchez et al., 2013; Russell, 2001), and

299
these values affect leader efficacy, this leadership style may create appreciation in
followers, who in turn become innovative, creative, and productive. Servant leadership
has the potential to enhance the journey of organizations as they march into the future.
Researchers have noted the need for sound leadership (Fehr et al., 2015; Lawton & Páez,
2015; Wu et al., 2015). Choudhary et al. (2013) offered servant leadership as one of the
two methods worth investigating, the other being transformational leadership. Further
studies involving this style of leadership (servant leadership), offer the potential to create
a method of leadership which could help develop sustainable, ethical, organizations to
serve the needs of global populations.
Greenleaf (1970) defined servant leadership as the method of offering service
first, along with the accompanying belief that leadership is the way to serve. Furthermore,
Chanhoo et al. (2015), Jones (2012a), Khan et al. (2015), Mehta and Pillay (2011),
Peterson et al. (2012), Udani and Lorenzo-Molo (2013), and Weinstein (2013), posited
that servant leadership acts as a catalyst that stimulates employee success to higher levels
of organizational performance, by way of going beyond, being engaged, and being more
productive. These terms emerged through the analysis as concepts espoused by the three
CEO participants involved in the study. The real-world results for previous theories
concerning servant leadership lay a foundation for continued research into this type of
leadership in the workplace generally, and libraries specifically. This additional research
could produce valuable guidelines regarding which type of organizations would benefit
from servant leadership, as well as which levels of leadership would find servant
leadership most advantageous.

300
Recommendations
Although there is a wealth of evidence in the literature for a positive relationship
between servant leadership and employee success in organizations, there is limited
empirical research on this variable and that of organizational culture. Previous research
about servant leadership have produced literature establishing this construct and the
serving culture (Liden et al., 2014); servant leadership and leaders who are efficient,
principled, and employee focused (Jones, 2012b), and servant leadership and ethical
leadership (Spears, 2002; van Dierendonck, 2011; Weinstein, 2013). However, few of
these scholars have produced meta-analyses of these subjects.
Recommendations for future research. Based on the findings, it is
recommended that future scholars conduct meta-analyses, in addition to more qualitative
and quantitative studies, to ascertain what statistical significance exists with other studies
on servant leadership. These meta-analyses would establish more accurate information
concerning the practice of servant leadership. These additional works would provide a
greater understanding of any possible harms or benefits that might accrue through the
specific method of servant leadership utilized in this study.
Ethnographic studies are also recommended, as they may produce significant
insights concerning the servant leadership style of governance. The current globalization
of society mandates that diverse cultures participate in the creation and sustainment of
global institutions. These studies may offer insights on preplanning for minor and
massive workplace changes, including in libraries, as social organizations. Lastly,
psychological studies might assist in determining the effect of servant leadership on the
leaders themselves.

301
Recommendations for future practice. The focus of this study was on CEOs as
servant leaders in the context of public libraries. As leaders of organizations serving the
public, these CEOs have a responsibility to ensure the success of the organization. Schein
(2004) confirmed this position, positing that a leader’s behaviors shape the culture of the
organization, thereby affecting the success of that organization. The success of
employees was also central to this study. To this end, three key areas of practice are
recommended, based on findings that emerged from this research.
1. The findings of the research should be shared with the library community in
Florida, especially the CEOs of other libraries. These leaders could gain a deeper
understanding of their organizations and personnel, as well as the impact their
leadership may have on the overall organization and its effectiveness. This was
initially cited as significant in Chapter 1.
2. The library community, through its many leadership agencies, including state and
national library associations, should encourage the development of a strong
mentoring program for training new and existing managers and CEOs on how to
imbibe and practice servant leadership principles in their organizations. The
benefit of mentoring programs cannot be overstated (Ibarra, 2016; Ruginosu,
2014; Wilson & Nancy, 1990).
Library schools in universities throughout the nation should closely examine the
study and the findings presented on the effectiveness of servant leadership generally, as
well as specifically in libraries. These findings might provide future researchers with new
directions for studying libraries as organizations in which servant leadership may be
practiced. University schools of Library and Information Studies should discuss the
possibility of adding servant leadership courses to their curriculum on leadership, and
those pertaining to the study of administration and or management. Currently, there is not
much evidence that there is an emphasis on servant leadership as a viable leadership style
that engenders highly effective organizations, as seen in the literature discussed in
Chapter 2. The development of such a curriculum could make a difference in the

302
operations of libraries as it pertains to both outcomes for personnel and the organization.
This would realize the recommendations of Anzalone (2007), Heaphey (2006), and
Yarnetsky (2013) for an adoption of servant leadership practices in libraries.