In Your Experience: Pathways and barriers for female students of STEM
by
Elizabeth J. Hartnett
Bachelor of Science
University of Missouri, 1988
Master of Library and Information Science
University of South Carolina, 2004

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Library and Information Science
College of Information and Communications
University of South Carolina
2017
Accepted by:
Samantha K. Hastings, Major Professor
Allison D. Anders, Committee Member
Karen W. Gavigan, Committee Member
Elise C. Lewis, Committee Member
Cheryl L. Addy, Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School








ProQuest Number: 10260673





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10260673
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Elizabeth J. Hartnett, 2017
All Rights Reserved.

ii

Acknowledgements
I wish to express my deep appreciation for the support and guidance of my
committee chair, Professor Samantha K. Hastings. Dr. Hastings provided invaluable
insights into the research process, encouraged an exploratory spirit, and kept me on an
even keel throughout the journey.
I am grateful to my committee members, Dr. Allison Anders, Dr. Karen Gavigan,
and Dr. Elise Lewis, whose comments and guidance on matters of research design and
reporting were vital to my navigation. Their encouraging words and support were much
appreciated.
In completing the data gathering phase, the help of several colleagues was
instrumental. I would like to thank April Dawkins and Karen Miller from the University
of South Carolina, and Alison Johnson from the University of North Carolina-Greensboro
for their vital assistance and cooperation in that phase of the project.

iii

Abstract
This study addresses the gender gap that exists in the STEM professions. The
number of jobs in STEM is climbing rapidly, but participation by women is
disproportionately low. Although they make up roughly half of the overall population,
women account for only about one quarter of the STEM workforce. A similar gap exists
among undergraduates majoring in STEM fields. This is an exploratory study intended to
identify and explore factors contributing to this gender gap, as perceived by
undergraduate students. Through an online survey and follow-up interviews of
undergraduates at two universities in the southeastern United States, data were collected
to provide in depth information on specific experiences participants consider to be
influential with regard to their decision to pursue or abandon a career in STEM. Themes
identified in the findings aligned closely with several ideas from research in Education,
including the importance of a sense of belonging and personal agency to success and
healthy development.

iv

Table of Contents

Acknowledgements .......................................................................................................... iii
Abstract............................................................................................................................. iv
List of Figures................................................................................................................... vi
Chapter 1 -Introduction ................................................................................................... 1
Chapter 2 -Literature Review .......................................................................................... 7
Chapter 3 -Methodology................................................................................................. 17
Chapter 4 -Findings ........................................................................................................ 31
Chapter 5 -Implications and further research ............................................................. 75
References ........................................................................................................................ 89
Appendix A –Survey Pilot Results ................................................................................ 97
Appendix B – ALERT Scale Items and Final Survey................................................ 106
Appendix C - Final Interview Questions .................................................................... 110

v

List of Figures
Figure 2.1. Gender Composition of Overall vs. STEM Workforce in the U.S. ................. 8
Figure 2.2. Projected Growth in Occupations 2010-2020 .................................................. 8
Figure 2.3. Postsecondary Female STEM Faculty 1993-2011 ......................................... 10
Figure 2.4. Female STEM Majors, 2004 versus 2014...................................................... 12
Figure 3.1 Comparison of study settings .......................................................................... 18
Figure 3.2 Ethnicity of Survey Respondents compared with Overall State Populations . 19
Figure 4.1. Characteristics of survey participants ............................................................ 32
Figure 4.2. Scores on ALERT scale, by gender and major .............................................. 33
Figure 4.3. Significance of variable relationships ............................................................ 34
Figure 4.4. Selection of influences by survey participants. .............................................. 35
Figure 4.5. Activities chosen, according to gender and major ......................................... 37
Figure 4.6. People chosen, according to gender and major .............................................. 38
Figure 4.7. Environments chosen, according to gender and major ................................. 39
Figure 4.8. Barriers chosen, according to gender and major ............................................ 40
Figure 4.9. Summary of interview participants ................................................................ 41
Figure 4.10. Coding Summary ........................................................................................ 43

vi

Chapter 1 -Introduction
Background
Females are underrepresented in occupations relating to the STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) disciplines. This has been true historically
and persists in the present day. A primary reason for this is societal norms that have
discouraged girls from pursuing an interest in these fields, identifying them as more
appropriate for males. The long-held stereotype that boys are better than girls at math and
science continues to do its damage to the confidence of female students in their own
abilities, as well as the expectations held for them by many of the important adults in
their lives.
Social norms and expectations exert significant influence on girls’ attitudes
toward STEM, and the problem extends well beyond childhood. Girls and boys all
receive similar exposure to STEM-related courses in high school, yet female students are
much less likely than male students to choose these subjects as their college major (Chen,
2009). By graduation, women earn just 20% of the bachelor’s degrees awarded in the
areas of physics, engineering, and computer science. The drop-off in representation
continues into graduate school and the workplace (Hill, Corbett, & St. Rose, 2010). In
recent years, women made up less than one-quarter of U.S. university faculty in computer
and information sciences (22 %), math (19 %), the physical sciences (18 %), and
engineering (12 %). (Di Fabio, Brandi, & Frehill, 2008).

1

In response to the growing need for skilled STEM employees as well as the
underrepresentation of females in STEM occupations, educators and community
organizations provide programs intended to foster an interest in STEM among girls. A
range of national organizations, including the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), the American Association of University Women (AAUW), and
the Girl Scouts undertakes major initiatives promoting the participation of girls in STEMrelated activities. Museums, libraries, and other cultural institutions incorporate programs
and create facilities that encourage the exploration of STEM subjects through activities
designed to foster experimentation and problem solving. Many school districts are
designing instruction and facilities specifically intended to encourage the development of
STEM skills and interests in students (Hill et al, 2010).
There has been encouraging progress in terms of increasing the number of
females working and studying in some STEM fields, so at least some of these efforts
have the desired effect (Hill et al, 2010). In 2016, for the first time in its history,
Dartmouth awarded more bachelor’s degrees in Engineering to females than males. Of
the 119 degrees awarded, 64 were to women. The school’s dean attributed this to the
practice of providing entry-level engineering courses to students across disciplines, as
well as “building a diverse population of role models” in the school (Trustees, 2016). At
the University of Texas, the number of women earning Engineering degrees more than
doubled in the decade between 2006 and 2016. Despite this growth, the overall
percentage of engineering degrees awarded to women there remains disproportionately
low: 22%, with certain areas, like Electrical/Computer, Aerospace, and Mechanical
Engineering seeing rates in 2015 that ranged from five to 16%. (Cockrell, 2016).

2

As these efforts to encourage female participation in STEM continue, it would be
useful to know more about what experiences the students themselves have found to be
most helpful, and also what they perceive to be the major barriers that remain on their
path to STEM careers.
A 2013 report (Mosatche, Matloff-Nieves, Kekelis, & Lawner, 2013) describes
three such programs used with thousands of middle school girls in an outside-of-school
time (OST) setting, offering both after-school and summer activities. These include
Techbridge, Girls Go Techbridge, and Access for Young Women (AFYW). Techbridge
originated in California, and was launched with a National Science Foundation grant in
2000. It was expanded in 2008 with the cooperation of the Girl Scouts to include 13
states (for Girls Go Techbridge). AFYW is a leadership program conducted by the
Queens Community House in New York City, which added a STEM emphasis beginning
in 2005.
Activities included in these programs were work on collaborative projects, lessons
on incorporating the scientific method in everyday life, research activities, and career
information. Survey data from participants in these programs indicated improvements in
technology skills, the ability to use data in research, and presentation skills. Most
significantly, the participants’ attitudes toward STEM careers often shifted: in the Go
Girls Techbridge survey, twice as many participants indicated an intention to pursue a
career in engineering at the end of the program as at the start (Mosatche et al., 2013).
Research Questions. To examine the problem of the underrepresentation of
women in STEM, it is useful to understand the experiences that have a positive or
negative impact on a girl’s intention to work in those fields. The proposed study seeks to

3

uncover these experiences, and to investigate whether the cognitive style of participants
is related to their career choice. Research questions include:
•

What experiences encourage female students to pursue an interest in
STEM fields?

•

What barriers do female students pursuing an interest in STEM
perceive?

•

Is there a relationship between cognitive style and career choice?

Definitions. One of the first steps in conducting the study was to clarify which
subject areas would be included under the umbrella of STEM. There is no universally
accepted list, and this can make comparing statistics from different sources problematic.
The search for an appropriate list yielded a number of candidates, including lists from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES),
the National Science Foundation (NSF), and even the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). These lists all had some overlap, but none were identical.
The DHS list has the broadest definition of STEM, which encompasses 22
disciplines, including areas such as Communications, Psychology, and Education. This
list is used in determining whether international students are eligible to remain for 17
months of additional training after graduation. This extension is granted to students in the
fields designated as STEM by the DHS. The list of STEM subjects compiled by the NSF
also includes Social Sciences and STEM Education. While it does include life sciences
such as Physiology, Genetics, and Immunology, the list makes no explicit mention of
programs such as Nursing, Medicine, or Allied Health. Both the NCES and the BLS
include health sciences and health occupations in their description of STEM disciplines.

4

For this study, the list provided by the NCES was used as a guide for categorizing
subjects as either STEM or Non-STEM. Its four categories: mathematics, natural
sciences, engineering, and computer/information sciences include the core disciplines
associated with STEM, as well as health sciences and technologies (Cunningham, Hoyer,
& Sparks, 2015).
Another important term to define for the study is cognitive style. For the purposes
of this study, cognitive style is defined as the way an individual person perceives, thinks,
solves problems, learns, and relates to others. This definition was first presented by
Witkin, Moore, Goodenough, and Cox (1977) in the late 1970’s, in their work on the
implications of cognitive style for education. Their research examined the influence of
cognitive style upon how students learn as well as how teachers teach, at both the K-12
and higher education levels.
Cognitive styles are generally considered to be arranged along a continuum, with
analytical tendencies (sometimes called field-independent style) seen as opposite to the
inclination toward less linear thinking and more reliance upon intuition (also called
“field-dependent style). A person’s cognitive style influences how they approach a
problem or task, but no specific cognitive style is considered to be indicative of superior
intelligence. There has however, been some evidence to indicate that cognitive style may
be related to career choice.
A recent descriptive study in Nigeria looked for relationships between cognitive
style and several other variables, including career choice among secondary students at 16
schools. Their data show a significant relationship between cognitive style and career
choice among participants. There was also a tendency for males to be identified as field-

5

independent more often than females, and the researchers attributed this to “cultural
stereotypes.” (Onyekuru, 2015).
Significance
Although extensive research over the last 25 years has targeted the need to
increase female participation in STEM and the reasons that need exists, progress has been
painfully slow. As success stories mount, it will be useful to understand what experiences
females engaged in the STEM fields find to be most helpful and what barriers they
currently perceive. This information can inform the work of educators, cultural
institutions, and community groups aiming to encourage the participation of females in
STEM.
Understanding the relationship between cognitive style and career choice may be
one way to assess the impact of social norms and expectations on female students’ pursuit
of an interest in STEM fields. In other words, it may clarify how significant those forces
are in changing the chosen path of an individual away from one that is aligned with their
cognitive style. This information may also help to clarify the continuing prevalence of
Implicit Biases, and the importance of working to change them.

6

Chapter 2 -Literature Review
To establish the proposed study’s context, this section examines the body of
literature that guides this study, including statistics and related findings in several areas.
First, it discusses the rising demand for skilled workers in the STEM fields and the
disproportionally low percentage of women working in those fields. Subsequent sections
deal with findings on social factors contributing to the situation, as well as theories that
can be applied toward understanding it.
Growing need and opportunities in STEM
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported in 2010 that STEM jobs increased at
more than twice the rate of non-STEM jobs in the decade beginning in 2000, and
projected that their growth would accelerate in the coming years. The same report shows
that the average earnings for STEM workers exceed that of workers in other areas,
regardless of education level (Langton, 2011). This situation presents an opportunity for
well-paid jobs, but statistics indicate that we face a considerable shortage of skilled
workers. This could be significantly ameliorated if female students chose to work in
STEM professions at a similar rate to males.
As it stands, the number of available STEM workers of any gender is inadequate
to meet the demand. Growth in STEM jobs over the last 10 years has been 3 times as fast
as other occupations. The projected growth through 2018 is expected to be 17.0% for
STEM jobs, compared with 9.8% for other areas (Langdon 2011). The National Science

7

Board (2012) reports that women represent just 26% of the workforce in science and
engineering, despite the fact that they make up about half of the nation’s college-educated
workforce. What is known about factors that contribute to this situation is discussed
below.

Overall
Workforce
by Gender

STEM
Workforce
by Gender

28%
47%

72%

53%
Male
Female

Figure 2.1. Gender Composition of Overall vs. STEM Workforce in the U.S.

Percent Job Increase, 2010-2020
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

All
Occupations

Mathematics

Computer
Systems
Analyst

Systems
Software
Developer

Figure 2.2. Projected Growth in Occupations 2010-2020.

8

Medical
Scientist

Biomedical
Engineer

Social and Environmental Factors
Research indicates the gender gap in STEM achievement is created by social and
environmental factors (Hill et al., 2010). There is consistently a difference between boys’
and girls’ interest and feelings of confidence when it comes to STEM subjects. This can
start at a very young age, and some evidence indicates that it is related to negative selfperception (Halpern et al., 2007).
Another important social factor in this discussion is Implicit Bias. Implicit Bias
refers to the fact that all humans harbor prejudices of which they are not aware, but that
nevertheless influence their choices and behavior. For example, even a woman working
in a STEM field may have a subconscious inclination to view men as more suited to her
position than women (Brownstein, 2015). Implicit Bias has an impact on career choices,
and is created by our social environment (Handelsman & Sakraney, 2015).
Mentors
The importance of mentoring relationships to success in any field has been well
documented. Research shows that girls benefit from relationships with role models and
mentors (Holmes, Redmond, Thomas & High, 2012; Mosatche et al., 2013; Weber,
2011). In their 2012 study, Holmes, Redmond, Thomas, and High looked for correlations
between middle school girls’ overall confidence in science and mathematics with their
experience in a year-long, afterschool mentoring program led by female university
students majoring in engineering. They found that the girls’ confidence levels were
significantly related to the quality of the mentoring relationship.
The disproportionally low percentage of women working in STEM careers and
faculty positions has an effect on the number of female students choosing and persisting

9

in these areas of study. By some calculations, women make up less than a quarter of the
faculty at American universities across the range of STEM subject areas. Biology is the
exception, with about 34% of faculty in that area being female (Hill, et al., 2010). As a
result, female role models and mentors in the STEM fields can be few and far between.
Research shows that a major influence on the confidence of women in STEM
fields is the presence of encouragement from influential individuals, including teachers
and peers (Zeldin 2000). However, much of the research indicates that female students
are likely to receive less feedback and encouragement from STEM faculty in college,
who tend to subtly favor males. Among these tendencies, discussed by Grunspan et al
(2016) is the fact that faculty members are more likely to spend time mentoring males,
respond to emails from males, and call on males in class (Moss-Racusin 2012, Milkman
2014, Eddy 2014).

Female STEM Faculty
100
80
60
40
20
0

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Figure 2.3. Postsecondary Female STEM Faculty 1993-2011

10

2007

2009

2011

Attrition
While male and female students generally receive nearly equal exposure to STEM
subjects through high school, the percentage of girls who choose STEM majors when
they enter college is very low (Chen, 2009). Research into the reasons for this suggests
that they include the institutional climate, faculty characteristics, support, and resources
for STEM learning (Blickenstaff 2005; Fouad et al. 2010; Ost 2010). In work focusing
particularly on female STEM undergraduates of color, Espinosa (2011) found the impact
of the college environment to be especially significant on rates of attrition. Institutions in
which these students were able to participate in a “robust community of STEM students”
as well as in undergraduate research programs, helped female students of color to persist
in their study of STEM subjects.
A recently published cross-disciplinary study examined how gender impacts
students’ perceptions of their peers with regard to subject mastery, in this case: Biology
(Grunspan et al, 2016). The researchers explored the possibility that the social
environment in the classroom contributes to higher attrition rates for female college
students in the sciences. When asked to identify knowledgeable classmates, students of
both genders were more likely to nominate males, even when their actual performance in
the class did not support that opinion. The authors suggest that this bias might contribute
to female attrition because of its negative effect on self-confidence, and in turn,
performance. They listed three major influences on women’s decision to leave a STEM
field: sense of belonging, decision to start families, and confidence that one can succeed
in the chosen profession.

11

Women in STEM Majors
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2004
2014

Figure 2.4. Female STEM Majors, 2004 versus 2014
A study currently underway at Stanford University, called Elephant in the Valley,
gathers information from women in technology professions, primarily located in
California’s Silicon Valley (Vassallo, 2015). Surveys of over 200 professional women
elicit their experiences in five major areas: Feedback & Promotion, Inclusion,
Unconscious biases, Motherhood, and Harassment & Safety. Researchers are responding
to the fact that, while women in technology fields are well aware of workplace
disparities, they often come as a surprise to most men working in the field. Their findings
show considerable gender discrimination as a common experience. For example, 66% of
respondents reported being excluded from networking opportunities because of gender,
and 88% said that they have been bypassed with questions. In other words, clients or
colleagues have asked a male colleague questions that would best be answered by a
female present. Researchers see this as an example of unconscious bias on the part of
male colleagues. This study illustrates the fact that barriers for women in STEM extend
far beyond the classroom.

12

Recognizing the barriers to female participation in STEM is just one part of the
puzzle. Also relevant is information on what instructional approaches are most beneficial
to girls in STEM subjects.
Resources and Instruction
Research indicates specific approaches to STEM instruction are effective in
reaching female students in particular. Girls are motivated by open-ended, hands-on, and
personally relevant projects that they can approach in their own style (Chatman, Boisnier,
Spataro, Anderson, & Berdahl, 2008; Mosatche et al, 2013; Calabrese, Kang, Tan,
O’Neill, & Brecklin, 2013). They gain confidence when they receive direct feedback on
their effort and strategies (Halpern et al., 2007), and benefit from collaboration and
communication (Werner & Denner, 2009).
Werner and Denner (2009) have studied the effects of working with a partner
upon girls’ performance in computer science courses. They found that students who
worked with a partner “were more confident in their solutions, declared computer
science–related majors more frequently, passed this and subsequent programming courses
at higher rates, and produced higher-quality computer programs than students who
worked solo.” (p. 31) While this applied to students of both genders, the boost in
confidence seen in women (24%) was much higher than that in men (15%).
Werner (2009) points to the value of partnerships in encouraging persistence in
computer science on the part of female students: “Because working with a partner may
also result in social support, it is a particularly promising strategy for improving the
confidence, problem solving, and performance of students who do not typically persist or
excel in computer science, such as girls” (p. 32).

13

Based on the research previously described, effective instruction for girls in
STEM should involve collaboration, frequent communication and feedback, and
relatively self-directed projects.
Relevant Theory
Ideas from the fields of Social and Educational Psychology help to explain how
this imbalance in the STEM fields came to be. This section discusses how three major
theories relate to the problem of underrepresentation of females in STEM. These relevant
theories are Social Interdependence Theory, Implicit Bias, and Radical Change Theory.
Social Interdependence. Social Interdependence Theory explores the idea that
how our goals are structured determines how we will interact, and in turn affects
outcomes (Johnson, 2003). Positive Social Interdependence occurs when the individual’s
efforts are facilitated by interaction with others. It validates the idea that collaborative
work can produce better results than individual or competitive frameworks for tasks. This
theory has been tested and applied in educational research for decades, and certainly has
implications for the design of programs intended to encourage female students in their
pursuit of STEM subjects.
Given the information discussed above regarding instructional approaches that
most benefit girls, it seems likely that positive social interdependence is essential for
encouraging persistence in STEM among female students. Identifying activities and
approaches that promote social interdependence would be one way to encourage more
students to study STEM subjects.
Implicit Bias. Another important idea, briefly discussed above, is Implicit Bias,
also known as Implicit Social Cognition. This describes the unconscious assumptions that

14

we all make as a result of our experience. These assumptions can run completely counter
to our conscious opinions about things like gender and race, causing us to make decisions
that do not necessarily reflect those opinions. (Statts, 2015).
This type of inner bias affects the choices that female students make in relation to
career goals and what interests and skills they see as appropriate for themselves. The
study of Biology students discussed above points to this sort of bias as a factor in attrition
rates for female students of STEM. It also influences the attitudes they encounter from
classmates, parents, and teachers. Research shows that male STEM majors in the U.S.
strongly associate science and maleness. On the other hand, female STEM majors show a
low level of Implicit Bias with regard to gender and science (Nosek, 2011).
Research has found that Implicit Bias is universal, but also malleable. It can be
reduced through awareness and experience. There are methods for measuring Implicit
Bias with regard to gender and subject areas specifically. The levels of this type of bias
within an individual, as well as the bias they encounter among peers and mentors, could
provide insight into reasons for selecting or not selecting STEM majors as a field of
study.
Radical Change. Developed by Eliza Dresang in the 1990’s, Radical Change
Theory is often applied to the study of how young people learn and seek information, and
how this changes in response to societal conditions. The theory identifies three ways that
behavior changes: in terms of forms, perspectives, and boundaries. This certainly applies
to the proposed study, which explores the perspectives of females with regard to STEM
careers, and how their experiences and environment shape those perspectives. In order to
play a larger role in the STEM fields, it may be necessary for girls to cross gender

15

boundaries that are only now being brought to light. While much of the research using
Radical Change Theory has been related to information seeking behavior, it can provide a
useful lens for examining how female students view themselves and others. It takes into
account the need for interactivity, connectivity, and access that characterizes students in
the digital age (Dresang, 2005).
The factors contributing to the gender gap in STEM are very complex, and relate
to ideas from many disciplines. The research suggests several important factors that may
influence girls to pursue or abandon their interest in STEM. One interesting idea to
explore is whether these same factors emerge as themes in the data collected in the
current study.

16

Chapter 3 -Methodology
As discussed in Chapter One, this study aimed to determine what experiences
female undergraduates feel have encouraged them to pursue an interest in STEM and also
what barriers they have encountered. These were examined in conjunction with the
participants’ cognitive style in order to discover what role they play in students’ choice of
career field.
The study addresses three questions:

• What experiences encourage female students to pursue an interest in STEM
fields?

• What barriers do female students pursuing an interest in STEM perceive?
• Is there a relationship between cognitive style and career choice?
This chapter discusses the approach used in exploring these questions. It provides
information on the tools and instruments used to gather data, which included the online
survey, ALERT Scale, and follow-up interviews. The chapter concludes with a discussion
of the study’s limitations.
Approach and Data Gathering
This study is exploratory in nature, and seeks to identify the variables that influence
girls in their decision to pursue an interest in STEM fields. The study utilizes surveys,
interviews, and content analysis to elicit and analyze information from undergraduates of
various majors at the University of South Carolina and at the University of North
Carolina at Greensboro.
17

Setting and Participants
Study participants were undergraduate students of both genders with various
majors at two universities: The University of South Carolina in Columbia, South
Carolina, and The University of North Carolina at Greenville. These settings were chosen
for their proximity and the likelihood of access to student participants. Those participants
were selected through convenience sampling, defined as sampling that involves drawing
samples that are both easily accessible and willing to participate in a study (Yu, 2007).
Participants were identified through working with contacts at both universities willing to
administer the online survey to their students.

City populationa
Undergraduate
Enrollmentb
Gender splitc
Courses in sample
a

University of South CarolinaColumbia

University of North CarolinaGreensboro

134,000
24,000

280,000
16,000

Males 45.9 %, Females 54.1
SLIS 202

Males 34%, Females 66%
ENG 101

U.S Census Bureau
http://ipr.sc.edu/enrollment/prel2016/spring/freeze.pdf and http://admissions.uncg.edu/discoverabout.php
c
http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/university-of-south-carolina3448/student-life.
b

Figure 3.1 Comparison of study settings
With the assistance of two instructors at the University of South Carolina and one
from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 121 survey participants were
identified. These were all undergraduate students, and were enrolled in either SLIS 202,
Introduction to Information Literacy and Technology (at South Carolina) or English 101
(at North Carolina). These courses were chosen because they are open to all majors and

18

would provide a broad cross-section of the student body and would more likely result in a
heterogeneous sample.
The survey participants ranged in age from 18 to 45, with the average age falling
at 20 years. That matches the average age for all undergraduates at the University of
South Carolina, as reported in 2015, and is very close to UNCG’s average undergraduate
age of 21 years. (University of South Carolina, 2015; College Portrait, 2015).
Just over half of the survey respondents (57%) were white and 27% were AfricanAmerican. Just 6% of the students responding reported their ethnicity as Asian, 5%
Hispanic, and less than 1% chose either Native American or Pacific Islander. This
distribution of ethnicities fairly closely reflects the overall population of the region (see
Figure 3.2).
Ethnic Identity

Survey South Carolina North Carolina

White

57%

68.4%

71.2%

Black

27%

26.7%

22.2%

Asian

6%

1.6%

2/8%

Hispanic

5%

5.5%

9.1%

Native American

<1%

0.5%

1.6%

Pacific Islander

<1%

0.1%

0.1%

Figure 3.2 Ethnicity of Survey Respondents compared with Overall State
Populations
Survey respondents were also fairly well distributed along gender lines, with 72 (59.5%)
of the 121 respondents self-identifying as female, and 48 (39.6%) male. One respondent
preferred not to identify as one gender or the other.

19

The percentage of male participants who reported a major in a STEM field was
38, slightly higher than the 32% of female participants who were STEM majors.
Initial Survey
The first step in data gathering was administration of an online survey using the
Qualtrics platform. A pilot was administered in March of 2016 to test the survey. Pilot
participants were recruited from the SLIS 201 class at the University of South Carolina.
The following section summarizes the findings of this pilot survey and discusses the
adjustments that were made to the instrument as a result.
The survey pilot. A pilot was conducted in March 2016 to test the survey
instrument. This section summarizes the results of this test, with information relating to
the various areas addressed by the survey questions and the results of the ALERT Scale
of Cognitive Style. The ALERT scale was developed in 1989 by Dr. Lauren D. Crane of
Western Michigan University, and is widely used among researchers in the fields of
Education and Psychology. The scale has been used in psychological evaluations, to
examine how educators determine their instructional approach, and also as a tool for
human resource departments in recruiting and selecting the workforce in a variety of
occupations (Poore, 2014).
The pilot survey was made up of two parts: the ALERT Scale of Cognitive Style,
followed by 18 questions. These, along with a summary of the pilot results, are included
as Appendix A.
Participants in the pilot were students in an undergraduate course, SLIS 201, in
the School of Library and Information Science at the University of South Carolina. Of the

20

five respondents, one was a sophomore, two were juniors and two were seniors. They
represented 3 ethnic groups: African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian. Four of the
participants self-identified as female, one male. Two of the respondents were Accounting
majors; two majored in Library and Information Science, and one in Psychology. When
asked to identify their intended occupation, two participants chose business and financial
operations. The three other occupations selected were: computer or mathematical,
healthcare support, and office or administrative support.
Several survey questions addressed the students’ backgrounds. Four of the pilot’s
participants attended public high schools, and one a private high school. High schools
were located in four states: Maryland, New Jersey, New York, and South Carolina. With
regard to the occupations pursued by the adults in the home where participants grew up, a
broad range of responses was received. Occupations listed here included: management of
professional occupations, management of business or financial operations, business
operations specialist, community and social services, education, training, or library,
health practitioners and technical operations, healthcare support, personal care
supervisors, and transportation or material moving.
The next section of the survey included questions about experiences and
activities in which the students have participated, as well as people who have influenced
them. What follows is a summary of the responses to those items received from each of
the five individuals in the pilot survey.
Influential people
All of the five respondents listed parents as being important influences in their
development of career interests. Respondent Number One commented that her parents

21

provided steady encouragement: “They told me that I’m able to do anything I put my
mind to as long as I keep in the right path…” She also listed school clubs as being
influential, and this was the most frequently identified activity among all respondents.
Respondent One also credited travel with influencing her interest in medicine. Her
primary barrier comes in the form of teachers cautioning her to avoid setting her sights
too high.
In addition to parents and teachers, Respondent Two included “other family” and
“group leaders” as influential people. She included an extensive list of activities, and also
cited travel as an influential environment, saying that it “opened my eyes to an interest in
business.”
Respondent Three was the only participant who did not include teachers as a
category of influential people. She listed parents and peers, and cited internships, church
groups, and sports as being particularly influential activities in her career planning. She
was also able to observe her parents’ experiences as they started a business of their own.
In addition to his parents and teachers, Respondent Four was influenced by people
he has never met. “Game designers and online personalities have kindled my passion for
programming and development,” he wrote. School clubs were valuable for helping him to
develop his skills in team-building and problem-solving. “I enjoyed coming up with
solutions to difficult problems in clubs and sports teams.” He also commented on the
supportive atmosphere at home, which allowed him to “spend a lot of time analyzing
media and practicing programming.”

22

Respondent Five also chose her home atmosphere as an influential environment,
saying, “My friend lives with me in our apartment, so she tells me all sorts of neat things
about information science.” She also included “peers” as a category of people that were
influential, and described the benefits of participation in school clubs as helping her to
“…be more sociable, and open up about myself more.”
On the ALERT Scale of Cognitive Style, respondents to the pilot survey all fell
into one of two categories: Strong Left Hemisphere Orientation (1) or Moderate Left
Hemisphere Orientation (4). This indicates a tendency toward an analytical approach to
learning and problem-solving. There was no division apparent across gender, as the one
male participant fell into the same category as three of the females.
Pilot participants took the survey online and completed the ALERT Scale during
class time. The total time required was under 15 minutes and the students reported no
problems in understanding questions or completing the tasks.
Following analysis of these results, the decision was made to add ALERT Scale
questions directly to the survey, in order to simplify data collection, and to allow for
connections to be made between ALERT Scale scores and both the survey data and
subsequent interview results. The open-ended questions included in the pilot survey were
eliminated following in the final survey, in order to simplify coding of a larger number of
survey responses.
Based on lessons learned in the pilot, the survey was modified and streamlined.
The resulting instrument includes 35 questions, including the 20 items that comprise the
ALERT Scale. The survey questions, administered to 121 undergraduates in September
2016, are included as Appendix B.

23

Scale of Cognitive Style. As part of the online survey, participants completed the
ALERT Scale of Cognitive Style. The scale consists of 20 pairs of statements.
Respondents are asked to choose the statement that best applies to their own attitude
toward the situations posed by the questions. Scores reveal where the participants fall on
a spectrum of cognitive styles ranging from Strong Left Hemisphere Orientation
(sometimes referred to as “logical” cognitive styles) to Strong Right Hemisphere
Orientation (also called “intuitive” cognitive style).
While cognitive style can be a useful framework for understanding an individual’s
preferred approach to learning and problem-solving, the ALERT Scale does not provide
an in depth exploration. Rather, it gives a relatively simple overview and introductory
look at how that individual learns. This type of scale is not viewed with favor in the fields
of Neuroscience and Psychiatry, where testing addresses complex connections between
brain function and cognition. For practical reasons, it was not possible to include this sort
of complex instrument in the current study.
There is evidence that an individual’s cognitive style can influence their career path.
Martin (1998) outlines several points that should be considered in relation to cognitive
style, which can be paraphrased as follows:
•

It is possible to observe and measure differences in cognitive styles

•

A person’s cognitive style can be detected by observing verbal and non-verbal
communications.

•

Specific cognitive styles are associated with certain careers, and often take on a
good or bad connotation.

24

•

A person or organization can become more creative and effective when the two
styles are fused. (p. 2)
While the analytic, or “left brain” cognitive style is most often associated with

STEM, Martin (1998) emphasizes that there are benefits to both:
…when differences and similarities among cognitive styles in a group are
recognized and taken into consideration, a type of synergy can be created. This
synergy results when the group honors the efforts of each of its members to use
his or her particular cognitive expertise in those stages of the problem-solving
process where it is most appropriate. For example, systematics and intuitives
might work together on the first phase of the problem-solving process (problem
identification). Then the intuitives might use a divergent approach by expanding
all of the problem possibilities in order to identify all potential problems.
Subsequently, the systematics might employ a convergent approach, using the
intuitives’ list to identify realistic problems. Ultimately, the focus of the group’s
problem-solving activity would become more and more narrow and specific until
a problem statement could be generated. (p. 9)
The results of the ALERT Scale were tied to the other survey data, as well as
responses in follow-up interviews, and examined for patterns and relationships, in order
to create a more detailed portrait of participants.
Follow-up Interviews
At the end of the online survey, all 121 participants were asked to take part in a
follow-up interview. The requested contact information was provided by 49 survey
participants and of those, eight ultimately completed a follow-up interview. The 49

25

potential participants were contacted initially by email, and this round of contact yielded
5 scheduled interviews. After the first round of interviews was complete, a second email
was sent, resulting in 3 additional interviews. The survey instrument included a total of
35 questions and required an average of seven minutes and 42 seconds to complete. The
follow-up interview aimed to elicit greater detail on experiences of the students,
especially in relation to their responses on the survey. Interview questions were openended, and asked respondents to describe their personal experience relating to the three
major topics covered in the survey: people, places, and activities that played a role,
whether positive or negative, in their choice of major and career. The interview questions
are included as Appendix C.
Using directed qualitative content analysis, interview data were coded to uncover
major themes and important ideas. This method is an established approach to analyzing
data. According to Hsieh (2005), its goal is “to validate or extend conceptually a
theoretical framework or theory. Existing theory or research can help focus the research
question…” and “provide predictions about variables of interest or about the relationships
among variables, thus helping to determine the initial coding scheme or relationships
between codes.” (p. 1281) Since some possible variables influencing females’
participation in STEM have been identified by the research discussed above, this
approach was useful for initial coding, which looked for data relating to mentoring,
Implicit Bias, instructional approaches, and attrition, or change in career path.
Multiple rounds of coding were conducted, beginning with descriptive coding,
which enabled the identification of major categories of data (Saldaña, 2011). Using field
notes and analytic memos to guide that development, coding proceeded into in vivo,

26

values, emotion, and versus coding, as recommended by Saldaña (2011). A consistent
and exhaustive list of schema was developed, to help insure inter-coder reliability, which
was established through review by a fellow researcher. From the themes that emerged, it
was possible to identify concepts that help to describe experiences along the path to
STEM careers that students find beneficial, as well as those seen as obstacles.
These data were synthesized with the survey data and the ALERT Scale
categorizations to determine where connections could be found and whether the data are
in any way contradictory. Comparisons were made, with particular attention to contrasts
that emerge in responses of males and females, as well as any differences observable in
responses from students majoring in STEM and those in other academic majors.
Additional exploration
In an effort to expand understanding of the factors that are important for success in
STEM, particularly among females, an interview was also conducted with a distinguished
computer scientist and researcher. The subject to of the interview was suggested by the
supervisor of this study. This individual is a Senior Research Scientist and Director of
User Research at the prestigious Online Computer Library Center (OCLC). She
collaborates on international research projects relating to topics like data mining and
information-seeking behavior. She shared her experiences through her responses to the
following questions:
•

What were some early influences, mentors, or experiences that you feel were
significant in pursuit of your interest in a STEM-related profession?

•

Based on your experience, what advice do you have for young women interested
in working in STEM or technology-related jobs?

27

•

Are there any resources or programs that you know of that you would recommend
to women getting started in STEM fields?

These questions were generated with the intention of reflecting the contrasts and
similarities that might arise between the viewpoint of an established professional and that
of undergraduates just beginning to navigate the world of work. The interview was
intended to provide additional insight into current conditions and challenges for women
in STEM careers. The wealth of information gained from this interview made it clear that
the career paths of established female professionals in STEM would be a fruitful topic for
future study. The interview data were coded and are discussed in Chapter 5 in terms of
topics for further research.
Limitations
The current study was limited in the sense that the sample size was small, both for
the survey (121 respondents) and the follow-up interviews (eight respondents). This was
primarily due to time constraints and to scheduling challenges inherent to working with
undergraduate students. Another factor could be that there was no incentive offered for
participation. Although 49 survey participants provided an email address for follow-up
contact, only eight eventually scheduled and participated in the interview.
The study’s results are not generalizable, but instead they suggest what variables
are most important in influencing these particular students in their decisions regarding
major and career choice. Since the sample consisted entirely of undergraduate university
students, it is also limited to people with sufficient financial means to enroll at a
university. The sample has a small geographical reach as well, and includes only
undergraduate students at two mid-sized universities in the southeastern United States.

28

A limitation imposed by the use of the ALERT Scale became evident during the course
of the study. The scale was selected in part because of its very accessible language and
brevity, and the fact that it has been vetted in the field. However, there is considerable
question in disciplines like Neuroscience and Psychiatry about the scale’s usefulness.
Experts in these areas who have weighed in on the topic suggest that the scale overly
simplifies the very complex processes and factors at play. While it is generally agreed
that there are indeed different styles of learning and problem-solving, the notion that one
side of the brain or the other may be dominant is largely dismissed (Kozhevnikov, 2007).
In recent years, more complex and reliable tests have been developed that more
accurately measure cognitive style. These often involve hands-on activities in a
laboratory setting, and would not be practical for the current study. With this evidence in
mind, little significance can be attributed to the ALERT scores recorded for participants.
Conclusion
By focusing specifically on the experiences deemed significant by undergraduate
students, this study sheds light on their perspective. It concentrates on experiences and
influences outside of the classroom that the students themselves see as either help or a
hindrance to their pursuit of chosen topics and careers.
While the research clearly shows that barriers to women persist into higher
education and the workplace, early experiences may change the expectations of students,
including young girls intent upon a STEM career. Understanding which of these are most
beneficial or detrimental to their ambitions can valuably inform instruction and other
efforts. Used in conjunction with greater awareness of the unconscious biases held by

29

people off all ages and genders, this information may begin to change the landscape for
women in STEM.
Given the impact of excellence in the STEM fields upon the prosperity and
progress of the country, clearing barriers and providing encouragement to females in
STEM serves everyone’s interests.

30

Chapter 4 -Findings
This chapter describes the findings of this study, derived from the data provided by
both the online survey, administered to 121 undergraduates, and by the follow-up
interviews conducted with eight undergraduates. It begins by summarizing the survey
results and providing information determined from descriptive statistics. Next it gives an
overview of the interview results and then includes detailed accounts of individual
interviews. The chapter concludes by considering these two sets of data together in order
to create a fuller picture of the ideas expressed by participants and the themes that arose
in their discussions.
Survey Findings
The online survey was conducted in September 2016 on the Qualtrics platform. A
total of 121 complete responses were received, with participants drawn from
undergraduate courses at the University of South Carolina and the University of North
Carolina-Greensboro. While 125 students participated in the survey, four did not
complete all questions, stopping at the end of the ALERT Scale section. Their data were
not included in the analysis.
As discussed in Chapter 3, the ALERT Scale was included to aid in discovering
more about the participant’s approach to problem-solving. It provided a general idea
about whether the respondent tends to be more logical and analytical or more holistic and
subjective in their learning style. Without the additional demographic information

31

provided later in the survey, scores were not useful, since they could not be connected to
things like gender or major field of study.
Participant characteristics. The survey participants included 72 students
identifying as female, 48 as males, and one who preferred not to specify a gender. This
provided a fairly balanced sample, with roughly 60% of respondents being female and
40% male. The one “prefer not to answer” response was excluded in looking at data
related to gender.
All of the respondents were undergraduates, and each of the classifications, from
freshman to senior, were represented. Well over half of the students were freshmen.
The ages of the students surveyed ranged from 18 to 45, with 90% of respondents
falling into the 18 to 21-year-old range. Asked to identify their race, four of the
respondents selected “other”, and the majority (57%) chose “white/Caucasian.”
Characteristics are summarized in Figure 4.1.

Participant Characteristics
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Figure 4.1. Characteristics of survey participants

32

ALERT Score. Among the 121 survey respondents, the average of the scores
recorded for the ALERT scale was 8.33, and fell within the range indicating a moderate
orientation toward a more analytical thinking style. There were slight differences in the
averages when they were examined through the filter of gender or major field of study.
These are illustrated in Figure 4.2. Since lower scores indicate a stronger tendency
toward objective, logical, and analytical thinking, these results would indicate that the
males in the sample group had a slightly greater tendency toward analytic thinking, and
that STEM majors, whatever their gender, fell farther toward that end of the spectrum
than did students with non-STEM majors.

ALERT Score by Gender and Major
Male STEM
Female-STEM
Males
Females
All Non-STEM
All STEM majors
Overall Average
7

7.2

7.4

7.6

7.8

8

8.2

8.4

8.6

8.8

Figure 4.2. Scores on ALERT scale, by gender and major
While these data may prompt some interesting questions and inspire future
investigations, ANOVA analysis indicated that the variables of gender and major (STEM
or Non-STEM) are not strongly related to ALERT score, as shown in Figure 4.3.

33

Levene's Test of Equality of Error Variancesa
Dependent Variable: Score
Independent: Gender
F

df1

df2

2.280

1
Independent: Major
1

1.373

Sig.
120

.134

119

.244

Tests of Between-Subjects Effects

Source
Corrected
Model
Intercept
filter_$

Dependent Variable: Score
Independent: Gender
Type III
Sum of
Mean
Squares
df
Square
a
1.912
1
1.912

F
.148

Sig.
.701

234.863

1

234.863

18.221

.000

1.912

1

1.912

.148

.701

Independent: Major
Corrected
Model
Intercept
Majors

6.959a

1

6.959

.548

.460

8380.083

1

8380.083

660.497

.000

6.959

1

6.959

.548

.460

Figure 4.3. Significance of variable relationships
Influences. In addition to the ALERT Scale and questions related to
demographics, the survey asked participants to identify activities, people, and
environments that were influential to them in choosing a career path. Another question

34

asked the students to identify barriers that they have faced. Figure 4.4 shows which
options were chosen most often on these questions overall.

Activities
Scouting
Summer Camps
Internships
Science Fairs
Sports
Church Groups
School Clubs

0

20

40

60

80

60

80

100

People
Group Leaders
Employers
Peers
Other family
Parents
Teachers
0

20

40

35

100

Environments
Libraries
Hobbies
Travel
Museums
Home
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Barriers
Peer pressure

Lack of resources

Family Expectations
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Figure 4.4. Selection of influences by survey participants.
For further information, these responses were examined through various
demographic filters. One that seems most relevant in the present study is gender, and
another is whether the major field of study is a STEM or Non-STEM subject. The
following set of figures breaks down the responses to questions about influential
activities, people, and environments, as well as perceived barriers, based on those

36

100

characteristics. For each question, several participants selected “other,” and supplied
further information. Tables are included below to indicate what was entered for each of
the four areas, with the items categorized by gender and by major field.

Activities -by Gender and Involvement in
STEM
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Females

Males

STEM

Non-STEM

ACTIVITIES
“Other” Responses
Volunteering in Summer
Military
Job
Theater
Marching band
Hospital/Daycare
Performing arts
Self Employed Job
Teen Advisory Group

Females
X

Males
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Figure 4.5 Activities chosen, according to gender and major

37

STEM
X
X

NonSTEM
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X

People- by Gender and Involvement in STEM
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Females

Males

STEM

PEOPLE
“Other” Responses

Females

Males

Media
School Programs
Mentor
Celebrities
No one
Myself
Children
Librarians

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

NON-STEM

STEM

Non-STEM

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

Figure 4.6. People chosen, according to gender and major

38

X
X
X

Environments- By Gender and Involvement in
STEM
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Hobbies

Home
Libraries
Atmosphere
Females

ENVIRONMENTS
“Other” Responses
Research
School
Hospital
Church
Clinic
Internet
Studio
Work
Family History
Hospitals/Daycare

Males

Females
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Museums
STEM

Males

Travel

Other

NON-STEM
STEM

Non-STEM
X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X

Figure 4.7. Environments chosen, according to gender and major

39

X
X
X

Barriers -By Gender and
Involvement in STEM
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Family
Expectations
Females

Lack of
Resources
Males

BARRIERS
“Other” Responses

Personal Expectations
Self-Doubt
Grades
Indecision
Pay And Conditions
Prospects For Success
Financial Hardships
Challenging Coursework
Amount Of Work
Lack Of Direction
Lack Of Training
Learning Challenges
(ADHD)

Peer Pressure

STEM
Females

Other

NON-STEM
Males

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

STEM
X
X

Non-STEM
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

Figure 4.8. Barriers chosen, according to gender and major

40

X

Interview Findings
This section describes the eight students who agreed to participate in a follow-up
interview. It summarizes their demographic characteristics, identifies the major themes
that emerged in the coding process, and then provides a narrative profile of each
interview subject.
At the end of the online survey was a request for participation in a follow-up
interview. Contact information was provided by 49 survey participants and of those, eight
ultimately completed a follow-up interview. Five of the eight subjects identified as male,
and three as female. Two of the male subjects were Computer Science majors. Other
majors included Biochemistry (female), Psychology (female), Media Arts (male),
Mathematics (male), Sociology (male), and Public Health (female). Among the
respondents, 4 indicated their ethnicity as white, and 3 as African-American. One
participant listed ethnicity as “other.” Figure 4.9 provides an overview of this interview
group, and is followed by a summary of their responses.

Interview Subjects-Gender

Interview Subjects- Major

Biochemistry
Psychology
Media Arts

Mathematics

Female

Male

41

Computer
Science
Public
Health
Sociology

Interview Subjects-Ethnicity

African-American

Other

Interview Subjects-Academic
Class

White/Caucasian

Freshman

Sophomore

Junior

Figure 4.9. Summary of interview participants
Interview Responses. Coding of the responses collected in the interview process
revealed several themes that could be used as a framework for exploring significant
experiences in students’ lives. These are ideas that were frequently mentioned as having
an impact on each student’s navigation of the path to a career and pursuing their interests.
The themes are: a sense of belonging, a desire to help others, certain pivotal life events,
the importance of a role model or mentor, the idea of self-directed learning, student’s
perceived level of control, and access to practical information and experiences. Figure
4.10 provides a summary of how frequently each of these ideas was touched upon in the
interviews.
Descriptive coding was used simultaneously with in vivo, emotion, and versus
approaches to analyze the interview responses. Each interview was coded in its entirety
before moving on to the next subject, in order to provide a holistic understanding of each
participant’s experiences. With the same aim, interview data are presented in a narrative
form in this report.

42

Interview Summary by Topic and Category
Interviewees
Topics and Categories
A
B
C
SENSE OF BELONGING
1A Peer connections
1B School connections
1C Family connections
1D Like-minded people
DESIRE TO HELP OTHERS
2A Volunteering
2B Each one Reach one

X

3D Met inspiring person
3E Changing schools
3F Witnessed birth of sibling
ROLE MODEL/MENTOR
4A Validation of interest
4B Family
4C Lack of
SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING
5A Self-expression
5B Observe others
5C Pursue interests independently
SENSE OF CONTROL
6A Opportunities for leadership
6B Broad knowledge of potential
occupations
6C Self-efficacy
NEED FOR PRACTICAL
INFORMATION/EXPERIENCE
7A Exposure to the workplace
7B Teach kids how to think
7C Information on higher education
BARRIERS
8A Lack of resources
8B Discrimination
8C Learning problems
8D Negative comments
ENCOURAGING EXPERIENCES

X

E

F

G

H

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

2C Sharing chosen field
PIVOTAL EVENTS
3A Health issues
3B Parent divorce
3C Adoption

D

X

X

X

8
1
1
1

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

3
1
1
9
2
5
2
8
1
2
5
7
3
3
1
6

X
X
X

9
3
1
1
4
6
2
2
2

X

X

Total

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

9A Environments

X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

1
2
3
14
2
6
2
5

14

43

9A1 Travel
9A2 Work
9A3 Museums
9A4 Libraries
9A5 Church
9A6 Home
9B People
9B1 Family
9B2 Teacher
9B3 Peer
9B4Professional
9C Activities
9C1 Scouting
9C2 Science Fairs
9C3 Summer Camp
9C4 Sports
9C5 Theater
School Clubs
Total Responses

X
X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

17

X
X
16

13

X
X
8

X
14

X
13

9

14

3
3
3
1
2
2
10
6
2
1
1
12
2
1
2
2
1
4
104

Figure 4.10. Coding Summary

Subject Profiles. To provide a more complete picture of each interview subject, the
following section presents individual profiles. Subjects were assigned a pseudonym for
purposes of identification.
Anna
Anna is a freshman attending the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. She
is studying Public Health, and is intent upon a career in medicine. Anna attended a public
high school in North Carolina, and took advantage of several opportunities outside of the
classroom for exploring potential careers.
The ALERT scale score for Anna was 8, which indicates a nearly neutral
orientation, slightly favoring the analytical. In her interview, Anna described her
approach to grocery shopping. Her strategy is geared toward efficiency, proceeding from
an inventory of the refrigerator through generation of a categorized list that makes it
possible to move through the store systematically, and “not go back and forth.”
44

In her interview, Anna indicated an inclination toward science and math, along
with an interest in working with children. She is looking for a career that will allow her to
balance these interests with her desire to be a mother, and although she did not list that as
a barrier to pursuing her chosen field, she did mention it when asked about biases she has
encountered. She expressed concern about the time it would take to complete a medical
degree, saying “I don’t want to be 30 when I have kids.”
What follows is a discussion of Anna’s interview responses, aligned with the
major themes revealed in the coding process.
Sense of belonging. While Anna made less explicit reference to the importance of
feeling like she fits in or belongs, she did express a feeling of comfort and ease in specific
environments. For example, she was very comfortable with spending time in a hospital,
working with children with disabilities, assisting in a classroom, and volunteering with
children and families. In discussing these situations, she mentioned that, in addition to
enjoying her activities, they also helped her to feel competent and able. This suggest the
idea that a major factor in creating a sense of belonging may be our feelings of
competence and self-efficacy.
Desire to help others. Anna currently volunteers at the Ronald McDonald House
in her town, as part of her sorority’s philanthropic effort. She described her enjoyment of
this activity, saying “that is the kind of environment I want to be in.” She also taught
Sunday school, and enjoys any environment in which she can work with children.
Pivotal events. Anna mentioned two life events that had an impact on her career
interests. The first occurred when she was very young (7 years old). Her grandfather was
diagnosed with cancer and the family spent a lot of time at the hospital. This was not a

45

negative experience for Anna, in the sense that hospitals did not make her uncomfortable.
“I have always been fine with them (hospitals). …I would pretend to be a doctor.”
Another significant event occurred when Anna was 18 years old. She had been a
competitive swimmer since age 5, and stopped swimming when she went to college. This
sudden change in her level of physical activity caused her to have problems with weight
gain (50 pounds in 2 months) and metabolism issues. Interacting with her team of doctors
encouraged her interest in nutrition and medicine. “… all of that was really interesting to
me and made me want to learn more.”
Role model/mentor. A significant role model for Anna was her mother, who was
a 3rd grade teacher. In high school Anna often visited her mother’s class to work with
students there: - “She took me to work with her when I was in high school and I loved
working with the kids. I would read to them and help them. That helped me see that I am
good at working with kids and to decide that I want to do that in my career.”
Self-directed learning. While dealing with her health issues, Anna took it upon
herself to learn more about topics like nutrition and how the metabolism works. Her
doctors recommended books and documentaries, which she purchased. --“I started doing
a lot of reading about it on my own…”
Control over situations. Closely related to the idea of self-efficacy, the degree of
control and choice that people have over their situation and activities can be an important
factor. For Anna, this came up in her discussion of experiences she had that gave her
exposure to the workplace. She mentioned visiting her mother’s classroom, working as an
intern in a veterinarian’s office, and shadowing her father at his office.

46

While the classroom experience was very positive, and helped her to feel
competent in working with children, Anna did not feel the same connection in her
father’s business setting or at the veterinarian’s office. Those experiences led her to
conclude that she would not be well suited for either of those work environments, and she
had enough control over these situations to steer future workplace experiences in a more
desirable direction.
Need for practical information and experiences. Anna was aware that she had
many valuable opportunities to explore her interests growing up, including internships,
summer jobs, and volunteer work. She did express the wish that she had been more aware
of specific jobs that full under the umbrella of medicine, aside from “doctor” or “nurse.”
Without that information, she felt that her career choice has involved a lot of “trial and
error.” “I would have liked to have programs in high school that help you explore careers
and get an idea of what’s out there,” she said.
In both the survey and the follow-up interview, Anna was asked to comment on
which activities, environments, and people encouraged her to pursue her chosen career
field and which acted as barriers.
Barriers. In the survey, “family expectations” was selected as a barrier faced by
Anna in choosing a career. This is clarified in the interview when she described her
childhood experience of having a stay at home mother. It is reflected in her conflicted
feelings about balancing work and family, describing the importance of being a mother
and the need to take that into consideration when planning a career.
In her interview, Anna also mentioned that she has “severe” ADHD. This came
up in her description of her experience shadowing her father at his workplace. At that

47

time, she decided that the office environment was not for her. Due to her condition, she
said, “I know I need to keep moving.
Pathways. Anna listed several experiences that encouraged her interest in math
and science. She participated in science fairs, summer camps, and internships that helped
to shape her goals and clarify her strengths. These were all seen as positive influences,
even when they served mostly to show Anna what sort of work she did not want to do.
Parents and teachers were also influential, as were libraries, travel, hobbies, and home
atmosphere.
Ben
Ben is a male student at the University of North Carolina Greensboro, majoring in
Mathematics. He graduated from a public magnet school in North Carolina.
The ALERT score for Ben was 5, which indicates an inclination for taking an
analytic approach to learning and problem solving. This score is closer to that end of the
spectrum than that of most survey respondents. The average score overall was 8.4. In his
interview, Ben described his process for paying monthly bills. His strategy is to pay his
bills early to ensure that he avoids making a late payment.
Sense of belonging. This category was especially significant in the responses
from Ben. He described feeling like an outsider in nearly every situation he encountered
growing up. He attributes this in great part to the fact that he was given up for adoption as
an infant and was not actually adopted until age 7. This made it difficult for Ben to
establish relationships in many settings.
…in school I always complained about not having friends, or I didn’t really like
the way that the teachers…treated me. Also, when people would share things

48

about themselves I wouldn’t be able to say anything because I don’t really know
my parents.
Despite these challenges, Ben formed positive relationships with certain teachers at
school, which helped him to feel wanted there. This, in turn, had a positive impact on his
attendance and performance:“…because she cared. I felt at home. I felt like I was wanted
there, so then I was never late again, and I was always present to class.”
Desire to help others. While Ben expressed some alienation in his relationships
with peers in high school, he also described a desire to help others to succeed. He
mentioned that he tutored several friends in math, helping one in particular to pass a final
exam despite missing three weeks of class due to illness. “I like seeing the success of
other people. Whatever field I go into, I want to help other people be successful,” he said.
Pivotal events. Ben’s family situation had a profound effect on his development
of his own identity, as well as feelings about belonging, which in turn influenced his level
of involvement in various activities. He repeatedly referred to the fact that he was given
up for adoption, and then did not find a family for several years. This colored his outlook
on how others perceived him and he saw subsequent events as validation of his ideas
about not being wanted.
One example of this was his experience with a neighbor during childhood. This
was a retired math teacher, and Ben spent time with her regularly, getting help with math
assignments. He described his disappointment when the neighbor moved away, saying
“…every time someone important comes in my life they end up leaving.”

49

Role models/mentors. While his experience with the math teacher next door was
a source of sadness for Ben, it was also his first experience with a mentor. He mentioned
the fact that his math teachers have been a source of inspiration. They reinforced his
feelings of self-efficacy in math, but also encouraged a sense of belonging in the school
environment. This aspect of the relationship seems to hold the most value for Ben, who
felt valued by the teachers:
I don’t know if I really liked them because we were doing the same fields, but I
noticed that they were the ones that were able to inspire me the most, and they
were the only people in my life that I felt cared about me.
Control over situations. While Ben had little control over his family situation, he
was able to exercise control over his academic pursuits. His family background left him
struggling with his identity, he found ways to build that through his studies.
Ben indicated that one reason for his interest in mathematics is its “stable” and
“exact” nature. He found that math helped him to feel an increased level of stability and
control. His other interest, theater, has given him a chance to explore his identity through
his portrayal of a wide variety of characters. He noted that theater “gives me a little bit
more freedom,” and appreciates the balance between the structure of mathematics and the
ability to live vicariously through his character which is afforded by theater.
Need for practical information and experiences. In discussing programs or
information that would have been useful to him in deciding on his college major and
occupation, Ben again referred to the fact that he did not have access to advice from his
parents. He would have liked to know what careers his biological parents had, believing
that he might have some genetic predisposition to similar careers.

50

Ben also expressed the idea that high school did little to prepare him to navigate
in college. He would have liked more information on the workload involved in various
majors. He is currently pursuing a double major in mathematics and theater, but feels that
if he’d had a more realistic idea of the work involved he would have likely chosen one or
the other.
Barriers. Ben’s main barrier has been his struggle with identity and belonging,
which he attributed to the lack of a stable family and home in his early years. Even now,
he does not feel a close relationship with his adoptive mother, who he said “makes these
really rude comments.” He described his appreciation of being able to confide in a
teacher about this relationship, saying that the teacher “would always keep up” with what
was going on there.
In terms of barriers related to his choice of major, Ben mentioned that “a lot of
people hate math.” This has caused him to doubt his choice of mathematics as a major
and to feel discouraged about his career path. He has also encountered negative
comments from peers with regard to theater: “There’s always bad vibes there. …you’re
not going to make much or you’re going to end up being a waiter, living in the ghetto of
New York… and barely making it.”
Pathways. Experiences and situations that were encouraging for Ben often
involved making personal connections. His background has created a feeling of distance
and alienation, but feeling wanted and accepted at school alleviated that and made
participation and achievement possible. Encounters with a caring adult were mentioned
repeatedly as positive influences.

51

Ben participated in summer camps at a local performing arts center, which helped
him to gain confidence in his theater skills. This was the only helpful activity listed by
Ben in his survey responses, and school was listed as an encouraging environment.
Carl
A male, African-American junior at the University of South Carolina, Carl has a
major in Media Arts. He attended a public high school in South Carolina, and credits his
home environment with encouraging his interest in video games and film-making.
On the ALERT scale, Carl had a score of 10. This is higher than the survey
average, and indicates a “bilateral hemisphere balance” –in other words, a cognitive style
that utilizes both analytic and more holistic approaches to learning and problem-solving.
In the interview, Carl described his approach to grocery shopping. He makes a list,
prioritizing “must-have” items and then leaving room for additional items that he might
also like to have. Before shopping, he checks his bank balance, and at the store he keeps a
running tally of his spending in order to avoid exceeding his target amount for the
shopping trip.
Sense of belonging. In discussing the types of environments that he finds
encouraging, Carl made the point that the people he interacts with are what make an
environment positive: “…it may not be necessarily a great environment, but just
…having genuine people in that environment can alter it to be a more positive one.”
Participating in high school sports was also important in helping Carl to feel like a
part of things at school. He credits membership on basketball and cross-country teams
with contributing this, as well as teaching him the value of discipline, humility, and hard
work.

52

Role models/mentors. Carl did not feel that he had access to professional
mentors, since he grew up in a small town. His career interests are related to hip-hop and
film making, industries that had no presence there. He commented on the lack of
professional mentors in that environment: “It’s not like I could job shadow a director or
anything, coming from where I’ve lived.”
Carl did indicate an appreciation for the value of peer mentors and support from
others. He stated that the “people I surround myself with now” were supportive and that
he would frequently brainstorm with them about the next career move.
Self-directed learning. Carl mentioned the value of interacting with people who
come from diverse backgrounds in helping him to develop his understanding of different
human experiences.
Control over situations. Carl expressed positive feelings about his ability to
influence his environment and direct his own course. He said he realized that he had a
huge impact on his own environment. His experiences, including serving as a team
captain and as a camp counselor, provided numerous opportunities for developing
leadership skills, which he has been able to apply in his academic work as well.
Barriers. The primary barrier cited by Carl was a lack of resources. Despite
qualifying for the Governor’s School for Arts and Sciences in his junior year of high
school, he was unable to participate. This was due to his inability to produce a 3D
sculpture, which was a part of the application process. Not having access to the necessary
equipment, or to funds for securing it, led to a missed opportunity.
The lack of access to equipment was a significant barrier for Carl, since film
making involves the use of a range of camera lenses, lights and other expensive items. He

53

also cited a lack of resources as limiting his choices in terms of college, saying that
attending a school in another state was out of the question due to financial limitations.
Another factor that Carl saw as a barrier to his pursuit of his career interests was
related to the attitudes he perceived in the people around him. He referred to this as peer
pressure, and said that his progress was inhibited by a feeling that no one had high
expectations for him. While he was encouraged to participate in basketball, he did not
feel similar encouragement with regard to other interests, particularly academic.
Carl also perceived some bias with regard to whether African-Americans have a
place in film making. He felt discouragement from his peers in particular, saying that
they told him he was “in over your head…definitely (behind) a façade or mirage or fake
world I’m living in.”
Pathways. In terms of activities, people, and environments that helped Carl move
forward along his chosen path, there was an emphasis on experiences outside school. He
participated in church groups and played the piano in church, both of which contributed
to the development of his interest in music.
The home environment was also mentioned as being encouraging, particularly
with regard to his interest in film making. He cited the ready availability of movies and
video games in the home as important in developing that interest. At some point, he said,
he realized that he could make those himself.
Carl has held a number of jobs, and they had an impact on his development. His
job as a summer camp counselor helped him to develop interpersonal and communication
skills, and was an opportunity to interact with people of different ages and backgrounds.

54

Participating in sports was seen as encouraging, in the sense that it helped Carl to
develop self-discipline and leadership skills.
People who were helpful to Carl in pursuing his interest included his parents. His
father, who was in the military, provided structure and an example of how to present
oneself professionally, while his mother helped him to learn to be a “people person.”
Dan
This interview subject is a white male, majoring in Computer Science at the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro. He is a freshman, and attended a public high
school in North Carolina.
The ALERT score for Dan was a 4. This shows a strong preference for taking an
analytical approach to problem solving. This cognitive style seeks to identify causation
and objectively analyzes information. Dan chose to describe his process for paying his
monthly bills in answer to the first interview question.
To tackle the monthly task of paying his bills, Dan uses a Google spreadsheet to
track and calculate expenses. He predicts his income for the month, and then prioritizes
payments if necessary. Generally, he has enough money to cover all of his bills, and he
reserves a certain amount for unexpected expenses.
Pivotal events. Dan graduated from high school one semester early and joined the
National Guard. This was an important event with regard to his pursuit of career interests.
In the National Guard, he works as an information technology specialist. This has
enabled him to earn several key certifications and to find other jobs at places like Best
Buy and the local cable provider.

55

Role models/mentors. Dan cited his older brother as an important mentor. He
was in the National Guard, also working as an IT specialist, and helped Dan to make the
connections necessary to secure a similar position.
His brother also exposed Dan to computers throughout his childhood, primarily
through “playing World of Warcraft probably eight hours a day.”
Self-directed learning. Building upon the interest piqued by his older brother,
Dan went on to explore computers on his own, at home. He began to design websites at
age 14, and built a computer at age 15. Through his tinkering at home, he was able to
teach himself about how they work. He asserted that “self-teaching is a very good thing.”
Control over situations. In discussing his approach to planning his career, Dan
mentioned that he had practical reasons for choosing information technology: “I like to
think realistically and how things will affect me in the long run. …that’s why I chose IT,
so I could work right away and not be in school for six to eight years…”
This demonstrates his positive sense of self-efficacy with regard to choosing the career
path that works best for him.
Barriers. Dan reported encountering very few barriers to his pursuit of a career in
computer science. He did not recall hearing any discouraging comments, saying that this
was “because that was such a good field to be in.”
His mother was a police officer, and this fact came to light in the discussion of
whether Dan has encountered biases along the way that had an affect on his pursuit of his
interests. He cited his mother’s occupation as an indication that gender bias is not an
important factor in career choice. “I feel like there’s really no barriers to what really
anyone can be. Really I just don’t see it.”

56

Aside from expressing regret that he did not participate in high school sports, Dan
did not name any helpful experiences or resources that he felt were unavailable to him.
He did feel that sports would have been beneficial to him personally, since it might have
helped him to develop more skills in working with a group. He tends to “work much
better independently.”
Pathways. The work and home environments were most important in helping
Dan to pursue his chosen field of Computer Science. His first work experience was an
internship through his high school, with the IT department, which helped further his
understanding of computers and networks.
Following high school, Dan received 5 months of IT training through the National
Guard. He indicated that the training, along with the work experience in systems
management, was extremely helpful to him in pursuing his interest.
His family and home environment were also encouraging to Dan, who cited both
his brother and mother as positive influences. They both took an interest in his plans and
helped him to make progress. The fact that his older brother was home-schooled meant
that he was always there and spent a lot of time on the computer, which in turn increased
Dan’s exposure to them and his ability to explore his interests.
Ethan
This interview subject is an African-American male who attends the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro as a sophomore majoring in sociology. He attended a
public high school in North Carolina.
Ethan had an ALERT scale of 14, which suggests a moderate orientation toward
more holistic, intuitive, and flexible approaches to learning and problem-solving. For the

57

first interview question, he chose to describe his approach to grocery shopping. He
checks the inventory at home and creates a list built around a menu, selecting items for
particular dishes he plans to make. Once at the store, he starts at the back and proceeds to
the front of the store. He noted that he often digresses from his list, saying, “I kind of get
sidetracked sometimes. I find myself getting something that I don’t necessarily need.”
Sense of belonging. In terms of his feelings of belonging in various settings,
Ethan expressed a great interest in the people around him. He felt comfortable with his
peers and described “studying people:” observing their behavior and reflecting on the
effects of their actions. He recognized the value of networking and made note of the
talents and behaviors that made someone a valuable contact. He considered himself to be
an independent person in high school, but he also mentioned his ability to make
connections with a wide range of people.
Desire to help others. In describing difficulties he faced growing up, Ethan made
mention several times of the fact that he wanted to help others “coming after me.” He
believes that this desire to help others has always been a part of his make-up, and that it
was recognized and encouraged by his mother. He took advantage of opportunities to
become involved in community service projects, and said that he looked for ways to
develop skills that would make him an asset to others. “My mom actually saw at a young
age that I wanted to help people in any way I could.”
Pivotal events. Ethan mentioned two events that had a significant impact upon
his development of career interests. His parents divorced when he was in elementary
school, and Ethan saw this as having a very negative effect upon the family’s finances.
He saw that his mother was working very hard to supply his needs and those of his older

58

sister, and suggested that this may have led him to be more independent. He expressed a
reluctance to ask for any “extras” in order to avoid becoming a burden to his mother.
Another important event for Ethan was meeting a friend in 6th grade who came
from a more disadvantaged background. This peer overcame challenges relating to
poverty and seemed to only become more determined when difficulties arose. Ethan said
that meeting her changed his perspective about his own situation and created in him a
desire to help as many people as he could to overcome similar circumstances.
Role models/mentors. In discussing influential people in his life, Ethan said he
would have liked to have a professional mentor when growing up. Although proud of
what he was able to achieve, Ethan expressed the idea that it would have been easier with
a “trailblazer” –someone who had gone before and could help guide him.
Barriers. Growing up in a single-parent household resulted in a lack of resources
which Ethan felt posed a barrier to his pursuit of his career interests. He mentioned the
fact he would have liked to participate in sports, but he was unable to afford to do so. As
discussed above, Ethan was reluctant to ask for things that he saw as extras, given the
tight financial situation faced by his mother.
Ethan also discussed both racial and gender bias in describing barriers that he
faced. As an African-American, he found it to be true that he had to work much harder
than some of his peers in order to succeed. He described talks with his mother on the
subject, recalling: “…she was saying, ‘you work twice as hard; you have to. You have to
work twice as hard just because of the world we live in, and if you hate it so much, then
fix it.’”

59

Ethan also felt that his gender affected his ability to pursue his career, although in
a more positive way. The majority in his field, he said, are female. He expressed the
belief that this could be an advantage, since there are fewer males in the profession. He
did not like the idea of being able to move ahead purely by virtue of the fact that he is
male. When people in field suggested to him that he would be able to rise through the
ranks quickly as a man, he said that “being put at the top felt so uncomfortable, just
because it was unfair to everyone else. I want to be judged by my brain capacity, not so
much as who or what I am.”
Pathways. Ethan described several experiences and situations that he felt were
beneficial to his pursuit of his chosen field. The areas that he mentioned here included
travel, museums, school clubs, and scouting.
As a child, Ethan was able to travel outside the U.S. with his mother, and credits
these journeys with expanding his views regarding the range of human experience and
just what actually constitutes “the norm.”
Just to go see how other people live and how they see the world is kind of like…
it opens your eyes to a new perspective that you didn’t have before. Communities
(in S. America) have more of a “we” thinking vs. “I” thinking. I like that a lot,
because they don’t feel…isolated, I guess, or in competition. Everyone’s trying
to pull everyone up together, trying to better their environment all together.
In describing his reaction to museum visits, Ethan expressed the idea that art
allows us to tap into the experience and perspective of the artist:
… a good artist will always put a piece of themselves into their work, so you’re
seeing them at a different or deeper level, and therefore you get to see their view

60

of the world. Every time you see a new piece of the world that you weren’t able to
get before.
This comment echoes Ethan’s habit of observing the people around him to formulate
ideas about their motivations and the effects of their actions.
Ethan named his mother as the person who was most influential to him,
encouraging him to pursue his interests. He described having long conversations with her
about things that he was learning in school. She encouraged him to participate in
scouting, and explained to him that in order to help others we must first develop skills
that will make us useful and effective. Ethan credits her with instilling in him a sense of
gratitude which in turn fosters a positive outlook.
The activities mentioned as having a positive impact on Ethan’s career plans
included Boy Scouts and school clubs, including the Future Business Leaders of America
(FBLA). Scouting had great appeal due to its community service component, and Ethan
felt that FBLA helped him to develop the skills he would need to better himself so that he
would be in a position to help others in the community.
Frank
Frank is a white male freshman at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
He majors in Computer Science and attended a private high school in North Carolina.
On the survey, Frank received an ALERT score of 11, which suggests a learning
style that is balanced, sometimes called a bilateral orientation. On the first interview
question he chose to describe his approach to deciding on a restaurant. His basic
approach is to gather any information he can and then proceed, whether there is a definite
plan in place or not. He begins by asking himself several questions: What am I in the

61

mood for? Do I want to go out, or stay in? If he plans to eat with a friend, he will ask
whether they have a place in mind. Otherwise, he will “drive a little bit aimlessly in the
direction of a restaurant or a couple of restaurants…”
Sense of belonging. Frank spoke a good deal about how encouraging it has been
for him to spend time with like-minded people. He expressed the idea that being around
peers who were interested in computers made it easier for him to pursue his own
interests. He mentioned being involved in groups where an interest in computers was
“normal” encouraged him to keep working in that area. Meeting people with the same
career interests was an affirmation of his own choices.
Desire to help others. In discussing his ideas about helping other people, Frank
expressed a desire to share his chosen field with others. This was motivated by his own
positive experiences related to that field and working with computers: “Work with
computers really, really changed my life for the better, so I want to help people learn
about this.”
Pivotal events. Frank mentioned a time when he was very young (six or seven)
and met a technician from Best Buy who came to the house. After watching him work for
some time, Frank began to ask questions. He found the experience very interesting, and
found that he could “make sense out of some things.” This was the beginning of his
interest in computers and programming, since he was able to make connections for
himself, and carry his interest forward.
Role models/mentors. In discussing what encouraged his interest in computers,
Frank mentioned that his older cousin was an important role model. The cousin had
computers and games, and Frank looked up to him. Spending time at the cousin’s house,

62

and seeing his cousin’s interest in computers and programming, helped to convince Frank
that this was a viable field for him to pursue: “He was …into all the same things that I
was. I thought he was the coolest thing in the world.”
Frank encountered other role models among other “gamers” that he met growing
up. These were people who were interested in the same careers that Frank was choosing
for himself, and helped to direct his explorations.
Self-directed learning. Following his encounter with the Best Buy technician,
Frank began to explore computers and programming independently. He moved beyond
information provided by others. “I’d keep going a little bit deeper into it,” he said.
Need for practical information and experiences
When asked about what resources he would have like to have growing up, Frank
said that he felt he’s had many good opportunities, mentioning in particular a
programming class in middle school. Through his own initiative, he was able to expand
upon the information provided there. However, he did feel that today’s students should be
given engaging information on how computers work at an earlier age. He said that in
order to understand computers, most children needed to learn new approaches. “In a way,
you relearn how to think,” he said.
Barriers. When the discussion turned to barriers that Frank may have faced, he
shared that he has been diagnosed with ADHD, has “some anxiety,” and may fall
somewhere along the Autism spectrum. He said that this was a bit of a barrier, at least
when he was younger, but that he chooses to see his condition as an asset. He said, “I like
to say I think like a computer.” He is able to think very methodically, which he feels is
helpful in his work with computers.

63

In response to the question asking about any biases he may have encountered,
Frank mentioned gender bias. He recalled having technology classes in high school in
which female students were given special attention. His school was part of an initiative to
increase the number of female students participating in STEM, and while Frank felt that
girls certainly belong and have talent in STEM, he did not view favorably the special
treatment they received in his classes.
Another barrier mentioned by Frank was the fact that his parents did not
recognize the value of his activities with relation to computers and programming,
particularly in gaming. He found that participating in gaming enhanced his programming
skills and understanding, but felt that his parents did not see the connection. He recalls
that his parents often wanted him to “get off the games and spend time with the family.”
In terms of his interest in computers, comments from his parents were “a bit of a
discouraging factor.”
Pathways. As discussed above, Frank’s older cousin was a role model who
validated his interests in technology. This was the only family member mentioned as
being helpful.
Frank mentioned two specific activities that he felt helped him to pursue his
interests. He participated in a summer programming camp and also traveled to gaming
tournaments around the country. He continues to compete in these events, and has found
them to be very motivational.
Gayle
This subject is a sophomore at the University of South Carolina. She is a white
female, majoring in Psychology. She attended a public high school in South Carolina.

64

Gayle scored 14 on the ALERT scale, reflecting a moderate orientation toward a
more holistic, subjective approach to problem-solving and learning. On the first interview
question, she chose to describe her process for grocery shopping. Her first task is to
decide whether she really needs to go to the store or not. Once she decides to go, she will
“inevitably” buy more items than she set out to. She generally goes shopping when she
needs one item, without making a list. Once in the store, she will pick up other things that
catch her eye. She did not seem completely satisfied with her process. She mentioned that
she usually “chastises” herself for not making a list. She mentioned that her ideas about
what to buy may change if she sees particular bargains at the store.
Sense of belonging. For Gayle, a sense of belonging came in the classroom. She
has very positive feelings about herself as a student: … “I’ve always been smart. I’ve
always been a good student.” She stated that academics are her strength.
Pivotal events. Gayle attended a private religious school for much of her early
education, but moved to a public high school She said that this had a profound effect
upon her ability to explore her career interests. At the private school, she felt that she was
not being told the truth; that many facts were being withheld from her, particularly in
science. Upon entering the public school, she said, she “was able to take AP Biology and
learn my way out of all that.”
Role models/mentors. Gayle cited a peer as one of the people who most
influenced her to expand her scope and explore a variety of subjects and career ideas.
This “best friend” was the first person with whom Gayle could have “intellectual
discussions”, and these led her to look beyond the types of careers that her parents had
suggested.

65

Self-directed learning. Gayle mentioned always having been a curious child, she
liked environments that allowed her to pursue her interests independently. She felt
especially stifled at her private school, where information was carefully rationed and
certain subjects were not discussed.
Need for practical information and experiences. While she was generally able
to find information on her own, Gayle did mention that she missed out on the opportunity
to take college courses during high school. She would have liked to do that, she said, but
“nobody ever told anybody in my school about that.”
Barriers. The primary barrier that Gayle faced was related to religious bias. She
felt that her education was handicapped by the limited access to scientific information
provided by her private middle school: “…that robbed me of some opportunities to never
have learned really, really false information and have learned some positive, helpful
information. I wish that nobody ever had to go through that.”
Gayle also reported hearing negative comments from her family with regard to
her career interests, recalling her mother saying: “…you shouldn’t pursue this career
because you’re not good enough.” On the other hand, her family did expose her to several
experiences that Gayle cites as encouraging her to pursue her interests, including
providing access to places that encouraged independent exploration, like museums and
libraries.
Pathways. Among the pathways that Gayle encountered, museums and libraries
were very significant environments. “As a kid I particularly loved museums,” she said.
She felt that these environments welcomed the curious child, and and mentioned that
“outside of those environments, it kind of seemed like my intelligence was not a good

66

thing.” She felt that these place encouraged questions and exploration, and were very
positive places for her.
Hannah
Hannah is an African-American female, studying Biochemistry at the University
of North Carolina at Greensboro. She attended a public high school in North Carolina.
With an ALERT score of 10, Hannah would be categorized as bilateral, and might
be expected to use a hybrid approach to learning and problem-solving. She chose to
describe her process for choosing a restaurant on the first interview question. She starts
with three criteria: proximity, price, and what type of food she is craving at the time. She
also considers the advice of her peers, who can tell her about the prices and the quality of
the food.
Desire to help others. Hannah mentioned her involvement in several community
service projects, including volunteering for blood drives and bringing aid and supplies to
the homeless. She said that these experiences helped her understand how to be a good
citizen, and also provided her with information about “different types of career choices.”
Pivotal events. Hannah intends to become an obstetrician, and she asserts that
this idea was hatched when she was very young. She reported that, at age 3, she was
present at the birth of her sister. This, along with accompanying her mother and sister to
doctor visits over the years sparked her interest in becoming a “baby doctor.”
Self-directed learning. Hannah mentioned that she enjoys being able to learn
new things, and also that she considers herself “a different kind of learner.” She indicated
that she has a short attention span and likes to be able to redirect her attention when she is
ready.

67

Control over situations. In discussing the people she encountered that had a
negative influence upon her, Hannah described feeling helpless to change the situation.
She described being unable to express what she was feeling “without seeming like a brat”
when she felt uncomfortable with how an adult was treating her. She did not like being in
the situation of having to spend time with these negative adults despite her preference to
avoid it.
Need for practical information and experiences. Hannah felt that she would
have benefitted from more information related to higher education and how best to
prepare for college:“I wish that growing up I would have had more resources in learning
about higher education –the basics of college are totally different from the basics in high
school.…nobody really showed me how to study.”
Barriers. The main barriers encountered by Hannah had to do with bias. She
reported experiencing racial bias, and also felt that potential employers showed a bias
toward her with regard to her age. She had difficulty securing jobs early on (age 15), and
was told that it was because she was too young to have adequate experience. Hannah
found this very discouraging, and said that it “happened multiple times.”
Pathways. Museums were a very positive environment for Hannah, and she felt
that they matched her more independent and self-directed learning style. She also
described traveling with her family as an important experience that contributed to her
understanding of the world and the many options available as a career:“They (family
trips) were influential in my life, because I learned well. That’s like a field trip to me.”
Her mother was instrumental in encouraging Hannah’s interest in medicine,
encouraging her to explore the possibilities and describing options, like pediatric nurse or

68

nurse practitioner that might be suitable. Hannah stated that her mother inspired her to
become a doctor.
Hannah participated in Girl Scouts, and she cites this experience as being very
important in building her confidence in her own abilities.
Identification of themes
Following completion of student interviews, several rounds of coding revealed
themes that appeared repeatedly in the data. These were found to be: a sense of
belonging, a desire to help others, certain pivotal life events, the importance of a role
model or mentor, the idea of self-directed learning, their perceived level of control, and
access to practical information and experiences. These themes reflect the factors that
interview subjects felt were most influential upon their decisions concerning a career
path.
Conclusions
Perhaps the overarching lesson brought home by this research is the idea that
career choice, like other aspects of our development, is influenced by a complex set of
factors. In interviewing both males and females with a range of subject interests, the
study provides some suggestion of factors that may be important for girls with an interest
in STEM, but it also demands that more targeted investigation be undertaken.
Examination of the survey and interview data provided some insight into the
experiences of the student participants. What follows is a discussion of the results using
the framework of the nine major themes and areas identified through analysis.
Sense of belonging. The importance of feeling a part of things has long been
known to be essential for student success (Baumeister & Leary, 1995). A sense of

69

belonging and school connection are proven to have a positive impact on student
motivation, behavior, and attendance, all of which contribute to improved academic
performance. This is borne out by the results of this study, and is particularly evident in
the interview data. A sense of belonging was mentioned in several instances, in relation
to feeling wanted at school, as well as being among “like-minded” people in other
settings, such as scout troops and sports teams.
Desire to help others. Interview data revealed a tendency toward community
service among several participants. They described several ways in which they helped
others, and credit those experiences as being helpful to their own growth in their chosen
field. Several respondents said that the desire to help others motivated them to work
harder; as one subject put it: to seek “skills that were an asset to me so that I can be an
asset to others.”
Pivotal events. Six of the eight students interviewed mentioned specific events
that heavily influenced their career plans. They were each able to identify a particular
time when they felt sure of what occupation they would like to pursue, and sure of their
fitness for that pursuit. Many of these events had to do with family members, and in
three instances they involved meeting an inspiring person. These people were peers and
professionals. The timing of these encounters and pivotal events was important, and they
tended to occur at a young age. For example, BEN was adopted at age 7. Frank spent a
couple of hours with a technician from Best Buy at age 6, and IYES witnessed her
sister’s birth at age 3.
Role Models and Mentors. The importance of mentors has been noted in
previous studies of the STEM gender gap, and the lack of female mentors in industry and

70

higher education continues to be an issue. In this study, survey participants reported
being heavily influenced by adults in their lives, with parents and teachers most often
selected. In interviews, family members were often mentioned as being important role
models. For example, Anna described feeling some tension between her desire to become
a surgeon and her equally strong desire to be a mother. She cites her mother as a role
model. Dan interest in computer programming was affected by his brother’s enthusiasm
for gaming, and Frank looked up to his older cousin, who “validated” his interest in
computers through demonstrating his own interest. When asked what resources or
opportunities they would have liked to have growing up, two of the students interviewed
cited the lack of a mentor as a barrier.
Self-directed learning. Self-directed learning can be defined as learning that is
undertaken through the learner’s own initiative. The topics, pace, nature, and course of
exploration are all up to the person who is learning, and the learner is free to pursue
resources and ideas that interest her or him. Having opportunities to explore their
interests independently was one of the ways that students felt encouraged in developing
their career goals. Five of the eight students interviewed made mention of self-directed
learning as a positive influence.
This type of learning was a mode of self-expression, and helped students to
explore their identities as well as their interests. In describing his experiences in theater,
BEN said that participation there gave him opportunities to explore other identities
through the characters he played: “After I know something about the character, I’m able
to live vicariously…it gives me a little more freedom.” Hannah expressed appreciation
for museums and libraries because they “encouraged questions and exploration.”

71

Sense of Control. A sense of self-efficacy and of having a say in their own career
path arose as an important factor for study participants. Being able to feel confident about
pursuing their chosen field was tied to having a broad knowledge of potential occupations
and opportunities for leadership. The most frequently selected activities on the survey,
including school clubs, sports, and summer camps also provided these opportunities. Carl
described the value that he found in playing on a basketball team, saying it “taught me
discipline, humility, hard work, both physical and mental.” Anna mentioned several
experiences that helped her to understand the different occupations available in medicine,
including her interactions with a team of doctors who helped her through a health crisis.
The information she gained from that informed her choice of major in college.
Need for Practical Information. Interview subjects expressed a desire for more
practical information regarding specific occupations and what qualifications they require.
When asked what resources or opportunities she would have liked to have growing up,
Anna expressed the wish for “programs in high school that help you explore careers and
get and idea of what’s out there.” Hannah would have like to know more about higher
education, particularly with regard to developing study skills: “I didn’t know how to
study before college. …in college you can’t wing it. You can’t try. You can’t do it the
night before. You’ll be hurt.”
Barriers. The barriers identified by students completing the survey included
family expectations, lack of resources, and peer pressure. In the follow-up interviews
students described hearing negative comments from parents and peers. These had a
considerable impact on the students’ measure of their own capabilities. Two of the eight

72

students identified a lack of resources as a major barrier in their pursuit of their chosen
field.
Interviews also uncovered two other factors that can act as barriers. These were
discrimination and learning challenges. Half of the students interviewed mentioned some
sort of discrimination as being a part of their experience that they felt impeded their
pursuit of their intended career. Gayle, who attended what she considered to be a
repressive private school, said that the bias there against the sciences was a major barrier
for her in pursuing her interests. Hannah described experiencing gender bias as a barrier
when a significant adult in her childhood consistently denigrated anything that he deemed
“girly.” Gender discrimination was discussed by Frank, who is a male computer science
major. He felt that the female students in his programming class were given unfair
preferential treatment as a result of a program designed to encourage their participation in
STEM.
In some cases, the issue was discrimination against their chosen field. For
example, BEN, who majors in mathematics, reported often hearing negative comments
about math, and as a result felt doubtful about his chosen course. Carl reported being
discouraged by his impression that others felt that his choice of major (Media Arts) was
impractical and unrealistic. He recalled people telling him that he was “in over your head.
Definitely a façade, or a mirage, or some sort of fake world I’m living in.”
Positive Experiences. Perhaps the most valuable information gained through this
exploration has to do with what experiences students found most encouraging as they
explored their career goals. Every survey respondent was able to identify multiple
influences that helped them to clarify their goals, explore new possibilities, and build

73

their confidence. Based on the interview data, several statements can be made about this
sample:
•

Parents, home environment, and family expectations are all significant
factors in facilitating students’ exploration of career options.

•

Activities that encourage self-directed exploration as well as provide
opportunities for leadership are seen as most valuable.

•

Personal connections and a sense of belonging are essential in creating a
foundation that supports growth.

Increased understanding of the impact of a range of experiences upon the career
aspirations of our youth can be a useful tool for several stakeholder groups. The
activities, people, environments, and barriers that students themselves deem significant
can provide a helpful framework for developing this understanding.

74

Chapter 5 -Implications and further research
This study’s exploratory approach provided an opportunity to examine the
perspectives of undergraduates without preconceived ideas about what those would
involve. An online survey and follow-up interviews were conducted with students from
both genders and various major fields of study. The survey included 121 participants, and
eight follow-up interviews were conducted. Data were gathered related to the subjects’
cognitive style, demographics, and to specific experiences and influences that had an
impact on their choice of career field. The responses on both the survey and interviews
provide a picture of which factors were considered significant by the students themselves,
in terms of their development of career interests. This chapter discusses how the themes
identified through the study are related to ideas found in the examination of the literature,
and in what ways this study adds to our knowledge on the topic. It goes on to discuss the
real-world implications of this new information, and how it can inform the work of
various groups concerned with encouraging girls with an interest in STEM to persist, and
eventually help to close the gender gap in STEM professions. The chapter concludes with
discussion of further research that can build upon the ideas encountered in the current
study.
Impact
The results of this study support several ideas encountered in the literature. This is
particularly true with regard to the research in the field of Educational Psychology. Work
in this field has helped to clarify the web of factors that contribute to the STEM gender
gap, and to the high rate of attrition from STEM programs among female students. Of
75

particular interest is the relationship between this study’s findings and previous research
into some of the major themes that it revealed.
A sense of belonging. One major theme arising from the interview data was the
importance of feeling accepted and cared for in different environments. A sense of
belonging has shown in study after study to be essential for healthy development as well
as academic success (Baumeister, 1995). In their research specifically targeting women’s
reasons for leaving STEM fields, Grunspan et al (2016) identified the lack of a sense of
belonging as a major factor in attrition, along with the decision to start a family, and
confidence that one can succeed in the chosen profession.
The current study reflects the current research showing that a sense of belonging
is just as important during early years as it is to those already in STEM fields. Depending
on individual circumstances, it can be a lifeline that enables healthy development.
Feeling as though he belonged and was wanted at school was vital to the success of BEN,
for example, who felt that “teachers were the only people in my life who cared for me.”
Role models and mentors. The literature shows that a shortage or lack of female
mentors and role models is one factor that contributes to the STEM gender gap (Hill,
2010). The current study certainly bears that out. On the survey, female respondents
listed more influential people than did males, which indicates that other people were seen
as significant influences by the girls. In interviews, students mentioned peers and family
members, but also referred to teachers and professionals who took an interest and
provided encouragement. For example, Anna was greatly influenced by her interaction
with a team of doctors during a health crisis. This stimulated her interest in medicine and
helped her to decide on her major field of study.

76

A sense of control. The level of control that subjects felt with regard to their
career decisions was another theme that emerged in the interviews. Interview subjects
cited opportunities for leadership, such as being a captain for a sports team or leading a
summer camp group, as being helpful and positive experiences. Another factor that
enhanced a feeling of control among interview subjects was access to information about
how to move ahead in pursuing their goals. Knowing, for example, that it was possible to
take college courses in high school was cited by Gayle as a way to take control over her
career path.
Feeling that they have little control over their own learning and career path is a
very negative state in which some young people find themselves. Dweck (1973) did
groundbreaking work on the impact of what she calls “learned helplessness” upon
children and their learning. It is an important factor in how persistent learners are:
…giving up may reflect their perception of independence between what they do and
what happens to them. Even though failure may indeed be contingent on their
response, they may not see it as such. For example, a child might perceive
independence between his response and failure by attributing the outcome to the
influence of some external agent; he might perceive independence between his
response and outcome by attributing the outcome to his inability to perform the
response, whether this is true or not. In either case, he views the situation as being
beyond his control. (p.110)
This feeling of having no real control over outcomes may be an important factor
in decisions by female students to abandon STEM. It has its roots in Implicit Bias. In
many cases the strongest limiting factor may be our own ideas –conscious or otherwise-

77

about what we are capable of doing. Our own Implicit Bias can create barriers and give
the impression that certain pursuits are inappropriate or out of reach. As discussed in
Chapter 2, this is an unconscious bias that results from the fact that all humans harbor
prejudices of which they are not aware but nevertheless influence their choices and
behavior. It can have a harmful effect on young people, whether the biases are held by the
adults in their lives or by the youth themselves.
An individual’s own Implicit Biases can be a powerful foe in their pursuit of
academic and career goals. A recent study found that, around the age of six, girls begin to
associate a high level of intellectual ability with being male (Bian, 2017). It found that at
the age of 6, girls become less likely than boys to believe that members of their gender
are high in intellectual ability (“really, really smart”), and that they begin, at this age, to
avoid activities that they perceive as being for those with high intellectual abilities.
Gender stereotypes about intellectual ability emerge early and influence children’s
interests. In the present study, Implicit Bias subtly impacted the interactions students had
with teachers, parents, and peers, with some interview subjects mentioning these, and the
influence they had upon the subject’s own ideas about what an appropriate or realistic
career goal was for them. This theory, along with Radical Change and Social
Interdependence theories, informed the current study, but separate coding rounds were
not conducted based on each of them. Nonetheless, in vivo coding did reveal the
influence of Implicit Bias upon two interview subjects in particular: Anna expressed
some conflict between her desire to be a surgeon and her ability to be a mother, and
Frank struggled with his parents’ bias against gaming as a worthwhile pursuit.

78

Learned helplessness and Implicit Bias are closely related to an individual’s
perception of their own competence, which is referred to as self-efficacy. This is a
person’s appraisal of and confidence in their own capacity for choosing actions and
carrying them out for specific purposes. Research indicates that self- efficacy may affect
achievement in powerful ways (Bandura, 1986). Individuals with higher self-efficacy
tend to have higher aspirations, are more committed to their goals, and are able to recover
more quickly from setbacks than do those lower in self-efficacy. How capable a person
believes herself to be in turn contributes to a sense of personal agency. This is a feeling of
control and choice; the sense that one is up to managing any task that presents itself, and,
indeed, has some say in what tasks will be undertaken.
The current study suggests several ways in which personal agency can be
encouraged and strengthened. Several interview subjects mentioned the value of being
able to pursue interests on their own. Taking charge of their own learning empowered
them to shift their expectations and develop a stronger sense of personal agency and
control. Environments like museums and libraries were named as being places where this
sort of independent exploration and questioning is encouraged. Interview subjects also
saw value in spending time with others who shared their interests through a wide array of
activities, including gaming competitions and theater camps. School clubs and other
semi-structured activities were frequently selected on the survey as well.
Implications
The findings of this study may be useful to those whose work has an impact on
the development of children, as well as those with a stake in developing the future
workforce. This encompasses a broad range of people, starting with teachers, then

79

expanding quickly to include counselors, as well as industry members such as employers,
creators of educational games, and software developers.
Education. Understanding the importance of promoting a strong sense of control
and self-efficacy among students can inform the work of educators, and this was a
significant finding of the current study. This can be related to the work of psychologists
Mueller and Dweck (1998), who conducted a series of studies that examined how praise
and encouragement impact individual motivation and academic achievement (Mueller &
Dweck, 1998). Their work explores the reasons why some students persist in difficult
tasks while others do not, and the current study’s findings about the importance of
student self-efficacy support those ideas. Dweck goes further, in collaboration with
Yeager, specifying an instructional tendency that is damaging to self-efficacy,
particularly in female students.
What Dweck and Yeager call “fixed mindset” can develop when students are
praised and flattered for how easily they completed a task, and this can make them afraid
to tackle more challenging topics and tasks. They begin to see their ability as fixed,
meaning that if something is not easy to learn it must be beyond their capabilities. A
fixed mindset damages motivation and confidence, since the student does not expect to
succeed at tasks that are outside of their comfort zone, and they are therefore not
motivated to persist. They fear that having to work hard on a task makes them “look
dumb.” They expect success with a certain level of effort and have not gotten into the
habit of pushing themselves beyond that. In these cases it may be that effort is seen as
signaling a lack of natural talent.

80

On the other hand, a growth mindset comes when students are encouraged to learn
from their mistakes. Students who are praised for their process, strategies, and effort feel
more confident about tackling difficult tasks and topics, because mistakes are expected,
and the use of strategies and procedures is as much a goal as any final product or test
score.
While this idea of encouraging a growth mindset has many implications for the
classroom, and for students of any gender, some additional information described by
Yeager and Dweck in 2012 is pertinent to the present study, and to the discussion of what
is behind the STEM gender gap.
That study found that the type of praise given to children differs along gender
lines (Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Teachers in their study tended to praise boys for their
process more than their intelligence, while girls tended to be praised for doing things well
without much effort. The study attributes this to the fact that, in many cases, boys are
more immature and harder to engage. As a result, teachers tend to focus their comments
to the boys on the importance of paying attention and putting forth more effort. Girls,
who are generally better-behaved in the classroom, don’t get that sort of feedback.
Rather, they more often receive praise for completing tasks with relatively little effort.
Yeager and Dweck suggest that this leads to the boys developing a growth
mindset, which is the belief that they can improve their skills and understanding through
persistence and hard work. Without this belief, students tend to give up on difficult tasks.
Their study suggests that encouraging the development of a growth mindset among girls
may be one key to helping them to persevere in challenging subject areas like those in
STEM.

81

Industry. STEM industries and employers have a stake in encouraging more
students, regardless of gender, to pursue occupations requiring a background in areas like
mathematics, engineering and information technology. The current study’s findings
related to the importance of a sense of belonging and of access to mentors are both
worthy of note for these stakeholders.
Creating an atmosphere that is inclusive and ensuring that new professionals are
encouraged and guided by mentors would go long way toward improving retention in
STEM professions. In an industry not known for its “soft-skills,” such as effective
communication and an ability to work collaboratively, this may mean taking deliberate
steps to change organizational culture in order to reach and include non-traditional groups
in STEM. Efforts to connect with young people investigating STEM occupations would
help to promote a sense of belonging, and would also meet the need expressed by study
participants for more practical experiences and information on potential professions.
Employing a more inclusive approach in the design of software and educational
games will also enhance their effectiveness. So-called “girl-centric design” uses findings
from research to create programs that engage female students and other groups not
traditionally represented in STEM. This is essential, both to develop needed skills and to
provide these students with a sense of ownership and belonging in STEM.
Future research
The exploratory nature and small sample size mean that the current study is not
generalizable, but it does provide information that may help in designing future, more
extensive and targeted studies.

82

The findings of this study, along with the consideration of related literature,
indicate that there is much further research needed into the reasons behind the STEM
gender gap, particularly from the student’s point of view. This section describes some
avenues for future inquiry, with emphasis upon exploring themes of belonging, agency,
and mentorship.
Cross-discipline opportunity. The topics mentioned above provide an excellent
opportunity for interdisciplinary work. Library and Information Science is one standpoint
for examining activities and experiences that motivate and empower young people to
pursue their interests. Libraries and other cultural institutions are in the business of
connecting people with information and extending their reach. Other disciplines, such as
Social and Educational Psychology, focus on how our experiences shape development
and affect learning. Research in Education often involves the examination of specific
factors impacting motivation and academic performance, and these can provide insight
into how the STEM gender gap came to be and what strategies might be effective in
correcting that gap.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, topics in those disciplines, such as Implicit
Bias and self-efficacy, appear to heavily influence the career choices made by young
people. They played a part in the development of the STEM gender gap and contribute, to
some extent, to its continuation. An examination of the interaction of these two factors
would be instructive, and would be useful in better understanding the impact of teaching
a growth mindset, as described by Dweck. The findings from Bian (2017) regarding the
Implicit Biases of young female students could be a starting point for research that looks
for connections between bias levels and student mindset. As the research has shown,

83

Implicit Bias is “malleable.” Instructional approaches may be a powerful tool for
amending Implicit Bias that has the potential to be harmful.
Also interesting here is the fact that, while Bian found that girls saw a high level
of intelligence to be a male attribute, the problem identified by Dweck was that girls were
being told that they are “smart.” Being praised for intelligence happened much more
often with girls in her study. So given the idea that girls as a group may consider
themselves less likely to be highly intelligent merely by virtue of gender, this creates a
confusing mixed message. The girls do not feel smart, but they are told that their success
is due to their intelligence. It would be very interesting to explore this dichotomy, and to
determine what part it might play in what is called “imposter syndrome.” This is a
commonly reported feeling among women in traditionally male professions in which one
lacks confidence in their own fitness for their occupation, and expects to be “found out”
or exposed as being less competent than they appear (Langford & Clime, 1993).
These elements cross disciplinary lines and their study would bring together
findings and theory from a range of researchers. It is necessary to have this sort of
interdisciplinary approach in order to understand how they combine to make entry into
STEM more difficult for female students.
Mentorship. As mentioned in Chapter 3, part of the data gathering process for the
current study involved an interview with an established female STEM professional (LC).
The responses from that interview underlined the importance of mentorship to her
success in a male-dominated field. LC framed her description of her career with
important contacts, friends and mentors who contributed to her success.

84

LC was influenced by family members in her childhood, when an aunt went to
work for IBM. This made her aware of opportunities and occupations that were open to
her, and inspired her to find a field where “I can travel and talk to people.” She credits
her high school librarian with encouraging her to major in Library and Information
Science, and once her career began in earnest, a series of professional mentors helped to
guide her decisions. As she completed her MLIS, LC was encouraged by three professors
in particular to continue on to a PhD. These were all males, and LC mentioned several
other male mentors, as well as a number of important female mentors.
So while the interview reinforced the notion that mentorship is very important to
women in STEM, it also raised the question: Does the gender of mentors necessarily
matter? In other words, is it necessary for a young woman to have female mentors in their
profession, or is the quality of the relationship much more significant? This question is
separate from the idea of role models, who are not necessarily people with whom one
interacts personally. Girls need to see women in the STEM professions and on faculties
in order to better picture their future selves in those positions. Mentors, on the other hand,
act as guides and advocates, making introductions, developing critical skills, and pushing
their protégées beyond their comfort zones. More research on just what makes for an
effective mentor, and how important gender may be in the equation, particularly for girls
in STEM, would strengthen our ability to provide young people with the support they
need for success in whatever field they pursue.
Summary and conclusion
This exploratory study helped to clarify our understanding of what factors
students themselves see as being influential in their choices with regard to career path and

85

major fields of study. While limited by its reliance on convenience sampling, the
investigation yielded useful information on variables that bear further study. The data
support previous findings with regard to the influence of the students’ sense of belonging
and control as well as the importance of early mentoring and exposure to the world of
work.
There were some snags and obstacles encountered in the course of conducting the
study. One significant improvement that could be made would be a revision of the survey
questions. For items asking students to choose activities, environments, or people who
were influential to them, it would be more useful to create a separate question for each
response. For example, rather than asking what experiences they found significant and
providing a list of choices, it would be better for purposes of analysis to ask respondents
to rate the significance of each experience on a Likert scale. This would provide a
numerical value associated with each individual experience.
Another challenge arose in scheduling follow-up interviews. Despite the fact that
no incentives were offered, 49 of the 121 survey respondents indicated a willingness to
complete a follow-up interview by providing contact information. A first round of contact
yielded five scheduled interviews. Reminders were sent one day prior, and four of those
went on as scheduled. The fifth student was not available at the scheduled time, but
completed the interview at a later date. Three weeks after the initial email seeking to
schedule an interview, a second round was sent to the remaining pool of 44 subjects. This
resulted in the scheduling of 3 additional interviews. A more extensive study would
require some way of incentivizing participation in follow-up interviews to increase the

86

sample size. It would also be useful to explore the idea of conducting these in person
rather than by phone.
To gather more targeted information, direct contact with girls who have an
interest in STEM would be most productive. An opportunity for future study will be a
summer camp for middle school girls conducted by the University of South Carolina’s
College of Engineering and Computing. This program provides hands-on experiences and
is designed to familiarize girls with the variety of occupations available in engineering.
A surprising theme that arose from the interview data was the desire expressed by
most subjects to help others. These students appreciated the fact that they enjoyed
advantages that others do not, and they felt an obligation to contribute to the betterment
of their communities. They are intent upon a career that allows them to accomplish this in
their work. This is interesting in that it echoes some of the tenets of Positive Youth
Development (PYD), which is closely related to resilience and includes community
engagement and service as an important component of healthy development (Masten,
2014). Youth involvement in community service has many positive outcomes, including
academic success and increased personal responsibility, as well as a sense of belonging,
connectedness, and self-efficacy (Jones, 2013).
This information makes the case for continued efforts to provide youth with
opportunities to contribute to society in tangible ways, enhancing their development and
providing a solid foundation for the pursuit of their chosen field. Community service
opportunities are offered in an array of organizations, such as scouting and 4-H, as well
as school clubs, sports teams, and church groups. Community groups provide
programming designed to encourage student involvement and the development of

87

leadership skills. Students can make a difference by volunteering in their community –
participating in food drives, Special Olympics, community cleanup projects, and peer
tutoring are all widely available options.
Many school districts embed service learning into the curriculum, providing
students with insights and lessons that extend far beyond the curriculum. These projects
encourage the development of skills such as problem analysis and critical thinking, and
they also contribute to more positive relationships with faculty, improved communication
skills, and an enhanced sense of self-efficacy (Eyler, 2001). Given the evidence examined
in the current study, it is clear that these effects are essential for encouraging youth to
pursue their interests and thrive in an academic setting.
Overall, the present study was useful in suggesting which avenues of study might
be most fruitful for investigating the many reasons for the gender gap in STEM
professions. Considering the experiences and viewpoint of the students themselves helps
to enrich our understanding and ensure that efforts to narrow the gap are well-targeted
and relevant.

88

References
Baumeister, R.F., & Leary, M.R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychology Bulletin, 117(3),
497-529, doi: 101037/033-2909.117.3.497.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social Cognitive Theory: An agentic perspective. Asian Journal of
Social Psychology, 2: 21-41.
Bian, L., Leslie, S., & Cimpian, S. (2017). Gender stereotypes about intellectual ability
emerge early and influence children’s interests. Science 355(6323). 389-391. doi:
10.1126/science.aah6524
Blickenstaff, J.C. (2005). Women and Science Careers: Leaky Pipeline or Gender Filter?
Gender and Education, 17(4): 369–386.
Brown, E. A. (2014). 'Growth mindset' may boost girls' confidence in STEM. Education
Daily, 47(180), 1-2.
Brownstein, Michael (2015). Implicit Bias. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Retrieved from
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/implicit-bias/.
Calabrese, A., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T., & Brecklin, J. (2013). Crafting a Future in
Science: Tracing Middle School Girls’ Identity Work Over Time and Space.
American Educational Research Journal 50 (1), 37–75.

89

Chatman, J. A., A. Boisnier, S. Spataro, C. Anderson, & J. Berdahl (2008). Being
distinctive versus being conspicuous: The effects of numeric status and sexstereotyped tasks on individual performance in groups. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 107: 141–160.
Chen, X. (2009). Students Who Study Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) in Postsecondary Education (NCES 2009-161). National
Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
of Education. Washington, DC.
Cockrell School of Engineering (2016). Statistics on Women in Engineering. University
of Texas at Austin. Retrieved from http://www.engr.utexas.edu/wep/about/stats
College Portrait (2015). University of North Carolina-Greensboro College Portrait.
Voluntary System of Accountability. Retrieved from
http://www.collegeportraits.org/NC/UNCG/characteristics
Cunningham, B.C., Hoyer, K.M., & Sparks, D. (2015). Gender differences in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) interest, credit earned, and
NAEP performance in the 12th grade. National Center for Education Statistics.
Accessed at: https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2015/2015075.pdf
Dresang, E. T. (2005). The information-seeking behavior of youth in the digital
environment. Library Trends, 54(2), 178-196.
Di Fabio, N. M., Brandi, C., & Frehill, L. M. (2008). Professional women and
minorities: A total human resources data compendium. Washington, DC:
Commission on Professionals in Science and Technology.

90

Dweck, C.S., & Reppucci, N.D. (1973). Learned Helplessness and Reinforcement
Responsibility in Children. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25 (1).
109-116.
Dweck, C. S. (2010). Mind-Sets and Equitable Education. Principal Leadership, 10(5),
26-29.
Eddy SL, Brownell SE, Wenderoth MP (2014). Gender Gaps in Achievement and
Participation in Multiple Introductory Biology Classrooms. CBE-Life Sciences
Education 13: 478–492. doi: 10.1187/cbe.13- 10-0204 PMID: 25185231
Espinosa, L.L. (2011). Pipelines and Pathways: Women of Color in Undergraduate
STEM Majors and the College Experiences That Contribute to Persistence.
Harvard Education Review, 81(2): 209–240.
Eyler, J.S., D.E. Giles, Jr., C.M. Stenson, and C.J. Gray. (2001) At a Glance: What We
Know About the Effects of Service-Learning on College Students, Faculty,
Institutions, and Communities 1993-2000. Funded by the Corporation for
National and Community Service, Learn and Serve, National Service-Learning
Clearinghouse. Accessed at
https://www.mnsu.edu/cetl/academicservicelearning/Service-Learning.pdf
Fouad, N.A., Hackett, G., Smith, P.L., Kantamneni, N., Fitzpatrick, M., Haag, S., &
Spencer, D. (2010). Barriers and Supports for Continuing in Mathematics and
Science: Gender and Educational Level Differences. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 77(3): 361–373.
Grunspan D.Z., Eddy, S.L., Brownell, S.E., Wiggins, B.L., Crowe, A.J., Goodreau, S.M.
(2016) Males Under-Estimate Academic Performance of Their Female Peers in

91

Undergraduate Biology Classrooms. PLoS ONE 11(2): e0148405.
doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0148405
Halpern, D., Aronson, J., Reimer, N., Simpkins, S., Star, J., & Wentzel, K. (2007).
Encouraging girls in math and science (NCER 2007-2003). Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education.
Handelsman, J. & Sakraney, N. (2015). Implicit Bias and Inclusive STEM Education.
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Retrieved from
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/bias_9-1415_final.pdf.
Hill, C., Corbett, C., & St. Rose, A. (2010). Why so few? Women in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. Washington, DC: American
Association of University Women.
Holmes, S., Redmond, A., Thomas, J., & High, K. (2012) Girls Helping Girls: Assessing
the Influence of College Student Mentors in an Afterschool Engineering Program,
Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 20:1, 137-150, DOI:
10.1080/13611267.2012.645604
Hsieh, H., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), 1277-1288.
Johnson, D. W. (2003). Social Interdependence: Interrelationships Among Theory,
Research, and Practice. American Psychologist, 58(11), 934-945.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.58.11.934
Jones, J. N., Bench, J. H., Warnaar, B. L., & Stroup, J. T. (2013). Participation As

92

Relational Process: Unpacking Involvement in Social Action and Community
Service. Afterschool Matters, (18), 9-16.
Kozhevnikov, M. (2007). Cognitive Styles in the Context of Modern Psychology:
Toward an Integrated Framework of Cognitive Style. Psychological Bulletin,
133(3), 464-481.
Langford, J., & Clance, P. R. (1993). The imposter phenomenon: Recent research
findings regarding dynamics, personality and family patterns and their
implications for treatment. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,
Training, 30(3), 495-501. doi:10.1037/0033-3204.30.3.495
Langdon, D., McKittrick, G., Beede, D., Khan, B., & Dorns, M.(2011). STEM: Good
jobs now and for the future. U.S .Department of Commerce, Economics and
Statistics Administration Issue Brief #03-11. Retrieved from
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/documents/stemfinalyjuly14_1.
pdf
Martin, L.P. (1998). The Cognitive Style Theory. The Pfieffer Library, 8. New York:
Wiley-Jossey Bass.
Masten, A. (2014). Invited Commentary: Resilience and Positive Youth Development
Frameworks in Developmental Science. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 43(6),
1018-1024.
Milkman, K. L., Akinola, M. & Chugh, D. (2014).,What Happens Before? A Field
Experiment Exploring How Pay and Representation Differentially Shape Bias on
the Pathway into Organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, Forthcoming.
Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2063742

93

Mosatche, H. S., Matloff-Nieves, S., Kekelis, L., & Lawner, E. K. (2013). Effective
STEM Programs for Adolescent Girls: Three Approaches and Many
Lessons Learned. Afterschool Matters, (17), 17-25.
Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M. J., & Handelsman, J. j.
(2012). Science faculty's subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings
Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of America, 109(41),
16474-16479. doi:10.1073/pnas.1211286109
Mueller, C.M., & Dweck, C.S. (1998). Praise for Intelligence Can Undermine Children's
Motivation and Performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
75(1), 33-52. doi: 0022-3514/98153.00.
Nosek BA, Smyth FL (2011) Implicit social cognitions predict sex differences in math
engagement and achievement. American Educational Research Journal 48: 1125–
1156.
Onyekuru, B.U. (2015). Field Dependence-Field Independence Cognitive Style, Gender,
Career Choice, and Academic Achievement of Secondary School Students in
Emohua Local Government Area of Rivers State. Journal of Education and
Practice 6 (10). Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1081668.pdf
Ost, B. (2010). The Role of Peers and Grades in Determining Major Persistence in
Sciences. Economics of Education Review, 29(6): 923−934.
Poore, J. C., Forlines, C. L., Miller, S. M., Regan, J. R., & Irvine, J. M. (2014).
Personality, Cognitive Style, Motivation, and Aptitude Predict Systematic Trends
in Analytic Forecasting Behavior. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision
Making, 8(4), 374–393. http://doi.org/10.1177/1555343414554702

94

Saldaña, J. (2011). Fundamentals of Qualitative Research. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Staats, C., Capatosto, K., Wright, R., & Contractor, D. (2015). State of the
Science: Implicit Bias Review 2015. Ohio State University Kirwan Institute
for the Study of Race and Ethnicity. Retrieved from
http://kirwaninstitute.osu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/2015-kirwanimplicit-bias.pdf.
Trustees of Dartmouth College (2016). Dartmouth Makes History by Graduating a
Majority-Female Engineering Class. Retrieved from
http://engineering.dartmouth.edu/news/dartmouth-makes-history-by-graduating-amajority-female-engineering-class
University of South Carolina Office of Institutional Research, Assessment, and Analytics
(2015). Common Data Set: Student Life. Retrieved from
http://www.ipr.sc.edu/cds/cds2015/cdsf2015.htm
Vassallo, T., Levy, E., Madansky, M., Mickell, H., Porter, B., Leas, M., & Oberwies, J.
(2015). Elephant in the Valley. Retrieved from http://elephantinthevalley.com.
Weber, K. (2011). Role Models and Informal STEM-Related Activities Positively
Impact Female Interest in STEM. Technology And Engineering Teacher, 71(3),
18-21.
Werner, L., & Denning, J. (2009). Pair Programming in Middle School: What Does It
Look Like?. Journal Of Research On Technology In Education, 42(1), 29-49.

95

Witkin, H. A., Moore, C. A., Goodenough, D. R., & Cox, P. W. (1977). Field dependent
and field independent cognitive styles and their educational implications. Review
of Educational Research, 47, 1–64.
Yeager, D. Y., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets That Promote Resilience: When
Students Believe That Personal Characteristics Can Be Developed. Educational
Psychologist, 47(4), 302-314. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012.722805
Yu, C. (2007). Mixed Methods Sampling: A typology with examples. Journal of Mixed
Methods Research, 1:77-100. doi: 10.1177/2345678906292430
Zeldin AL, Pajares F (2000) Against the odds: Self-efficacy beliefs of women in
mathematical, scientific, and technological careers. American Educational
Research Journal 37: 215–246.

96

Appendix A –Survey Pilot Results

Pilot (n=5)
Last Modified: 03/01/2016

1.

Dear Participant: Thank you for agreeing to participate in this survey. Your
responses will be used to judge the effectiveness of the survey for use in a larger
study. Please elaborate on your responses when appropriate, to provide more
details. PLEASE SELECT YOUR 6 DIGIT CODE:
#
Answer
Response
%
1
IYEP00
0
0%
2
IYEP01
0
0%
3
IYEP02
1
20%
4
IYEP03
1
20%
5
IYEP04
1
20%
6
IYEP05
1
20%
7
IYEP06
1
20%
Total
5
100%
Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

Value
3
7
5.00
2.50
1.58
5

2. What is your gender?
#

Answer

1
2

Male
Female
Prefer not
to Answer
Total

3

97

Response

%

1
4

20%
80%

0

0%

5

100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

1
2
1.80
0.20
0.45
5

3. What year were you born?
#

Answer

5
6
7
97

1996
1995
1994
1904
Total

Response

%

1
1
3
0
5

20%
20%
60%
0%
100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

5
7
6.40
0.80
0.89
5

4. What is your race?
#

Answer

1

White/Caucasian
African
American
Hispanic
Asian
Native American
Pacific Islander
Other
Total

2
3
4
5
6
7

Statistic

Response

%

3

60%

1

20%

1
0
0
0
0
5

20%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

1
3
1.60
0.80
0.89
5

98

5. What is your academic classification?
#

Answer

1
2
3
4
5

Freshman
Sophomore
Junior
Senior
Graduate
Total

Response

%

0
1
2
2
0
5

0%
20%
40%
40%
0%
100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

2
4
3.20
0.70
0.84
5

6. Please select your major.
#

Answer

1

Accounting
Library and
Information
Science
Psychology
Total

77
102

Response

%

2

40%

2

40%

1
5

20%
100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

1
102
51.60
2,237.80
47.31
5

7. Which best describes your High School?
#

Answer

1

Public
Public Magnet
Private
HomeSchooled
Total

2
3
4

99

Response

%

4

80%

0

0%

1

20%

0

0%

5

100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

1
3
1.40
0.80
0.89
5

8. Where was your High School located?
#
21
31
33
41

Answer
Maryland
New Jersey
New York
South Carolina
Total

Response
1
1
1
2
5

%
20%
20%
20%
40%
100%

Statistic

Value

Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

21
41
33.40
68.80
8.29
5

9. Which category best describes your intended occupation?
#

5
8
18
25

Answer

Business and
financial
operations
Computer or
mathematical
Health care
support
Office or
administrative
support
Total

Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Mean
Variance
Standard Deviation
Total Responses

Response

%

2

40%

1

20%

1

20%

1

20%

5

100%
Value
5
25
12.20
79.70
8.93
5

100

10. When you were growing up, what occupation(s) did the adult(s) in your
household pursue?(please choose all that apply)
#

1

2

6
12
14

16

18
23
32

Answer

Management:
professional or
related
occupations
Management:
business or
financial
operations
occupations
Business
operations
specialists
Community
and social
services
Education,
training, or
library
Health
diagnosing or
treating
practitioners &
technical
occupations
Health care
support
Personal care
or service
Supervisors,
transportation
or material
moving

Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Total Responses

Response

%

1

20%

1

20%

1

20%

1

20%

2

40%

1

20%

1

20%

1

20%

1

20%
Value
1
32
5

101

11. In which of the following have you participated?(please choose all that apply)
#

Answer

1
2

Scouting
Science Fairs
Summer
camps
School clubs
Church
groups
Internships
Sports

3
4
5
6
7

Response

%

3
0

60%
0%

4

80%

5

100%

3

60%

2
4

40%
80%

Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Total Responses

Value
1
7
5

12. What aspects of the above activities were most helpful to you in developing
your skills and interests?
Order of response:04,03,05,06,02
Text Response

Internships, church groups, sports
organization, motivational aspects, achievement of success
Team building, and problem solving. I enjoyed coming up with solutions to difficult
problems in clubs and sports teams
I learned to be more sociable. Learned how to open up more about myself and observe
a new environment I've never been in.
With all of these activities I was able to help me to interact with kids my age and older.
I was able to build relationship and just experience a lot of different things through the
years.
Statistic
Total Responses

Value
5

13. Which of the following have influenced your career plans?(please choose all
that apply)
#

Answer

1
2
3
4

Teachers
Parents
Other family
Peers
Group
leaders
Employers
Others

5
6
7

102

Response

%

4
5
1
2

80%
100%
20%
40%

1

20%

0
1

0%
20%

Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Total Responses

Value
1
7
5

14. Please describe how these people influenced you.
No response: 03
Text Response

Watching my parents go into business.
My teachers and parents have always encouraged me to pursue a career I can both
enjoy and make a living in. Game designers and online personalities have kindled my
passion for programming and development.
I learned about Information Science from my friend and it sounded like something I
really wanted to get into. My parents have always supported me in whatever it is I want
to do in life, and the teachers here make me want to learn more about Information
Science and what I can do with it.
The would tell me that im able to do anything i put my mind to as long as i keep in the
right path and dont let anything block my vision. They gave a lot of encouraging word.
Statistic
Total Responses

Value
4

15. Which of the following do you feel had an impact on your career
choices?(please choose all that apply)
#

Answer

1
2
3
4

Museums
Libraries
Travel
Hobbies
Home
atmosphere

5

Statistic
Min Value
Max Value
Total Responses

Response

%

0
0
3
4

0%
0%
60%
80%

4

80%
Value
3
5
5

103

16. Please describe your exposure to the factors above, particularly with regard
to how they affected your awareness of your personal interests.
Text Response

I saw that I enjoyed learning about business.
Opened eyes to interests in business by exposure
My home atmosphere was very supportive of my interests and hobbies, so I spent a lot
of time analyzing media and practicing programming.
My friend lives with me in our apartment, so she tells me all kinds of neat things about
Information Science.
Traveling around the world helped because i was able to see that people need more
medical attention than the media portrays and its sad. I started volunteering and jsut
seeing how sad people are in hospitals made me realize that i have to change the lifes
of others
Statistic

Value

Total Responses

5

17. What are some barriers that you’ve faced in pursuing your chosen field?
Text Response

It is very difficult to learn.
competition, complexity of material
I eventually want to get into game development, but it is not the best field. Pay is not
necessarily high and jobs are not secure.
Just things like mental barriers, thinking "I can't do this" or "what am I even doing in
college" for example.
The fact that im still young anf some teachers at my private school told me i need to
change my career feild because my goal is too drastic.
Statistic

Value

Total Responses

5

18. Have you made a major change in career path? When did this occur? What
factors led to this change?
Text Response

No
no- declared major beginning of freshman year.
Last year I was a nursing major, I switched because as I took more nursing classes I
realized nursing is not what I wanted to do for the rest of my life.
Not that I can think of at the moment.
Yea, ive wanted to be a pediatrician for years but now an addition to that i want to find
a cure for cancer. This change occured my senior year in high school due to all the
cancer patients that have lost their lives over the years
Statistic

Value

Total Responses

5

104

ALERT SCALE
A responses
B responses
Totals
Classification
0-4
5-8
9-11
12-15
16-20

IYEP01
3
2
5
ML

IYEP02
3
4
7
ML

IYEP03
2
2
4
SL

Strong Left Hemisphere Orientation (SL)
Moderate Left Hemisphere Orientation (ML)
Bilateral Hemisphere Balance (B)
Moderate Right Hemisphere Orientation (MR)
Strong Right Hemisphere Orientation (SR)

105

IYEP04
3
4
7
ML

IYEP05
4
2
6
ML

Appendix B – ALERT Scale Items and Final Survey

106

20.

I arrange clothes in my closet by type, length, season, etc. (A)
I don’t put clothes in my closet in any particular order. (B)

A______OR B______

The first section of the final survey was comprised of the ALERT Scale items above.
Fifteen additional questions completed the survey, and are listed below.
21. What is your gender?
Male

Female

Prefer not to Answer

22. What year were you born?
23. What is your race?
24. What is your academic classification?
Freshman

Sophomore

Junior

Senior

25. Please select your major.
26. Which best describes your High School?
Public
Public -Magnet
Public-Charter School
Private
Home-Schooled
27. Where was your High School located?

107

Graduate

28. Did you take STEM classes in high school?
29. Which category best describes your intended occupation?
30. When you were growing up, what occupation(s) did the adult(s) in your household
pursue?
31. In which of the following have you participated?
(please choose all that apply)
Scouting
Science Fairs
Summer camps
School clubs
Church groups
Internships
Sports
Other
32. Which of the following people have influenced your career plans?
(please choose all that apply)
Teachers
Parents
Other family
Peers
Group leaders
Employers
Others

108

33. Which of the following environments do you feel had an impact on your career
choices?
(please choose all that apply)
Museums
Libraries
Travel
Hobbies
Home atmosphere
Other
34.Have you faced barriers in pursuing your chosen field or occupation?
(please choose all that apply)
Peer pressure
Lack of resources
Family expectations
Other
35. Follow-up
Greater insight on the topic will be gained through a brief interview, which can look more
deeply into individual views and experiences. Please consider making a further
contribution to the data in this way. Interviews can be done by Skype, phone, or email.
If you would be willing to participate in a follow-up interview, please enter your name
and email address below. This information will not be linked to your survey responses,
which are anonymous.
First Name

Last Name

Email address

109

Appendix C - Final Interview Questions
1. Please choose one of these common tasks and provide a detailed description of
how you go about completing it. Choices are: grocery shopping, paying monthly
bills, and choosing a restaurant.
2. Please tell me about your experiences with different activities outside of the
classroom and their influence on your career plans.
3. Please talk about the people who had an impact (positive or negative) on your
feelings about the sort of work you’d like to do.
4. Describe some of the environments that influenced your interests and why they
are significant to you.
5. What are some biases you’ve encountered or seen others deal with in relation to
who is best suited to work in one field or another?
6. Are there any resources or opportunities you now wish you’d had access to
growing up?

110

