ACADEMIC LIBRARY BEHAVIORS AND PERCEPTIONS OF A COMMUNITY
COLLEGE’S DISTANCE LEARNERS

by
Cantrell Johnson
Bachelor of Arts
Central Connecticut State University, 1997
Master of Science
Central Connecticut State University, 2003
Master of Science
Southern Connecticut State University, 2009

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Library and Information Science
College of Information and Communications
University of South Carolina
2017
Accepted by:
Paul Solomon, Major Professor
Susan Rathbun-Grubb, Committee Member
Karen Gavigan, Committee Member
Mary Brown, Committee Member
Cheryl L. Addy, Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School








ProQuest Number: 10265929





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10265929
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Cantrell Johnson, 1997
All Rights Reserved.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Dr. Paul Solomon for
his selfless time and care through this process. I could not have imagined having a better
advisor and mentor for my Ph.D. study.
Besides my advisor, I would like to thank the rest of my committee: Dr. Mary
Brown, Dr. Susan Rathbun-Grubb, and Dr. Karen Gavigan for their encouragement,
insightful comments and hard questions.
I want to offer my thanks to Dr. Doris Van Kampen-Breit for her prior research
on this subject and for allowing me to use her Library Anxiety Scale.
I would like to thank my cohort members, particularly Anmol Kalsi and Porchia
Moore for our stimulating discussions, supportive exchange, and all the fun we had for
the last four years, which helped enrich the experience. April Dawkins, I am most
grateful for your support during our Statistics course.
I would like to express my gratitude to those dear to me for their encouragement
and support during this journey (Donna, Duncan, Jane, Jeviah, Lawrence, Linda,
Michael, Ruth, Shavonne, Tilda and Valerie). LKJ, if everyone had a friend like you, the
world would be a better place.

iii

ABSTRACT
Over 1,200 community colleges nationwide enroll over ten million students each
year, with more than one in four of these students taking some of their courses at a
distance. Many of these post-secondary institutions also struggle to retain and graduate
students enrolled as distance learners. In a continuing effort to address college
completion gaps, research attempts to identify barriers to success and provide insights on
how to decrease college completion gaps. Given post-secondary education’s increased
focus on students’ use of resources beyond the classroom, a logical line of exploration is
the link between academic library usage and library aptitudes and attitudes. This study
sought to examine the academic library behaviors and perceptions of a community
college’s distance learners. Of interest is the relationship among inexperience, apathy,
and anxiety in general as well as differences, if any, among demographic variables of
gender, race/ethnicity, and distance from their college. Ninety-two distance learners
completed an abbreviated thirty-item version of the Multidimensional Library Scale
developed by D. J. Van Kampen-Breit in 2016. Results were analyzed using well
Pearson’s r, independent sample t-tests, and ANOVA using the composite factors of
inexperience, apathy, and anxiety. The most compelling finding in relation to race and to
the study was that White students were significantly more experienced than Asian
students. Correlations suggest that as student becomes more experienced with how to use
the library and its resources, anxiety in and apathy toward using the library will decrease.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................................................................................ iii
ABSTRACT .......................................................................................................................... iv
LIST OF TABLES .................................................................................................................. vi
LIST OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................ vii
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................... viii
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................1
CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW ........................................................................................11
CHAPTER 3 METHODS ..........................................................................................................31
CHAPTER 4 RESULTS ...........................................................................................................42
CHAPTER 5 DISCUSSION ......................................................................................................53
REFERENCES .......................................................................................................................60
APPENDIX A

ABBREVIATED MULTIDIMENSIONAL LIBRARY ANXIETY SCALE .......................70

APPENDIX B

USC INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD APPROVAL LETTER .................................72

APPENDIX C

USC IRB AMENDMENT APPROVAL LETTER .......................................................73

APPENDIX D

MANCHESTER COMMUNITY COLLEGE INVITATION LETTER .............................74

APPENDIX E

MCC INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE APPROVAL LETTER ........................75

APPENDIX F

INFORMED CONSENT .......................................................................................76

APPENDIX G

INTERVIEW QUESTIONS ...................................................................................77

APPENDIX H

INTERVIEWS ...................................................................................................78

v

LIST OF TABLES
Table 3.1 Juxtaposition of Sample Population to Entire Student Body ...........................32
Table 3.2 Variables, Research Questions and Items on Survey.......................................33
Table 3.3 Composition Questions for Composite Factors ...............................................38
Table 4.1 Distribution of Participants among Reported Ethnic Backgrounds .................42
Table 4.2 Makeup of the Composite Factors: Inexperience, Anxiety, and Apathy;
and Average Rating for Each Question across All Participants ......................44
Table 4.3 One-way ANOVA of Differences in Inexperience, Anxiety, and Apathy
among the Four Ethnic Backgrounds ...............................................................46
Table 4.4 Percent of Students Reporting Ability to Perform Specific Library
Skills, Attitude toward the Library as Part of College Life .............................47
Table 4.5 Content Analysis of Similar Library Behaviors & Perceptions .......................48
Table 4.6 Content Analysis of Differing Library Behaviors & Perceptions ....................51

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 4.1 Correlation of Inexperience, Apathy, and Anxiety in Distance
Learning Students ............................................................................................45
Figure 5.1 Higher Education Student Success Model .......................................................54

vii

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
LAS .................................................................................................... Library Anxiety Scale
MCC.................................................................................. Manchester Community College
MLAS ...................................................................Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale

viii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the Problem
The theoretical construct of ‘library anxiety’ can be traced back to Constance
Mellon who coined the term in 1986. “Mellon’s 1986 article was chosen as one of the
seven most important in the 75-year history of College & Research Libraries because it
made library anxiety, a phenomenon observed by practitioners, ‘official’ and uncovered
its origins” (Gremmels, 2015, p. 270). Feelings of anxiety have been attributed to “(a) the
relative size of the library; (b) a lack of knowledge about the location of materials,
equipment, and resources; (c) a lack of knowledge about how to initiate library research;
and (d) a lack of knowledge about how to proceed with a library search” (Onwuegbuzie,
Jiao, & Bostick, 2004, p. 31). Mellon (1988) concluded that three attitudes can help to
explain the basis of library anxiety:
1. students’ fears are due to a feeling that other students are competent at library use
while they are alone incompetent
2. the lack of competence is somehow shameful and must be kept hidden
3. and asking questions reveals inadequacies
Onwuegbuzie, Jiao and Bostick (2004) summarized the symptoms of library
anxiety as “a student who experiences library anxiety usually undergoes either emotional
or physical discomfort when faced with any library or library related task, whether it is a
routine responsibility such as returning a library book or a more complex task such as

1

conducting an extensive library search” (p. 32). Some researchers (Carlie, 2007;
Gremmels, 2015; Katopol, 2012; Mellon, 2015; Onwuegbuzie & Jiao, 2000) define
library anxiety whereas others (Atlas, 2005; Blundell & Lambert, 2014; Jiao &
Onwuegbuzie, 1997a) argue that the availability of online catalogs, databases, and fulltext resources decrease the use of reference transactions.
In discussions of library anxiety, debate has ensued around the effectiveness of
online education. It is important to realize that the role of the academic library is
changing as a result of growth in the number of colleges and universities that offer online
courses and online degree programs. The relationship that a student once had with the
library as a physical resource, accordingly, has changed. As access to digital
representations has increased, the need for distance learners to actually visit an academic
library has decreased. Online access to degree programs allows greater distances between
the student and their institution’s physical library. Further, distance learners may be at
such a distance from their institution that they do not have the ability to visit their
academic library and need to access their institution’s collections and databases solely
online. While Internet access and connectivity issues may pose a problem for distance
students, another critical obstacle to accessing their institution’s resources can be the
possession of little or no formidable library skills.

“With more than one in four students (28%) taking some of their courses at a
distance, these courses seem to have become a part of the course delivery modality for
many students” (Babson Research Group, 2016, p. 21) and, therefore, merit separate
consideration of how they are supported by the institution. One consideration is whether
the student’s level of information fluency matches the needs of remote, from campus

2

learning. As college students need to know how to conduct library research to complete
assignments, the question arises whether distance students have the independent skills to
remotely the access library resources of their institution.
Each year, 1,200 community colleges enroll over ten million students. “Yet most
students who enter these colleges never finish: fewer than four of every ten complete any
type of degree or certificate within six years” (Bailey, Jaggars, & Jenkins, 2015, p. 1).
Not only does this highlight the flaws in our K-12 education system, it also signifies the
need for community colleges to reconstruct themselves to improve the academic
outcomes for its students. “It is not surprising, then, that most community college classes
include students with different learning styles, ways of thinking and communicating,
motivational cues, and ethnic and social backgrounds” (Palma-Rivas, 2000, p. 74) In this
case, Bailey, Jaggars and Jenkins’s (2015) Redesigning America’s Community Colleges:
A Clearer Path to Student Success echoes the necessity for these higher education
institutions to adopt an updated model that leads to increased graduation and transfer
rates. Ascertaining whether community college distance learners face difficulties
regarding academic library usage is important for one simple reason: to increase
completion rates.
Need for the Study
I have always been intrigued by my personal observation that many students shy
away from the library, especially African Americans. In my own attempt to rationalize
why far too many African American students struggle to graduate, I pondered for quite
some time about why my observed relationship between academic library usage and
college completion often takes the back seat when the topic of retention arises either in

3

the literature or campus meetings. Since I hold Master’s degrees in Counseling (with
emphasis on student development in higher education) and Library Science, I believe that
this relationship is the perfect interplay that drives my passion to help students succeed.
To this end, it was a natural progression to continue studying this concept in my doctoral
program.
Ascertaining whether community college distance learners face difficulties in
terms of academic library usage is important for no other reason than to increase college
completion rates. In my 2016 article, “Interplay of Autonomous Learning, Library Usage,
and College Completion”, I assert: “The interplay of autonomous learning, library usage
and college completion can be used to construct new student success paradigms and
strategies. This interplay has been overlooked. Prolific research is needed to signify that
library usage has a direct effect on college completion” (Johnson, 2016, p. 54). By
assessing the needs of this population, the findings, implications, and recommendations
resulting from this research may help to identify ways to increase library comfort and
skills for distance students, and therefore potentially increase their academic success. It is
important for academic libraries to understand the library anxieties of their distance
learners so that they may provide the information and support this user group needs to
overcome barriers such as: anxiety, distance, age, gender, and inexperience inside the
virtual classroom.
This study follows from a previous examination of library anxiety titled Is the
Library Where It’s At? (Johnson, 2009) undertaken as a graduate student at Southern
Connecticut State University. The previous study focused on an investigation of the
correlation between academic procrastination and library anxiety particularly for African

4

American community college students. The research examined students’ perceptions of
the Arthur C. Banks Library (Capital Community College in Hartford, Connecticut) and
their level of library anxiety. Capital Community College is one of the most ethnically
diverse campuses in New England. Nearly 70% of the students are African American
and/or Hispanic (Connecticut State Colleges & Universities, 2016).
My 2009 study, Is the Library Where It’s At? used Bostick’s (1992) Library
Anxiety Scale to obtain a snapshot assessment of the information literacy and anxiety of
current students. It was distributed to two hundred students. One hundred sixty-five
students responded and one hundred twenty-three of these responses were useable.
Responses were examined, evaluated and reported according to Bostick’s five
dimensions of library anxiety. Students reported feeling comfortable in the college
library. However, students reported being confused while trying to find their way around
the college library. 74% agreed they want to learn how to conduct their own research.
51% responded “no” to asking for assistance using the on-line catalog. Although the data
revealed that students experience library anxiety, satisfaction with the Library itself was
reported. 73% agreed that they felt comfortable in the college library. Since this was
almost a decade ago, it is time to ascertain whether there are additional constructs other
than academic procrastination that can negatively influence academic library usage.
Research site details
The research site for this study is a non-residential community college located in
the northeastern United States. Manchester Community College is located in Manchester,
Connecticut. Manchester Community College (MCC) is the state’s largest community
college with over ten thousand degree seeking students attending each year. MCC was

5

founded in 1963 and is accredited by the Board of Governors for Higher Education and
the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Inc.
(www.manchestercc.edu/neasc). MCC offers associate in art and associate in science
degrees in over 40 disciplines. Areas of study include: accounting, business, business
office technology, computer information systems, computer science and technology,
engineering science and industrial technology, general studies, health careers, hospitality
management, human services, humanities and the liberal arts and sciences. MCC also
offers certificate programs of a shorter duration (6 to 30 credits) in each of the areas listed
above.
This community college’s degree-seeking population in 2015 consisted of 6,891
students who were enrolled in 12 credits or less and 4,015 students enrolled in at least 15
credits or more. Thirty-five percent of these students were full-time and the other 65
percent were part-time attendees. Enrollment in online courses has doubled from Fall
2010 to Fall 2015; 18 percent were enrolled in one or more distance education courses.
Given these statistics, 53% were women and the remaining 47% were men. At the same
time, the racial composition consisted of 57 % White, 16% Black, 19% Hispanic, 6%
Asian and 2% Other.
MCC’s library, Raymond F. Damata Library, is an essential part of the college.
The library’s collection consists of a variety of print, electronic and audio-visual
materials. It holdings include over 60,000 volumes, a strong reference collection, over
400 periodicals, and online access to more than 12 million titles via databases. The
library provides access to its electronic collections both on-campus and remotely. The
library offers numerous amenities including a designated quiet study area (Fireside

6

Commons), five group study rooms, individual study carrels, computers, Wi-Fi, laser
printing, scanning, and photocopying.
The Raymond F. Damata Library, through its academic librarians, provides a
number of vital services to its patrons. Patrons can seek help from the reference desk,
either in person, by phone or by email. Not only are three librarians available to assist
patrons with searching the library’s online catalog and research databases, the “Ask-aLibrarian” reference service allows patrons to connect to a librarian 24/7 wherever they
are. Patrons can also request books and articles not available at MCC through interlibrary
loan.
Statement of the Problem
The purpose of this mixed methods study was to examine the academic library
behaviors and perceptions of a community college’s distance learners. Of interest are the
relationships, if any, among demographic variables (gender, ethnicity, and distance from
college) and anxiety, inexperience, and apathy. Given the three decades of continued
findings of library anxiety and its impact on academic studies, it is important for
academic libraries to understand the library anxieties of their distance learners so that
they may provide the information and support this user group needs to overcome the
aforementioned barriers.
Research Questions
Central Research Question
1. What are the behaviors and perceptions of a community college’s distance
learners as it pertains to academic library usage?
Sub-questions:
a) What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity, and distance from the college) and inexperience?
7

b) What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity, and distance from college) and apathy?
c) What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity, and distance from college) and anxiety?
Definition of Terms
Abbreviated Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale (MLAS) - instrument
reconstructed by Doris Van Kampen-Breit in 2016, who shortened the original MLAS
instrument. The abbreviated MLAS measured the construct of library anxiety through a
46 question Likert scale instrument. The scale measured six dimensions of library
anxiety: (i) comfort and confidence when using the library; (ii) the information search
process and library anxiety; (iii) perceived barriers with staff; (iv) perceived importance
of understanding how to use the library; (v) comfort with technology as it applies to the
library; and (vi) comfort level while inside the library (Van Kampen-Breit, personal
communication, June 14, 2016)
Apathy - lack of interest or concern (merriam-webster.com, 2016)
Anxiety - feeling of worry, nervousness or unease, about something with an uncertain
outcome (en.oxforddictionaries.com, 2016)
Distance Education – interchangeable with distance learning and refers to any method of
organizing and delivering instruction that does not require the learner to be with or near
the instructor (Ellison, 2000)
Distance Learner - student who receives instruction in a variety of formats beyond the
physical classroom (Fishman, 2015)
Distance Student-one whose residence is too far away from him/her to reasonably be
expected to regularly travel to the home campus library (Caspers, 2000)

8

Google (verb) - to use the Google search engine to obtain information on the World
Wide Web (merriam-webster.com, 2016)
Imposter Syndrome-a false and sometimes crippling belief that one’s successes are the
product of luck or fraud rather than skill (merriam-webster.com, 2017)
Inexperience - lack of knowledge, skill, or wisdom gained from experience
(dictionary.com, 2016)
Information Literacy - the ability to recognize when information is needed and being
able to efficiently locate, evaluate, use and communication information in various
formats (American Library Association, 2016)
Internet Self-Efficacy – the belief in one’s capability to organize and execute Internet
actions required to produce given attainments (Eastin & LaRose, 2000)
Library Anxiety - feeling of being overwhelmed, intimidated, nervous, uncertain, or
confused when using or contemplating use of the library and its resources (Mellon, 1986)
Online Course-a course where most or all of the content is delivered online. Typically
have no face-to-face meetings. (Babson Research Group, 2016)
Summary of Chapter One
In summary, as academic library digital collections expand, the need for distance
students to physically visit the library has decreased. Yet, students may not have the
independent skills to remotely access the library resources of their institution. Gaining a
better understanding of the difficulties that distance learners experience in terms
academic library usage can assist academic librarians in providing information and
support this user group’s needs. This study examines the library behaviors and
perceptions of a community college’s distance learners. Of particular interest was the

9

relationship among inexperience, apathy, and anxiety in general as well as differences, if
any, among demographic variables of gender, race/ethnicity, and distance from their
college.

10

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
A review of the literature was conducted to examine and summarize previous
research regarding the competency skills of distance learners and library anxiety. This
chapter is divided into two sections: 1) impact of inexperience, apathy and 2) anxiety on
student success and library anxiety literature. The first section surveys the literature
regarding the importance of obtaining formidable academic library skills including
discussions of barriers to success, information seeking-behavior of college students,
pitfalls of online education and the role of emotions in academic library usage. The
second section reviewed the major theories and studies, validation tools, and
interconnections of library anxiety.
Impact of Inexperience, Apathy, and Anxiety on Student Success
Barriers to Success
A plethora of literature exists to support the observation that many community
college students are faced with overcoming obstacles and disadvantages when pursuing
higher education. Last year’s, Community College Online report (Fishman, 2015)
highlighted several barriers that community college students face both inside and outside
of the classroom. These barriers include:


remediation



life events that interrupt students’ class attendance
11



advisors overburdened or unavailable after-hours to help students who
need scheduling flexibility



lack of academic preparation and emotional barriers also serve as
disadvantages

Furthermore, community college students are less likely to live on campus, spend more
hours per week at work than school, and are reluctant to meet with faculty during office
hours or through email. Bailey, Jaggars, & Jenkins (2015) stresses that not only do
students struggle to overcome the aforementioned barriers they are subjected to a faulty
‘cafeteria style’ approach to higher education. This approach basically centers on a one
size fits all premise.
Community college students are most likely to be first-generation students and/or
minority students insufficient in what is referred to as “college knowledge.” College
knowledge can be simply defined as knowing what to do in college. In his book, “College
Knowledge,” David Conley described an extensive three-year project sponsored by the
Association of American Universities, which looked what college-bound students need to
know to survive in college. The technology barrier is a long-standing issue which
juxtaposes itself with the digital divide. “The delivery of an online course may
be…difficult for a student who does not have a technical background…Technological
advances have made it more complicated for the user novice user to attain and participate
in an online classroom” (Mensch, 2015, p. 13).
There are many instances where distance students start college ill-prepared in this
regard. Leeder (2013) stated that: “Library anxiety, at least anecdotally, appears to be
even more intense among community college students than their four-year peers, as many

12

live on the wrong side of the digital divide without the finances that provide for laptops
and home Internet service” (p. 192). Although it may appear to be ill-advised that a
student would enroll in an online course without the proper technology tools, it has been
found/observed that distance education students often enroll for convenience and not
necessarily for their readiness for, or understanding, the needs of distance education. As
an illustration, the recent 2015 EBSCO Survey on how students conduct research,
included an accompanying infographic, which highlighted 1) the notion that some
students can be apathetic when it comes to completing academic assignments, and 2)
32% percent of students conduct class work from 7 pm—12 midnight. (“Do your students
speak library-ese? | EBSCO post,” n.d.)
Information Seeking Behavior of College Students
A review of literature found that college students still do not know how to
adequately look for information to complete assignments. It is a mistake to assume that
all members of this user group are the same and do not have different needs. Head (2013)
reported that: “Even fewer studies…have systematically investigated how students who
were born digital acquire their information literacy competencies and how they use,
adapt, and expand upon these strategies…” (p. 473). Notwithstanding this finding, Weiler
(2005) stressed that “students arrive at college with varying levels of cognitive
development and will continue to progress at varying levels through dualistic,
multiplicity and relativistic methods of dealing with new information” (p. 51). While this
user group has been studied continuously for the last four decades, and we already know
much about their needs, a newer and little-studied question has arisen with the advent of

13

remote access to both resources and classes; that question is whether distance students
have the independent skills to remotely access the library resources of their institution.
Different levels of information literacy influence the information seeking
behavior of those pursuing higher education. Understanding college information seeking
behavior is the key to providing user-centered information services to college students.
The information seeking behavior of college students varies according to three different
contexts:
1.

low levels of library competency skills,

2.

time constraints,

3.

and the availability of the Internet.

Most often, these contexts negatively influence the process of information seeking
(Gross, 2005). Students in turn experience library anxiety and have difficulties seeking
needed information. An individual’s self-efficacy in utilizing the Internet appears to be a
factor that influences learning in online contexts (Kuo, 2014, p. 243).
Gross (2005) discussed the impact of low-level skills on information-seeking
behavior. “Competency theory suggests that people who function at a low level of skills
lack the metacognitive ability to recognize their own incompetence and are unable to
accurately assess the skill levels of others” (p. 155). With this in mind, Gross noted that
low levels of information-seeking skills may keep students from recognizing the need for
information, keep them from recognizing the value of libraries, hinder their ability to
accurately assess information, and impede judgment to recognize needed information.
The author Gross found that although interventions have been used to help increase an
individual’s ability to assess his or her own performance, the lack of feedback and

14

consequences for low skill levels may keep individuals from recognizing their lack of
ability. Competency theory will be used to interpret and inform the findings of this study.
By using competency theory as a framework and focusing on the variables of
inexperience and apathy, this study will explore to what degree the affective experience
of library anxiety is associated with academic library usage for distance learners.
Prabha, Connaway, Oslzewski, and Jenkins (2007) examined how and why
academic users satisfy their information needs. Their research consisted of
online/telephone services, focus groups, and semi-structured interviews for its data
collection approaches. Participants were comprised of faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students. The results concluded that undergraduate and graduate students tend to
stop looking for information when they find the required number of sources for an
assignment. Faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students all indicated that time
constraints influenced when ‘enough’ information was found.
Karas and Green (2007) conducted a literature review, which concluded “the
majority of researchers agreed that most students were interested in getting quick and
easy information for their assignments” (p. 104). Many do not have the skills or previous
know how to access information without the help of reference librarians. In order to
achieve academic success, college students must know how to engage in effective
academic research. It is necessary to know how to find, evaluate, and use information
from a variety of sources; understand that having access to ‘more’ information is not
necessarily better and that the best source of information is not always Google. It is also
vital to know when and why a journal or book is more appropriate, credible and more

15

useful than a result found from an Internet search on the Web. Many college students are
still using Google as the main searching tool to look up information.
Jones, Johnson-Yale, Millermaier, and Perez (2008) found that student use of the
Internet for information searching is pervasive. Through a national sampling, this study
assessed students’ perceptions of their academic environments and the role that the
Internet plays. Ninety-five (95%) percent of the respondents reported that their preferred
means of information searching involves the search engines of Google or Yahoo. The
study concludes that although students spend increasingly more time online and for
different purposes than they have in the past, college students continue to have a positive
opinion about using Google for academic related tasks.
Lee (2008) identified four dimensions that shape the information seeking behavior
of students:


user’s knowledge of existing structures in their information environment



how users navigate the structures



which structural features work or do not work



knowledge of additional structural supports

The study found that the instant availability and convenience of the Internet suited the
information seeking needs of the students. The study concluded that the Internet has
diminished the importance of the university library’s collection in meeting students’
information needs.
Despite past efforts, there continues to be a disconnect between the necessity and
use of academic research skills and how students perceive this process. Unlike many
other user groups, college students need information in a timely manner most often with a

16

predetermined purpose. For this reason, since the Information Literacy Competency
Standards for Higher Education were recently rescinded by the Association of College
Research Libraries’ Board of Directors on June 25, 2016, ‘A Framework for Information
Literacy for Higher Education’ will be used to encourage flexible approaches instead of
one set of standards that were viewed as outmoded prescriptives. This Framework is
organized into six concepts:
1.

Authority is Constructed and Contextual

2.

Information Creation as a Process

3.

Information has Value

4.

Research as Inquiry

5.

Scholarship as Conversation

6.

Searching as Strategic Exploration

It is up to each higher education institution to use these concepts to design their own
learning outcomes. By the same token, this update includes an expanded definition of
information literacy. Information Literacy is “the set of integrated abilities encompassing
the reflective discovery of information, the understanding of how information is produced
and valued, and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating
ethically in communities of learning” (Association of College & Research Libraries,
2016, Introduction, para. 5).
2016 Online Report Card: Tracking Online Education in the United States
The Online Report Card-Tracking Online Education in the United States is the
thirteenth and final annual Babson Survey Research Group report documenting online in
the United States. This report marks the end of a series of annual reports on the state of

17

online education among U.S. institutions of higher education. This document contains
detailed statistical reports of distance education enrollments. It is now expected that the
National Center for Education Statistics’ Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS) will provide regular, comprehensive information on the extent and role
of online and distance education henceforth (Babson Research Group, 2016).
Although the Online Report Card identified upward trending enrollments, it noted
that online education is not highly respected. “Even after a decade of substantial growth
in the number of schools with distance offerings…, the level of skepticism among faculty
has remained very high. A continuing failure of online education has been the inability to
convince…faculty members-of its worth” (Babson Research Group, 2016, p. 26). This
undermines the value of this modality and the efforts of the students. The report went on
to indicate that there is no universally agreed upon metric to measure education quality
for either face to face or distance education, but also emphasized the advantageous nature
of distance education to remove distance as a barrier (Babson Research Group, 2016).
Interestingly enough, most online students are located in the same state as the institution
they are attending (Babson Research Group, 2016).
There are few large- scale studies that have focused on the success of online
students versus those that use face-to-face instruction. In 2013, the Community College
Research Center published a longitudinal study that found student performance decreased
in online courses for Virginia and Washington community colleges (Fishman, 2015).
This study is one of the few quasi-experiments that solely focuses on community college
students. With the ever-changing developments in technology, online courses continue to
transcend time and offer more flexibility. Although this may be true, a common

18

complaint of professors is that students still do not know how to use the library to search
for information and successfully complete assignments. The most recent Project
Information Literacy (PIL) Report found that 74 percent of first-year college students
start their academic program with little or no experience using databases to conduct
research. Not to mention, seven out of 10 students still use Wikipedia (Head, 2013).
Keramidas (2012) emphasized: “while students may like the flexibility of online
coursework, there also may be some misconceptions about the rigors of online
coursework (p. 26). This study compared two sections of the same course with the same
course materials but different delivery modes- one face-to-face and the other online.
Although attendance was better in the online course, there were almost twice as many
grades of A in the face-to-face section. The findings showed that online students
struggled with the time management aspects of the course more than the face-to-face
students. Perhaps Jaggars (2014) assertion is true: “With a feeling of isolation, the
students’ inability to interact in real time to get immediate feedback could result in not
fully understanding the assigned work, falling behind the assigned course work, or
dropping out of the course” (p. 28).
Several schools including Lake Land College, North Iowa Area Community
College, Roane State Community College gave a short survey to prospective students to
see if distance education is a good fit for them (Mensch, 2015). With this is mind,
A student orientation course should be delivered in an online environment to
accustom students to the interface…and the necessary skills requirements…Short
training modules should explain all the hardware and software requirements for

19

the class as well as the steps necessary to download the required applets (Mensch,
2015, p. 14)
Role of Emotions in Academic Library Usage
Hatchard and Toy (1986) confirmed that students experienced emotional
problems when approaching library staff for help. Jiao, Onwuegbuzie, and Lichtenstein
(1996) declared that library anxiety is an “emotional disposition experienced in a library
setting, which has cognitive, affective, physiological, and behavioral ramifications” (p.
52). Then Carlile (2007) built upon this study to identify the most commonly used words
by students to describe how they felt while in the library: confused, embarrassed,
frustrated, overwhelmed, threatened, lost, fear, phobia, worry, nervousness, sense of
unease, feeling helpless, inadequate, incompetent, intimidated and unsure.
Robinson and Reid (2007) addressed the role of emotions in academic library
usage. This study used the results from twelve qualitative interviews to conclude that the
reasons why students fail to use the library included a lack of awareness of services,
embarrassment or shyness, and/or anxiety caused by mechanical barriers and affective
barriers (Robinson & Reid, 2007). Zembylas, Theodorous, and Pavlakis (2008)
“confirmed earlier studies (Allan & Lawless, 2003; Hara & King, 2003; O’ Regan, 2003),
finding that in online learning positive and negative emotions can act to either inhibit or
enhance learning, depending upon the conditions or circumstances at the time. Ninetytwo distance learners participated in Zembylas et al.’s 2008 study at the Open University
of Cyprus by submitting monthly diaries as well as final year reports describing their
emotions at the end of the academic year.

20

Black (2016) concurred with previous studies that students who have low selfesteem, low perceptions of cognitive competence, and poor academic performance feel
the most threatened when seeking help. This lends itself to inexperience, apathy and
anxiety in academic library usage. “In short, research on library anxiety has
acknowledged the existence of emotional problems of students regarding the information
resources, library size, library knowledge, library, mechanical barriers, and so on as the
prevailing sources of library anxiety” (Jan, Anwar, & Warraich, 2016, p. 53).
Equally important, Katopol (2014) suggested that the threat of being stereotyped
may be an emotional element of information anxiety that impedes student success. This
author supplemented this idea by stating:
Many college students…feel embarrassed if they have to admit they
don’t know something…. For students of color, there may be a risk and stress
involved in asking for help…They fear that they will confirm stereotypes of
blacks as less intelligent, less able, and less worthy of being in college... (Katopol,
2014, p. 1).
Head (2013) reported that 84 percent of students stated that the most difficult part
of research is getting started. Project Information Literacy (PIL) is the nation’s only
continuous effort to investigate college students’ research habits. It has conducted six
seminal studies since 2008 on the information seeking behavior of this population. Just
as with Carlile’s 2007 study, students use twelve adjectives to describe how they feel
about research assignments: fear, angst, tired, dread, excited, anxious, annoyed, stressed,
disgusted, intrigued, confused and overwhelmed (Van Hoeck, 2017).

21

Library Anxiety Literature
Major Theories and Studies
As noted earlier, the phenomenon of library anxiety, which involves feeling
intimidated, embarrassed and overwhelmed by libraries, was first conceptualized by
Constance Mellon in 1986. Mellon (1988) summarized:


Library anxiety is the anxious or nervous feeling when a student enters a library to
look for information to complete a research assignment or project



This phenomenon can have such crippling effects that it can prohibit a student
from even starting the assignment altogether



Students often do not how to begin the search process and/or locate needed
information



This anxiety that students experience can have a debilitating effect on their
information seeking behavior
Mellon (1986)’s unprecedented qualitative study of anxiety examined the journals

of six thousand students from twenty English composition courses over a two-year
period. This study found that “for the majority of students (75%-85%), initial library
research experiences induce anxiety, culminating in search-avoidance behaviors, which,
in turn, prevent them from developing library skills” (Jiao, Onwuegbuzie, & Lichtenstein,
1996, p. 152). This study went on to become one of the seven most important articles in
the seventy-five-year history of College & Research Libraries (Gremmels, 2015). Melon
identified the recurrent themes of fear, confusion, a sense of being lost, and feeling of
helplessness in the students’ approach in having to use the library to do research (Carlile,
2007).

22

Melon (1986) reported that feelings of anxiety stem from one or more of the
following four sources: (a) the relative size of the library; (b) a lack of knowledge about
the location of materials, equipment, and resources; (c) a lack of knowledge about how to
initiate library research; and (d) a lack of knowledge about how to proceed with a library
search. From this, Mellon (1988) concluded that library anxiety can present itself in three
different ways:
1. students think that they have less library competence than their peers,
2. students are ashamed of their lack of library competence, and
3. students avoid asking questions so that their lack of library competence is
not exposed.
Mellon’s definition of library anxiety juxtaposes itself to Competency Theory, which can
also delve more into how and why a student feels the way he or she feels. Gross and
Latham (2007) summarized that “studies of competence theory predict that students with
low-level information literacy skills will proceed confidently, unaware that they do not
possess the level of skills they think they do. Interestingly, the effect of confidence in
completing research assignments has not been widely reported in the literature of library
and information studies” (p. 337).
A number of researchers have commented on Jiao and Onwuegbuzie’s
contributions to the field:


They have conducted several studies that supported their claim that library
anxiety needed further exploration. These researchers “added more substance to
the library anxiety concept, explaining that students’ uncomfortable feelings lead

23

to cognitive, affective, physiological and behavioral ramifications that interfere
with their abilities to accomplish library tasks” (Van Scoyoc, 2003, p. 330).


They used the LAS…to find correlations between library anxiety and
demographic characteristics…frequency and nature of library use…and
procrastination on library anxiety” (Gremmels, 2015, p. 269).



“Jiao and Onwuegbuzie have written extensively about library anxiety, which
they say is characterized by negative emotions of fear…negative self-defeating
thoughts and mental disorganization-characteristics that impede the development
of information literacy” (Atlas, 2005, p. 315).
Owuegbuzie, Jiao, and Bostick (2004) further defined the aspects for each of the

variables. These include:


Barriers with staff refers to whether the library patron perceives the library staff
as friendly and approachable



Emotional or affective barriers refer to the student’s feelings of inadequacy and/or
inability to know how to use the library



Comfort with the library refers to whether or not the students feel welcome and
safe



Familiarity with or knowledge of the library refers to how comfortable the student
feels using library uses



Barriers with library equipment refers to the student’s feelings that emerge
through the use of the library’s equipment such as the computer, copy machine
and printer (Owuegbuzie, Jiao, & Bostick, 2004).

24

Validation Tools
In 1992, Sharon Bostick developed the first quantitative measure of library
anxiety, the Library Anxiety Scale (LAS). This was devised to measure and classify
library anxiety in students attending both two–year and four-year colleges and
universities. The LAS measures the phenomenon of library anxiety through a 43 question
Likert scale instrument. Bostick (1992) identified five variables that can affect a student’s
level of library anxiety:
1. barriers with library staff;
2. emotional barriers;
3. comfort with or safety in the library;
4. familiarity with or knowledge of the library; and
5. barriers with library equipment.
In like manner, Doris Van Kampen-Breit constructed the Multidimensional
Library Anxiety Scale in 2003. The MLAS was developed to examine the library anxiety
among doctoral students at a southern university. This scale is a 53 question five-point
Likert scale instrument that measures overall anxiety. Just like Bostick’s Library Anxiety
Scale, the MLAS measures six variables:
1. comfort with and confidence in using the library;
2. general library anxiety and the information search process;
3. barriers with library staff:
4. importance of understanding how to use the library;
5. comfort with technology in the library; and
6. comfort level while in the library.

25

Uniquely, Van Kampen-Breit’s scale entailed questions that accounted for the Internet,
the plentitude of electronic databases, the ability to search library resources on or off
campus, and students’ comfort levels with computers (Van Kampen, 2003, 2004).
Onwuegbuzie, Jiao, and Bostick (2004) summarized five models of library
anxiety that have been used in numerous studies as: Kuhlthau’s Model of the Information
Search Process (ISP), the Cognitive-Affective Stage (CAS) Model of Library Anxiety,
the Information Literacy Process (ILP) Model of Library Anxiety, the DispositionalSituational-Environmental (DSE) Model of Library Anxiety, and the AnxietyExpectation Meditation (AEM) Model of Library Anxiety.
For the purpose of this review, Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process model
(1998, 1991) will be the center of focus. Kuhlthau struck out on her own and developed
her model from scratch to examine the information search process of students. Based on
the findings of this study on twenty-six college seniors, she developed a six-stage model
of the information process. The six stages are identified as: initiation of the task, selection
of the topic, exploration of information, focus on the specific topic, collection of
information, and conclusion of the search process (Kuhlthau, 1991). Basically, students
experienced the greatest amount of anxiety at the beginning of the search process.
Kuhlthau (1991) subsequently determined that anxiety also increased when the student
was unfamiliar with technology and library resources.
The Cognitive-Affective Stage Model of Library Anxiety characterizes library
anxiety during three stages of the library-task cycle: library preparation, library use, and
library reflection. The Information Literacy Process Model of Library Anxiety describes
how library anxiety interferes with information literacy on three distinct levels: input,

26

processing, and output. The Dispositional-Situational-Environmental Model of Library
Anxiety illustrates the pivotal role that self-perceptions and academic procrastination play
in the formation of library anxiety. And the Anxiety-Expectation Mediation Model of
Library Anxiety outlines the relationship between library anxiety and self-perception as
determining factors of academic success (Onwuegbuzie, Jiao, & Bostick, 2004).
Interconnections of Library Anxiety
A review of the literature determined that only three empirical studies have
investigated the interconnections of library anxiety. Jacobson (1991) declared that male
high school seniors had significantly higher levels of library anxiety than female high
school seniors. Bostick (1992) expounded on this to report that there were no gender
differences or racial of any kind among a small sample of community college,
undergraduate, and graduate students in their levels of library anxiety. Next, Mech and
Brooks (1995) insisted that neither gender or frequency of library use influenced library
anxiety in college students but there is a correlation between confidence and anxiety
level.
The literature indicated that distance education student library studies have mainly
focused on the relationship between library anxiety and on-campus learners (Collins &
Veal, 2004; Harrell, 2002; Veal, 2002) In addition, (Gaytan & McEwen, 2007; Glazer &
Murphy, 2015; Nichols, 2006; Zembylas, Theodorou, & Pavlakis, 2008) examined the
role of inexperience and apathy in academic library usage and (Beagle, 2000; Corbett &
Brown, 2015; Dew, 2001; Hensley & Miller, 2010; LaPadula, 2003; McLean & Dew,
2004; Roccos, 2001) summarized assessments of distance learner needs. Little empirical
research has been done in the area of library anxiety among distance learners and even

27

less has been done on the correlations between library anxiety and ethnicity of users. The
literature has primarily focused on undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in
programs on traditional campuses.
Researchers have studied library anxiety and the issues with library instruction at
length, yet college students continue to experience varying levels of anxiety and
difficulties in completing assignments. “To date, no research has connected students’
anxiety about using academic libraries with their level of concern about the university in
general” (Fleming-May, Mays, & Radom, 2015, p. 437). Nonetheless, Hensley and
Miller (2010) proposed the necessity of the library to proactively communicate with
distance learners about the numerous services that are available to them. Not only was
this proposed, better connections between the students and faculty must be fostered.
These findings resulted from their 2009 study conducted at the University of Illinois to
gather information about how distance learners use the library online. From this, the
authors concluded that online surveys are useful to understand the need of distance
learners.
Ritterbush (2014) presented an expansive literature review of the use and
effectiveness of library reference and instruction to distance users through the lens of
librarians, distance learners and faculty. In particular, “studies have shown the efficacy of
online instruction classes, but few libraries reported offering such classes to their distance
students” (p. 34). Comparatively, “some reviewed studies also indicate that many faculty
members believe distance students know how to use the library, which could explain why
some faculty do not refer students to library resources or do not incorporate library
instruction in to their courses” (p. 34).

28

Nonetheless, the Association of College & Research Libraries Standards for
Distance Learning (ACRL, 2016, Resources, para. 1) state: “the institution must provide
or secure convenient, direct access to library materials in appropriate formats that are of
sufficient quality, depth, number, scope and currency to:


meet all students’ needs in fulfilling course assignments



enrich the academic programs



meet teaching and researching needs



support curricular needs



facilitate the acquisition of life learning skills



accommodate student with varying levels of technological access



accommodate other informational needs of distance learning community
as appropriate”

Behr and LaDell-Thomas’s (2014) examination of why distance students choose
non-academic libraries over academic libraries confirms the need for academic libraries
to use both the ACRL’s Standards of Distance Learning and Framework for Information
Literacy for Higher Education as tools to serve the needs of this population. “Despite
these efforts librarians may find that a significant number of students have a ‘wandering
eye’ and do not necessarily look only to their home university, but also to local libraries
for some or all of their library and research needs...” (p. 137). This examination went on
to emphasize that it should not be automatically assumed that students are reluctant to use
a library at all. What is evident from this examination is that it is important to continually
identify ways to improve services for these students.

29

Summary of Chapter Two
This chapter reviewed the literature regarding the competency skills of distance
learners and library anxiety. The first section considered the impact of inexperience,
apathy and anxiety on student success for distance community college students regarding
their ability to utilize necessary academic research skills. The second section reviewed
the major theories and studies, validation tools, and acknowledged the interconnections
of library anxiety.

30

CHAPTER 3
METHODS
Introduction
This study utilized both quantitative and qualitative data collection methods to
explore relationships between specific student characteristics, barriers such as
inexperience and apathy, and library anxiety. The rationale for this approach is that the
quantitative data and results provide a general picture of the research problem while the
qualitative data and its analysis will refine and expound on the findings by exploring
participants’ views in more depth. According to Creswell (2014), triangulation methods
can serve a larger, transformative purpose to change and advocate for marginalized
groups such as ethnic/racial minority groups.
The primary research objective of this study is to examine the academic behaviors
and perceptions of community college’s distance learners. Of particular interest are the
relationships, if any, among demographic variables (gender, race, and distance from the
college). The secondary objective of this research is to further explore the phenomena
that explains the association between library usage and academic success.
Participants
Participants represent a random sample of undergraduates enrolled in at least one
distance course at a non-residential community college located in the northeastern United
States. A total of 1057 distance learners were enrolled during Fall 2016, and 92
participated in the study on a voluntary basis. Sixty-four (69.6%) out of the 92

31

participants are female; 29.3% (27)27 (29.3%) are male. One participant checked both.
The race of the participants was split among five categories: 29.3% White, 25% African
American, 25% Hispanic, 11% Asian, and 8.7% other. Table 3.1 relates the percentage
distribution of the sample to the entire student population at this community college.
While the sample does not exactly mirror the student body, it does oversample minority
students who are the interest of this study. All protocols for my interaction with
participants were reviewed and approved by the University of South Carolina’s
Institutional Review Board as well Manchester Community College’s Institutional
Review Committee.
Table 3.1
Juxtaposition of Sample to Entire Student Body
Gender/Race

Sample Population

Entire Student Body

27%

47%

Females

69.6%

53%

White, Non- Hispanic

29.3%

57%

African-American

25%

16%

Hispanic

25%

19%

Asian

11%

6%

Other

8.7%

2%

Males

Instrumentation
The data was collected using an abbreviated 46-item version of the
Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale (MLAS) specifically designed for community
college students. Creswell (2014) confirmed earlier research by Fowler (2009)

32

highlighting that: “Survey research provides a quantitative or numeric description of
trends, attitudes or opinions of a population by studying a sample of that population…
with the intent of generalizing from a sample to a population” (p. 13). To increase the
reliability and validity of the questions, the instrument was pre-tested by a small group of
students. Van Kampen (2004) previously tested the internal consistency using
Cronbach’s Alpha.
“The resultant alpha coefficient of .88 for all 53-statements items provided
evidence of adequate internal consistency” (p. 32). This 46-item instrument consists of
closed-ended statements and demographic questions specific to community college
student (see Appendix A). Twenty-three of the questions were assigned values one to
five as Likert Scale items and the remaining questions were fashioned as “yes” or “no”
responses. The Likert response options were “strongly agree”, “agree”, “undecided”,
“disagree”, or “disagree”. Strongly Disagree has a value of one and Strongly Agree has a
value of five. Table 3.2 illustrates the way in which the three variables for this study will
be used in the data analysis as individual composite factors.
Table 3.2
Variables, Research Questions and Items on Survey
Variable Name

Descriptive Research Question

Items on Survey

Inexperience

What is the relationship, if any, among
demographic variables (gender, race, and
distance form college) and inexperience?

See Questions 1, 2, 6, 7, 8,
19: familiarity with or
knowledge of the library

Anxiety

What is the relationship, if any, among
demographic variables (gender, race, and
distance form college) and anxiety?

See Questions 9, 11, 13, 14,
16, 17: emotional barriers

Apathy

What is the relationship, if any, among
demographic variables (gender, race, and
distance form college) and apathy?

See Questions 3, 4, 15, 19,
20: barriers with staff;
comfort with or safety in the
library

33

Although Bostick’s (1992) Library Anxiety Scale (LAS) established the precedent
for assessing library anxiety, the MLAS contains more current trends in library usage.
Unlike the LAS, the Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale (MLAS) incorporates
Internet usage, the availability and use of a vast number of electronic databases, the
ability to search the library’s webpage remotely, and students’ comfort with a computer
(Van Kampen, 2003, 2004). It contains six factors that measure library anxiety: comfort
with using the library; general library anxiety; barriers with staff; perceived importance
of knowing how to utilize the library; comfort with technology and comfort with the
physical library. The 46 questions that make up the MLAS are written as statements that
are to be answered in terms of agreement and/or frequency. Example statements include:


‘I feel intimidated when I walk into the library’



‘When using the library for research, I feel overwhelmed’



‘How often do you use the library?’



‘How often do you use the library in person?’

MLAS total scores can range from a low of fifty-three points to two hundred sixty-five
points. “If used on a similar population, the instrument should be sufficiently stable to
produce results that measure the six dimensions of library anxiety identified during factor
analysis” (Van Kampen, 2004, p. 33).
Permission was granted for use of the MLS by Dr. Van Kampen Breit in our
phone conversation that occurred on June 14, 2016. Dr. Van Kampen subsequently sent
me an abbreviated-46 item MLAS that she modified for the use of assessing community
college students’ library anxiety. Google Forms was then used to create an online version
of the survey for digital distribution. This decision was based on prior research that

34

promoted this form of data collection for its strengths, zero price cost, data availability,
and convenience. Starting October 2016 and ending in November 2016, an email was
sent to all MCC’s distance learners inviting them to participate and included a link to the
survey.
Procedures
Prior to beginning this research, approval for the study was obtained from the
Institutional Research Board at the University of South Carolina. (Appendix B) The
approach by which this dissertation was completed represents a change from the
researcher’s dissertation proposal. All four of the Connecticut Community Colleges
(Capital, Gateway, Housatonic, and Manchester) with the greatest number of minority
students were contacted via email and phone by the researcher with the opportunity to
participate in the study. Only one chose to participate, Manchester Community College.
Another one of the proposed data collection approaches, the content analysis from
voluntarily submitted diary logs and blog entries, was also dropped due to reasons of
practicality. This was decided as result of feedback provided from the pilot test of the
survey in the summer of 2016. Four community colleges students reported that it was
unrealistic to think that students would want to keep diaries and make blog posts about
academic library usage.
Data was collected in a cross-sectional three-phased approach during the Fall
2016 semester. The process started by the emailing of the abbreviated MLAS to one
thousand fifty-seven distance students at Manchester Community College for Phase One.
The primary point of access to Manchester Community College was through Dr. G.
Duncan Harris, who is the Institutional Research Officer as well as the Dean of Student

35

Services. After permission was established, (see Appendix E) the Assistant Director of
Educational Technology & Distance Learning-Tim Boto and Florence Sheils (now retired
Director of Retention Services) aided this study. A data collection time frame was
arranged with Tim Boto for October thru November 2016.
Potential participants received a link to complete the survey via email link
provided by the Office of Educational Technology and Distance Learning. Due to a low
number of email responses (30), consequently I employed Phase Two to which I solicited
participants and administered surveys to 17 willing participants in MCC’s cafeteria. The
Phase 2 & 3 effort came about through the suggestion and permission by the Dean of
Students to gain more responses from minority students. Students were specifically asked
whether he/or she participated in this same study online upon initial contact and
confirmation on online student status. Phase Three consisted of soliciting participants
(45) from a two-day bus trip sponsored by MCC to the National Museum of African
American History Culture located in Washington, D.C. on November 11, 2016.
One hundred twenty students attended this outing; forty- five of these NMAAHC
trip participants completed the survey after self-identification of taking at least one course
online. The survey was administered on two different buses on the way to the museum to
avoid interfering with the itinerary. The researcher switched buses at a rest stop break for
lunch. In both instances of the cafeteria and NMAAHC trip participants, the researcher
provided instructions regarding the survey to the students in the informed consent form
attached to the instrument. (see Appendix F). Students were asked to voluntarily
complete and return the survey to the researcher upon completion. Surveys took an
average of ten to 15 minutes to complete.

36

I developed my own questions for the three pre-arranged semi-structured student
interviews. These interviews with exclusively minority students were arranged by the
Office of Student Retention Services. These students did not complete the survey; they
were selected due to their unsatisfactory student standing. These students’ GPA is below
the required minimum and are experiencing academic difficulty. Purposive sampling was
employed to ensure choosing participants who could provide desired perspectives on the
difficulties that community college students face in terms of academic success and
academic library usage. These perspectives included: personal barriers, academic
difficulty, awareness of library services, use of the library, understanding the purpose of a
library on a community college campus, and the library’s role in the participant’s
development as a distance student. As this part of the study was the most exploratory, the
interviews were semi-structured. The interview questions were developed to give me the
flexibility to respond, react to and fully engage the interview participants, and identify
concepts that emerged (Merriam, 1998, p. 74). Permission was obtained from each
student before interviews commenced. Interviews lasted approximately 15-20 minutes in
the Office of Student Retention Services. All interviews were recorded using a voice
recorder and were later uploaded to the researcher’s computer. The focus of the
interviews was to better understand the library behaviors and perceptions of this
community college’s distance learners. The questions were both open-ended and closed
(see Appendix G), and I probed the participants for clarification and detail. Interviews
were conducted in English.

37

Data Analysis
IBM SPSS Statistics 24 and Microsoft Excel software packages were used for
quantitative data analysis. The MLAS assigns values of 1 to 5 (Strongly Disagree,
Disagree, Undecided, Agree and Strongly Agree) for the first 23 Likert-scaled questions
however, negatively worded statements had to be reversed so that all statements were
scored in the same direction. Responses were transposed so that ‘4’s & 5’s’ would
correspond with the highest levels on inexperience, anxiety, and apathy and “1’s&2’s’
would correspond with the lowest levels of inexperience, anxiety, and apathy. Given the
exploratory nature of this study, the analysis of the abbreviated MLAS was descriptive.
In keeping with the nature of descriptive statistics, I did not attempt to understand reasons
or provide explanations but described how and what things are.
In addition to transposing responses, the variables of ‘Inexperience’, ‘Anxiety’,
and ‘Apathy’ were defined as composite factors (made up of a group of selected
questions) in order to average them for an inexperience, apathy, and anxiety score.
Subsequently, each composite factor was comprised of questions that flowed in the same
direction:
Table 3.3
Composition Questions for Composite Factors
Composite Factor

Questions

Anxiety

Q9, Q11, Q13, Q14, Q16 and Q17

Apathy

Q3, Q4, Q15, Q19, Q20

Inexperience

Q1, Q2, Q6, Q7, Q8, Q10, Q18

In keeping with experimental tradition, this study employed “statistical techniques that
are used to evaluate the effectiveness…or a difference between groups, such as Analysis

38

of Variance (ANOVA) or t-test, to compare the size of “between-group” differences with
the size of “within-group” differences due to individual variability (Rudestam & Newton,
1992, p. 27).
First, the data was analyzed to identify an average rating for each question across
all participants. Using univariate analysis, the means, modes, and standard deviations
were determined for each factor by gender. Data also underwent bivariate analysis to
identify correlational relationships among the composite factors using Pearson’s Moment
Correlation Coefficient.
Inferential statistics tests were used to examine the hypotheses in the study. Ttests, independent sample tests, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were conducted to
test specific research hypotheses that examined whether participants who experience low
levels of one variable, experience high levels of another.
The qualitative data was analyzed based on qualitative content analysis or
‘coding’ to obtain insight on the relationship between library usage and academic
success. The goal was to describe the connections between academic success and library
participation within the community college from the distance learners’ point of view. I
also wanted to understand the perspectives of the participants regarding their feelings in
relation to inexperience, apathy and anxiety for their academic library usage.
After the interview data was collected, it was stored in the researcher’s computer,
hand transcribed and transferred into Word documents. Each participant’s responses were
coded without names. Another researcher with expertise in library anxiety and I later
conducted a content analysis of the interviews for triangulation (Creswell, 2014). The
content analysis included both coding and thematic analysis. Coding of the data consisted

39

of surveying the content of the responses, assigning codes, and reviewing the content
codes according to frequency and theme. A thematic analysis followed, and it was
applied to all of the qualitative data. Then, I used a three-phased analysis process for my
qualitative data: (a) data was reduced though coding to highlight the key points related to
library anxiety and academic success that were contained in the transcripts of the various
interviews; (b) the data was organized to bring together similar and opposing data from
across the transcripts; (c) the similarities and differences were assessed to determine
relationships and draw conclusions (Miles, Huberman & Saldana, 1994). An initial set of
codes was created based on the study’s research questions and on the sub-scales of the
Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale (MLAS).
At the completion of the data collection period, all survey data, interview
recordings, and transcripts were stored and locked in a small storage unit and were
password protected on my personal computer. Also, the information entered into Google
Forms required a login and password to access all survey-related information.
Limitations
This particular college was chosen to represent the 12-member system of
Connecticut Community Colleges as it had larger numbers of ethnic/racial groups in it
student body. Participants’ responses are reflections of a voluntary sample. The study
provides only one perspective, that of the students themselves. Due to time factor and
willingness to participate, not all of the distance learners who are currently enrolled at
MCC participated in this study. This may skew the statistical results of the quantitative
phase, though the representativeness of the participants in this study of the population of
distance learners at the study site will be considered.

40

There are 12 community colleges in Connecticut. This study focused on one of
these colleges. This produces a limited size sample and presents a snapshot of the
academic library usage of Connecticut’s college students. Therefore, the findings of this
examination may only be applicable to a specific sample from MCC within the state
community college system, though the reader will be able to judge the applicability of the
findings to other settings.
I may have introduced my bias into the analysis of the findings due to the
interpretative nature of qualitative research. To minimize this possibility, the positionality
of the research was disclosed and various steps to promote the trustworthiness of the
study (e.g., peer review, etc.) were included as part of the study design.
There is no clear set of definitions regarding distance education and each community
college may choose to use different definitions.
This study proceeded on the assumption that participants had sufficient reading
and writing comprehension of the English language to succeed in college. The findings
may be applicable to other community colleges with the characteristics of Manchester
Community College. I aim in the reporting of the findings to provide sufficient detail to
allow the readers to judge their applicability in other settings.
Summary
The goal of this exploratory research study was to determine if relationships exist
among demographic variables (gender, race, and distance from college) and inexperience,
anxiety, and apathy. This research used both quantitative and qualitative data collection
and analysis to examine its research questions. The MLAS was used to identify the levels
of library anxiety of distance learners at large sized Northeastern community college.

41

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
Ninety-two (92) undergraduates enrolled in distance learning courses at a
community college in New England completed a 46-question survey soliciting agreement
with statements about the library and its staff, use of the library and its resources, and
demographic information including gender, ethnic background, and distance the student
lives from the campus (academic library).
Of the 92 participants, 29.3% (27 students) are male and 69.6% (64 students) are
female (one participant checked both male and female). See Table4.1 for distribution by
reported ethnic background.
Table 4. 1
Distribution of Participants among Reported Ethnic Background
Ethnic Background

Number

Percent of Total

White, Non-Hispanic

27

29.3%

African American

23

25.0%

Hispanic

23

25.0%

Other

11

8.7%

TOTAL

92

100%

The survey results revealed that 69.6 % of the participants were female, 29.3 %
male, and 1.1% transgender. 52.7% of the participants reported that they live 15-30
minutes away from the campus, 28.6% live more than 30 minutes while 19.8 % live less

42

than 15 minutes away from the campus. The results depicted in Table 3, indicated that
three ethnic groups (White-non-Hispanic, Hispanic and African American) almost
equally participated in the study-29.3% White (non-Hispanic); 25% Hispanic; and 25%
African American and 12% Asian. The most compelling finding in relation to race and to
the study was that White (non-Hispanic) students were significantly more experienced
than Asian students (mean difference=-.8, p=.033). This finding is consistent with Leedy
and Ormond (2016) that people from East Asian cultures are more likely to downplay
their abilities than people from Western cultures (p. 26).
Eighteen of the questions using a 5-‐point rating scale (strongly agree to strongly
disagree) were grouped and then averaged to create three composite factors:
Inexperience, Anxiety, and Apathy (see Table 4.2).
From Table 4.2, the average rating across all participants suggests that students
are not particularly inexperienced or anxious or apathetic in terms of their attitudes
toward use of the library (3=neutral attitude or perception and 1=lack of apathy, anxiety,
inexperience).
Each of the items was averaged for each student to form an overall composite
score of inexperience (M = 3.33, SD =.839 ), anxiety (M =2.99 , SD =.796 ), and apathy
(M = 3.56, SD =.737 ).
When, however, I looked at the correlation (using Pearson’s Product Moment
Correlation Coefficient) among the composite factors, I found that as inexperience
increases, anxiety increases (r=0.41, t=4.2, p<0.01); as inexperience increases, apathy
increases (r=0.64, t=7.7, p<0.01);and as anxiety increases, apathy increases (r=0.64,
t=7.8, p<0.01).These correlations suggestthat as the student becomes more experienced

43

with how to use the library and its resources, anxiety in and apathy toward using the
library will decrease. (see Figure 4.2)
Table. 4.2
Maekup of the Composite Factors: Inexperience, Anxiety and Apathy; and Average
Rating for Each Question across All Participants
Inexperience

Question

Average Rating (N=92)

1

1.64

2

1.94

6

2.14

7

2.38

8

2.48

10

2.46

18

2.49

Anxiety

Question

Average Rating (N=92)

9

2.50

11

2.54

13

2.61

14

2.65

16

2.68

17

2.70

Apathy

Question

Average Rating (N=92)

3

2.67

4

2.63

15

2.62

19

2.62

20

2.65

*As noted in Method section, responses for this factor were transposed so that ‘5’ would
correspond with the highest level of Inexperience/Apathy and ‘1’ would correspond with
the lowest level.

44

anxiety and apathy
toward using
library decreases

experience with
how to use library
and its resources
increases

Figure 4.1 Correlation of Inexperience, Apathy and Anxiety in Distance Students
These findings are broadly in line/ harmony with those of research studies such
as: Mellon, 1998; Van Scoyoc, 2003; Onwuegbuzie, Jiao and Bostick (2004); Atlas,
2005; and Gremmels, 2015. Although these findings are generally compatible with
Bostick’s (1992) study, but they also agree with Kuhlthau’s (1991) report that students
experienced the greatest amount of anxiety at the beginning of the search process.
“Exploration is characterized by feelings of confusion, uncertainty, and doubt which
frequently increase during this time” (p. 366).
Findings by Gender
There is no significant difference at the .05 level of significance in inexperience,
anxiety or apathy by gender. The gender-based findings revealed that there is no
significant difference at the .05 level of significance in inexperience, anxiety or apathy by
gender. These findings are consistent with Bostick’s (1992) and Mech and Brooks (1995)
previous research. Bostick (1992) reported that there were no gender differences of any
kind among a small sample (just like this one) of community college, undergraduate, and
graduate students in the levels of library anxiety. Mech and Brooks (1995) further
expounded that neither gender or frequency of library use influenced library anxiety in

45

college but that there is a correlation between confidence and anxiety level as Gross and
Latham (2007) has identified. Also, there were no
differences in average inexperience, anxiety, or apathy based on how far away students
live from campus.
Findings by Race
There was no difference in average anxiety and apathy by race. (see Table 4.3). However,
there was a significant difference in inexperience by race.
Table 4.3
One-way ANOVA of Differences in Inexperience, Anxiety, and Apathy among the Four
Ethnic Backgrounds

Specifically, post hoc tests using Tukey’s HSD, a commonly used test for exploring
differences (Bryman, 2016) revealed that White (non-Hispanic)
students were significantly more experienced than Asian students (mean difference = -.8,
p = .033). Leedy and Ormond (2016) found that people from East Asian cultures are
more likely to downplay their abilities than people from Western cultures (p. 266).
Specific Skills
In addition to asking about students’ feeling of inexperience, anxiety, and apathy,
students were also asked about their skills with specific resources (see Table 4.4).

46

Table 4.4
Percentage of Students Reporting Ability to Perform Specific Library Skill, Attitude
toward the Library as Part of College Life
Question

Statement (yes, no or unsure)

Percentage Responding ‘yes”
(N=92)

24

I know how to locate full text
resources from the library

52%

25

I know how to download articles
to an e-reader

53%

28

The library is an important part of
my college life

56%

29

I am comfortable using my Wi-Fi
connected device to use library

65%

Over three-‐quarters (77%) of the students agreed that: “It is important for all
students to know how to use the library” (question 27) and over half (56%) of the
students agreed that: “The library is an important part of my college life” (question 28).
These findings run counter to the widely-expressed view that college students fail to
recognize the importance of the library. The findings in Table 4.5 contradict the
students’ claim that the library is important.
The positive aspects of this study’s quantitative findings include:


students are not particularly inexperienced or anxious or apathetic in
terms of their attitudes toward use of the library



correlations suggest that as student becomes more experienced with
how to use the library and its resources, anxiety in and apathy toward
using the library will decrease.



no significant difference at the.05 level of significance in experience or
apathy by gender exists.
47

Table 4.5
Content Analysis of Differing Library Behaviors & Perceptions
Attitudes and
Perceptions

Quantitative

Qualitative

Attitudes
Toward/Use of
Library

Question#8 I feel very
capable when doing research
in the library building-62%
agree

“We didn’t have a library.
It was a really small high
school”

Attitudes
Toward/Use of
Types of Resources

Question #7- I understand
how to use the library’s
online resources- 50% agree

“No. I used the MCC
database once to write a
paper”

Awareness of
campus support
services

Question#1 I can usually find “No, that’s like my
things I need in the libraryproblem that I think I need
58% agree
to fix.Like if you have a
hammer and nail on the
table, why would you use
your head?”

Perception of
College-Readiness
(after high school)

Question#36-Have you taken
a class on how to use your
school’s library?- 59.3%
disagree

“Yes, we had those a few
times a year. Up until
junior year they would
give us small writing
assignments, then senior
year we had to do it on
our own.

Perception/awarene
ss of importance of
good grades

Question#28-The library is
an important part of my
college life-60.9% agree

“ I don’t really use the
library that much. What
does that mean? Does that
mean-not at all? Yeah,
basically”

Attitudes
toward/preparednes
s for online courses

Question#7-I understand
how to use the library’s
online resources-50% agree

“I prefer online work. I
think I like it because I
take an An Introduction to
Computers course right
now. Everything is online
obviously. And I enjoy
that. Handing in papers is
not as fun”.

48

However, the negative aspect highlights that although there was no difference in
average anxiety and apathy by race, there was a significant difference in experience by
race. Tukey’s HSD post hoc test revealed that White (non-Hispanic) students were
significantly more experienced than Asian students.
Qualitative Findings
Although there were only a few interviews, these interviews provided the
opportunity for in-depth analysis. In keeping with this study’s research design, the
qualitative component was guided by one central research question and two subquestions:
1.

What are the academic library behaviors and perceptions of a community

college’s distance learners?
a. What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity and distance from the college) and inexperience?
b. What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity and distance from the college) and anxiety?
c. What is the relationship, if any, among demographic variables (gender,
race/ethnicity and distance from the college) and apathy?
Students were asked questions relating to barriers of their success and most specifically
to their use of the library and how they felt about it. Questions centered on if they aware
of the reason why they are currently experiencing academic difficulty. Analysis of the
interview transcripts looked for answers to perceptions. Aside from the fact that students
were not particularly inexperienced or anxious or apathetic in terms of their attitudes
toward the use of the library, the interviews provided a snapshot of the library behaviors

49

and perceptions of minority students. Several themes emerged from my analysis of the
interviews:


rational for low grades



awareness for campus support services



attitude toward seeking help from support services



perceptions of college-readiness after high school



perception of environmental influences



perception/awareness of importance of grades/GPA



perception of/attitude toward/methods of study behavior



attitudes toward/use of the library



attitudes toward/use of types of resources/information sources



attitudes toward preparedness for online courses perceived changes in selfawareness/attitude during the interview

These are all aspects and themes of the quantitative findings that are highlighted in Table
4.4, and reinforced by the qualitative comments provided in Table 4.6. In contrast,
unique and different aspects during in-depth interviews with minority students are
highlighted in Table 4.5. The positive aspects of the qualitative findings suggest that the
need to complete coursework assignments is a strong motivational factor to use the
library.” I use the library here for a quiet place to study”. “Yeah, it’s friendly there.
They’re helpful when you ask them questions”.
On a negative note, I found that emotional barriers such as inexperience and
apathy were a major perceived influence that can affect a student’s confidence and can
impede students’ progress. “We didn’t have a library. It was a really small high school”.

50

Table 4.6.
Content Analysis of Similar Library Behavior & Perceptions
Quantitative

Qualitative

Perception of/attitude
towards/methods of study
behavior

Question #21-I only use
the library if my professor
requires me to- 48.9%
agree

“I only log on when it’s
necessary-when I have to
for papers and stuff”

Comfort with using library

Question #10-I am
comfortable when I am in
the library-66.3% agree

“I use the library here for
a quiet space to study”

General Library Anxiety

Question #9- I feel
intimated when I walk into
th library-50% agree

“I mean I probably went
in there like once this
semester because I had a
group project to do and
that’s about it”

Barriers with Staff

Question #3-The people
“who work in the library
are helpful-78.2% agree

“Yeah, it’s friendly in
there. They’re helpful
when you ask them
questions”

Perceived importance of
knowing how to utilize the
library

Question #27- It is
important for all students
to know how to use
library- 84.6 agree

“Definitely, that was one
of the things, I didn’t
utilize while I was in high
school. I went to
Glastonbury and they had
spent all this money for
these databases to look for
information. I never used
any of it though it
would’ve facilitated my
writing skills and made
everything easier. I’m
trying to develop better
habits where I use the
resources available to me”

“No, that’s like my problem that I think I need to fix. Like the resources are right here.
Like if you have a hammer and nail on the table, why would you use your head?” “I don’t

51

really use the library that much. What does that mean? Does that mean-not at all? Yeah,
basically”. The participants showed a clear preference for only using the library when
necessary and/or just u “I only log on when it’s necessary-when I have papers and stuff”.
“No. I used the MCC database once to write a paper”.
Summary of Chapter Four
Chapter 4 presents the quantitative findings of this study according to race,
gender, and distance from college along with qualitative findings that highlight the
library behaviors and perceptions of three minority students. Dr. Van Kampen Breit’s
abbreviated 46-item Multidimensional Library Anxiety Scale (MLAS) was utilized. This
version specifically designed for community college students contains six factors that
measure library anxiety: comfort with using the library; general library anxiety; barriers
with staff; perceived importance of knowing how to utilize the library; comfort with
technology and comfort with the physical library. An in-depth analysis of these findings
will be covered in Chapter 5.

52

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
Introduction
The purpose of this dissertation is to examine and explore the academic library
behaviors and perceptions of distance community college students at a northeastern
community college. This study reveals that narratives can play a significant role in
studying the behaviors and perceptions of library anxiety. This is an attempt to employ an
under-utilized research method. The goal was not to revisit previous research on library
anxiety but to recognize that this phenomenon still occurs despite efforts to reform library
instruction. It is important not to study this phenomenon through the same outmoded lens
which leads to a cookie cutter approach of library instruction initiatives that do not meet
the needs of a varied student population.
Conclusions
More than 1,200 community colleges nationwide enroll over ten million students
each year, with more than one in four of these students taking some of their courses at a
distance. Many of these post-secondary institutions also struggle to retain and graduate
students enrolled as distance learners (Bailey, Jaggars, & Jenkins, 2015). In a continuing
effort to help address college completion gaps, the qualitative findings of this study
attempt to identify barriers to success especially for minority students, and provide
insights on how to decrease college completion gaps. It is important to make meaningful
inferences about behavior rather than just solely relying on statistical significance

53

reporting. Given post-secondary education’s increased focus on student’s use of
resources beyond the classroom, a logical line of exploration is the link between
academic library usage and academic success. The “cafeteria-style” model approach
(Bailey, Jaggars, & Jenkins, 2015) to student support services is faulty in this regard and
overlooked. The “cafeteria-style” model for community college students is not only
faulty for several reasons, but it actually costs more in the long run. This cost not only
includes monetary implications, but also can be measured in terms of cultivating
productive global citizens.
The role of the academic library is often undervalued in creating new paradigms
for student success. The growing completion gap between high- and low achievingcollege students makes it necessary to re-consider past efforts and start from a new
vantage point which seats the academic library at the helm. Not only do I agree with the
Bailey, Jaggars and Jenkins’s (2015) notion that the use of ‘guided pathways’ (student
success maps of required courses) is necessary to foster student success, I believe that
current higher education student success models need to be restructured much like
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs model to which a college student’s first survival skill must
be the possession of formidable library skills. (see Figure 5.1)
Academic
Support
Mandated Library Instruction

Information Literacy Skills

Figure 5.1 Higher Education Student Success Model
54

Information literacy is one of the most important survival skills that every college
student should possess. The gap between school library media programs and national
standardized test results is a long-standing issue that renders the problem in which
students eventually leave high school with inadequate research skills (Fabbi, 2015).
Twenty-first century literacy, as we all know, requires more much more now than just
being able to read or use the computer. A plethora of research suggests that many college
students still do not know how to adequately look for information to complete
assignments when they start college It is necessary for students to know how to find,
evaluate, and use of information for a variety of reasons. Since reform in higher
education dates back 10 to 20 years (Bailey, Jaggars, & Jenkins, 2015), it is well
documented that the earlier students are prepared for transitioning to higher education,
the more the chances for success are more probable. This study’s findings in relation to
correlations suggest that as a student becomes more experienced with how to use the
library and its resources, anxiety and apathy toward using the library will decrease.
This study is a case study that can be explained as an extension of Gross’
Competency Theory. This established discourse is grounded in developmental
psychology which has been undervalued in library research. The emphasis in this process
is that students are very likely to overestimate their proficiency. According to Gross
(2005) low levels of information-seeking skills may keep people from:


recognizing the need for information,



keep them from recognizing the value of libraries and reference services
(traditional or digital) to their needs

55



render them unable to access services, programs, and systems accurately when
they do access them



impede their ability to make good relevance judgments and to recognize the
information they need when they see it
Unfortunately, survey data, rather than the actual voices of the students has been

the focus of recent research. This does not allow the opportunity to include and/or make
meaning of lived experiences. Students’ voices are paramount to the design and
implementation of student success paradigms. Although library instruction has changed
over the years, there is little empirical research that highlights the inclusion of students in
this decision-making process. The students’ voices may be the “beacons of hope” that are
missing.
Recommendations for Future Research
This examination has concentrated on the library behaviors and perceptions of a
less recognized population, community college’s distance learners. I have only examined
the relationships of gender, race, and distance from the campus and inexperience, anxiety,
and apathy. However, the findings of this study do not imply that other constructs such as
sexual orientation, student classification, and/or if the student is also a parent should not
be explored. My study offers suggestive evidence for future studies that employ only
qualitative methods for examining the library perceptions of minority students from both
community colleges and universities. The use of ethnography supports Gross and
Latham’s (2007) sentiments of examining the relationship between low-level information
literacy skills, self-assessments of performance and library anxiety. Employing
competency theory in library studies would also allow for a strong analytic approach to

56

dispelling “imposter syndrome” and further understanding assumptions and constructs
that library anxiety scales may overlook or fail to go into sufficient depth. Kolligan and
Sternberg (1991) found that “individual with perception of fraudulence are highly critical
of themselves…and are anxious…and feel a strong pressure to achieve and excel” (p.
323).
Applying this same mixed method approach at other community colleges would
certainly be of importance and value to the missing body of knowledge in library anxiety.
Do other institutions distance learners’ have research difficulties? Have any measures
been taken to significantly include this population? Are distance learners offered an
online library instruction session at their point of entry? How significantly is student
learning impacted by embedding librarians into online courses? Future research could
explore these questions.
Research from this study could also lead to more culturally responsive library
instruction. The findings can be used as observations for planning and implementing
initiatives. This would support the higher education’s agenda to be more ‘inclusive”
(minorities, transgender, cross-cultural, parent status, etc.) when reporting research
findings and drawing subsequent conclusions. Culturally responsive practices are specific
educational practices, instructional strategies, team processes, and curricula content
which have been established by research to increase the achievement of culturally diverse
students. Most often, first-year minority students have had limited access and/or limited
experiences with library instruction and/or computer technology. As college students
need to know how to conduct library research, the question still arises whether these
students have the independent skills to use technology to access information and the

57

library resources of their institution. As the number of minorities in higher education
continues to increase, higher education professionals, especially academic librarians must
not only seek to understand the varied cultural backgrounds of their students, they must
be responsive to these differences.
In addition to suggesting recommendations for future research, this study has
made two major contributions to the literature on online distance library usage. Library
anxiety studies that center on inexperience and apathy as separate constructs are limited.
First, since the participants in this study are distance learners, they might not the possess
the library skills necessary to persist through an online course with a passing grade. Many
minority groups including, African-Americans, Asians, and Hispanic/Latinos are
inexperienced and need additional support services. These current findings are worthy of
further exploration since this study involved minority students raised in suburban
environments rather than inner cities. There is no empirical library research that explores
this distinction of classism amongst minority membership.
My investigation of the construct of apathy increased the originality of my study.
Although it can be misconstrued with inexperience and anxiety, it merits its own
consideration in library studies. It may be that unrecognized apathetic students are the
students who leave blank answers and/or choose not to participate altogether. I hope that
the findings of this study serve as a springboard for research methods that encourage
participation from those historically apprehensive to participate in library research.
Research has established that minorities are often reluctant to participate in research
endeavors due to long-standing trust issues with research. With this in mind, this supports

58

my idea that more qualitative research is needed. It is in my opinion that continuing the
research on library anxiety is not outdated and unwarranted, but necessary.

59

REFERENCES
Allan, J. & Lawless, N. (2003). Stress caused by on-line collaboration in e-learning: A
developing model. Education & Training, 45(8/9), 564-572.
Allen, I. E., Seaman, J., Survey, B., & Seaman, J. (2015). Tracking online education in
the United States. Retrieved from http://onlinelearningconsortium.org/read/surveyreports-2014/
American Library Association. (2016). Framework for information literacy for higher
education. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework
American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American
Psychological Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2012). The future of gamification | Pew Research Center.
Retrieved February 23, 2016, from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/05/18/thefuture-of-gamification/
Antell, K. (2004). Why do college students use public libraries? A phenomenological
study. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 43(3), 227–236.
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2008). Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education. Retrieved September 4, 2016, from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/issues/infolit/Framework_ILH
E.pdf
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2016a). Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education. Retrieved September 4, 2016, from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompentency
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2016b). Standard for distance
learning library services. Retrieved February 23, 2016, from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/guidelinesdistancelearning#resources
Atlas, M. C. (2005). Library anxiety in the electronic era, or why won’t anybody talk to
me anymore? Reference & User Services Quarterly, 44(4), 314–319.

60

Babson Research Group. (2015). 2015 online report card-Tracking online education in
the United States. Retrieved from
http://www.onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/onlinereportcard.pdf
Babson Research Group. (2016). 2016 WCET distance education enrollment report.
Retrieved from
http://wcet.wiche.edu/sites/default/files/WCETDistanceEducationEnrollmentReport
2016.pdf
Bailey, T. R., Jaggars, S. S., & Jenkins, D. (2015). Redesigning America’s community
colleges: A clearer path to student success. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Beagle, D. (2000). Web-based learning environments: Do libraries matter? College &
Research Libraries, 61(4), 367–379.
Becker, C. (2016). Connecticut rising to the challenge: A report of the dialogue on public
libraries. Washington, D.C.
Behr, M., & LaDell-Thomas, J. (2014). What do they have that we don’t have? Local
libraries and distance students: Why do students stray and can we get them back?
Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 8(3/4), 137–167.
Black, S. (2016). Psychosocial reasons why patrons avoid seeking help from librarians: A
literature review. The Reference Librarian, 57(1), 35-56.
Blundell, S., & Lambert, F. (2014). Information anxiety from the undergraduate student
perspective: A pilot study of second-semester freshmen. Journal of Education for
Library and Information Science, 55(4), 261–273.
Board of Regents (BOR) for Higher Education [Connecticut]. (2013). BOR Mission,
Vision, Goals. Retrieved February 24, 2016, from
http://www.ct.edu/regents/mission
Bostick, S. L. (1992). The development and validation of the library anxiety scale.
[Doctoral Dissertation]. Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses database
(UMI No. 9310624).
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Buehler, M. (2001). It takes a library to support distance learners. Internet Reference
Services Quarterly, 5(3), 5-24.
Carlile, H. (2007). The implications of library anxiety for academic reference services: A
review of the literature. Australian Academic & Research Libraries AARL, June
38(2), 129–147.

61

Case, D. (2007). Looking for information: A survey of research on information seeking,
needs, and behavior (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Academic Press.
Caspers, J. S. (2000). Outreach to distance learners: When the distance education
instructor sends students to the library, where do they go? The Reference Librarian,
32(67–68), 299–311.
Clayton, S. J. (2007). Going the distance: Library instruction for remote learners. New
York: Neal-Schuman Publishers.
Cleveland, A. M. (2004). Library anxiety: A decade of empirical research. Library
Review, 53(3), 177-185.
Collins, K. M. T., & Veal, R. E. (2004). Off-campus adult learners’ levels of library
anxiety as a predictor of attitudes toward the Internet. Library and Information
Science Research, 26(1), 5–14.
Connecticut State Colleges & Universities. (2016). Transform CCSU 2020 plan.
Hartford, CT: Connecticut State Colleges & Universities.
http://www.ct.edu/files/pdfs/overview-transform-cscu.pdf
Corbett, A., & Brown, A. (2015). The roles that librarians and libraries play in distance
education settings. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 18(2), 1-9.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Davies, M. M., & Mosdell, N. (2006). Practical research methods for media and cultural
studies: Making people count. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Dew, S. H. (2001). Knowing your users and what they want: Surveying off-campus
students about library services. Library Administration, 31(3/4), 177-194.
Dickson-Swift, V., James, E. L., & Liamputtong, P. (2008). Undertaking sensitive
research in the health and social sciences: Managing boundaries, emotions and
risks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Do your students speak library-ese? | EBSCO post. (n.d.). Retrieved February 23, 2016,
from https://www.ebsco.com/blog/article/do-your-students-speak-library-ese
Eastin, M. & LaRose, R. (2000). Internet self-efficacy and the psychology of the Digital
Divide. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 6(1).
Fabbi, J. (2015). Fortifying the pipeline: A Quantitative exploration of high school
factors impacting the information literacy of first-year college students. College
& Research Libraries, 76(1), 31-42.

62

Farmer, D., & Mech, T. (1992). Information literacy: Developing students as
independent learners. (D. W. Farmer & T. F. Mech, Eds.). San Francisco.
Field, K. (2015). The higher education act just turned 50. Has it done what it was
supposed to? Retrieved February 24, 2016, from http://chronicle.com/article/TheHigher-Education-Act-Just/234110
Fifteenth Distance Library Services Conference Proceedings. (2012). Memphis,
Tennessee: Central Michigan University Libraries and Off-Campus and Online
Programs.
Fink, A., Bourque, L. B., Fielder, E. P., Frey, J. H., Oishi, S. M., & Litwin, M. S. (1995).
The survey kit: How to analyze survey data. London: Sage.
Fisher, K. E., Erdelez, S., & McKechnie, L. (2005). Theories of information behavior.
Medford, New Jersey: Information Today, Inc.
Fishman, R. (2015). Community college online. New America Foundation.
https://www.newamerica.org/education-policy/policy-papers/community-collegeonline/
Fleming-May, R., Mays, R. A., & Radom, R. (2015). “I never had to use the library in
high school”: A library instruction program for at-risk students. Portal: Libraries
and the Academy, 15(3), 433–456.
Fowler, F.J. (2009). Survey method research methods. (4th ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Fry, R. (2015). Class of 2025 expected to be the biggest, most diverse ever. Retrieved
from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/09/11/class-of-2025-expected-tobe-the-biggest-most-diverse-ever/
Gaytan, J., & McEwen, B. C. (2007). Effective online instructional and assessment
strategies. American Journal of Distance Education, 21(3), 117–132.
Glazer, H. R., & Murphy, J. a. (2015). Optimizing success: A model for persistence in
online education. American Journal of Distance Education, 29(2), 135–144.
Gremmels, G. S. (2015). Constance Mellon’s “library anxiety”: An appreciation and a
critique. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 268–275.
Gross, M. (2005). The impact of low-level skills on information-seeking behavior.
Reference & User Services Quarterly, 45(2), 155-162.

63

Gross, M. & Latham, D. (2007). Attaining information literacy: An investigation of the
relationship between skill level, self-estimates of skill, and library anxiety. Library
and Information Science Research, 29(3), 332-353.
Hara, N. & Kling, R. (2003). Students’ distress with a web-based distance education
course: An ethnographic study of participants’ experiences. Journal of Distance
Education, 4(2): 190-198.
Harrell, K. J. (2002). Reducing high anxiety: Responsive library services to off-campus
nontraditional students. Journal of Library Administration, 37(3), 355–365.
Hatchard, D. B. & Toy, P. (1986). The psychological barriers between library users and
library staff: An exploratory investigation. American Association of Research
Libraries, 17(2), 63-69.
Head, A. (2013, April). Project information literacy: What can be learned about the
information-seeking behavior of today’s college students. Invited paper presented at
Association of College and Research Librarians Conference, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Hensley, M., & Miller, R. (2010). Listening from a distance: A survey of University of
Illinois distance learners and its implication for meaningful instruction. Journal of
Library Administration, 50(5/6), 667–683.
Herr, K. G. (2014). The action research dissertation: A guide for students and faculty.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Hinton, P. R., McMurray, I., & Brownlow, C. (2014). SPSS explained. London:
Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Holleman, M. (1990). The Role of the learning resources center in instruction. (M.
Holleman, Ed.) New directions for community colleges (Vol. 71, fall 1). San
Francisco.
Jacobson, F. J. (1991). Gender differences in attitudes toward using computers in
libraries: An exploratory. Library and Information Science Research, 13, 267-279.
Jaggars, S. (2014). Choosing between online and face-to-face courses: Community
college student voice. American Journal of Distance Education, 28(1), 27-38.
Jan, S. U., Anwar, M. A., & Warraich, N. F. (2016). Library anxiety and emotion
perception among the undergraduate social sciences students: A relationship study.
Behavioral & Social Sciences Librarian, 35(2), 52-63.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1997a). Antecedents of library anxiety. Library
Quarterly, 67(4), 372-389.

64

Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1997b). Prevalence and reasons for university library
usage. Library Review, 46(6), 411–420.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1998). Perfectionism and library anxiety among
graduate students. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 24(5), 365-371.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1999a). Identifying library anxiety through students’
learning-modality preferences. The Library Quarterly, 69(2), 202-216.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1999b). Self-perception and library anxiety: an
empirical study. Library Review, 48(3), 140-147.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2001). Library anxiety and characteristic strengths
and weaknesses of graduate students’ study habits. Library Review, 50(2), 73-80.
Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Bostick, S. L. (2004). Racial differences in library
anxiety among graduate students. Library Review, 53(4), 228-235.
Jiao, Q. G., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Lichtenstein, A. A. (1996). Library anxiety:
Characteristics of “at-risk” college students. Library and Information Science
Research, 18(2), 151–163.
Johnson, C. (2009) Is the library where it’s at (Master’s thesis, Southern Connecticut
State University, United States).
Johnson, C. (2016). Interplay of autonomous learning, library usage, and college
completion. Current Studies in Librarianship, 32(2), 43-57.
Jones, S., Johnson-Yale, C., Millermaier, S., & Perez, F. (2008). Everyday life, online:
U.S college students’ use of the Internet. First Monday, 14(10). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/article/view/2649/2301
Karas, M. & Green, R. (2007). The information needs and information-seeking behaviors
of community college and lower division undergraduate students. Community &
Junior College Libraries, 14(2), 103-109.
Karim, N. H. A., & Ansari, N. A. (2011). Examining the effects of gender, nationality
and bibliographic instruction on library anxiety. Malaysian Journal of Library and
Information Science, 16(2), 141–154.
Katopol, P. F. (2012). Information anxiety and African-American students in a graduate
education program. Education Libraries, 35(1), 10.
Katopol, P. F. (2014). Management 2.0: Avoiding the reference desk: Stereotype threat.
Library Leadership & Management (Online), 28(3), 1–4.

65

Keramidas, C. (2012). Are undergraduate students ready for online learning? A
comparison of online and face-to-face sections of a course. Rural Special Education
Quarterly, 31(4), 25-32.
Kolligan, Jr., J., & Sternberg, R. (1991). Perceived fraudulence in young adults: Is there
an “impostor syndrome?” Journal of Personality Assessment, 56(2), 308-326.
Korn, M. (2015). Big gap in college graduation rates for rich and poor, study finds. The
Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/big-gap-incollege-graduation-rates-for-rich-and-poor-study-finds-1422997677
Krathwohl, D. R. (2004). Methods of educational and social science research: An
integrated approach (2nd ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1988). Developing a model of the library search process: cognitive and
affective aspects. Rq, 28, 232-242.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). Inside the search process: information seeking from the user’s
perspective. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 42, 361-371.
Kuo, Y. (2014). Accelerated online learning: Perceptions of interaction and learning
outcomes among African American students. American Journal of Distance, 28(4),
241-252.
La Luz, M. (2014). Seven ConnSCU institutions join multi-state collaborative to measure
student learning. Retrieved February 24, 2016, from
http://www.ct.edu/newsroom/seven_connscu_institutions_join_multi_state_collabor
ative_to_measure_studen
LaPadula, M. (2003). A comprehensive look at online student support services for
distance learners. American Journal of Distance Education, 17(2), 119-128.
Latham, D., & Gross, M. (2007). What they don’t know can hurt them: competency
theory, library anxiety, and student self-assessments of their information literacy
skills. Sailing into the Future: Charting Our Destiny, Proceedings of the 13th
National Conference of the Association of College and Research Libraries, 277–
286.
Lee, H. (2008). Information structures and undergraduate students. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 34(3), 211-219.
Leeder, K. (2013). Open access: The community college reconsidered. Journal of Library
Administration. 53(2/3), 189-198.
Leedy, P. D., & Ormrod, J.E. (2016). Practical research: Planning and design. London,
England: Pearson Education.

66

Malvasi, M. (2009). Library Rx: Measuring and treating library anxiety: A research
study. Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ncid/BA91556864
Manchester Community College. (2016). NEASC accreditation. Retrieved from
http://www.manchestercc.edu/neasc
Maybee, C. (2006). Undergraduate perceptions of information use: The basis for creating
user-centered student information literacy instruction. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 32(1), 79–85.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2006b). Designing qualitative research (4th ed.). United
Kingdom: Sage Publications (CA).
Maxim, P. S. (1999). Quantitative research methods in the social sciences. United States:
Oxford University Press.
Mclean, E., & Dew, S. H. (2004). Assessing the library needs and preferences of offcampus students: Surveying distance education students, from the Midwest to the
West Indies. Journal of Library Administration, 41(1/2), 265–302.
Mech, T. F., & Brooks, C. I. (1995). Library anxiety among college students: An
exploratory study. In R. AmRhein (Ed.), Continuing and transformation: The
promise of confluence: Proceedings of the Seventh National Conference of the
Association of College and Research Libraries, Pittsburgh, PA, March 29-April 1,
1995 (pp. 173-179). Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Mellon, C. A. (1986). Library anxiety: A grounded theory and its development. College
and Research Libraries, 47(2), 160-165.
Mellon, C. A. (1988). Attitudes: The forgotten dimension in library instruction. Library
Journal, 113(14), 137-139.
Mellon, C. A. (2015). Library anxiety: A grounded theory and its development. College
& Research Libraries, 76(3), 276-282.
Mensch, S. (2015). Improving distance education through student online orientation
classes. Culture & Religion Review Journal, 2, 12-16.
Merriam, S. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A
methods sourcebook (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

67

Miller, D.C., & Salkind, N. J. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of research design and social
measurement (6th ed.). United Kingdom: Sage Publications.
Nichols, J. T. (2006). Monthly check-up: Using a monthly survey to monitor and assess
library and information services for distance learners. Journal of Library
Administration, 45(3/4), 387–395.
Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Jiao, Q. G. (2000). I’ll go to the library later: The relationship
between academic procrastination and library anxiety. College & Research
Libraries, 61(1), 45–54.
Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Jiao, Q. G., & Bostick. S. L. (2004). Library anxiety: theory,
research, and applications. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
O’Regan, K. (2003). Emotion and e-learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, 7(3), 78–92.
Palma-Rivas, N. (2000). Using technology to facilitate learning for minority students.
New Directions for Community Colleges 112, 73-83.
Platt, J., Platt, T. L., & Watkins, L. (2013). Library anxiety among undergraduates
enrolled in a research methods psychology course. Behavioral & Social Sciences
Librarian, 32(4), 240–251.
Pitre, A., Pitre, E., & Ray, R. (Eds.). (2009). Educating African American students:
Foundations, curriculum, and experiences (critical Blac). United States: Rowman &
Littlefield Education.
Poulin, R., & Straut, T. (2016) WCET Distance Education Enrollment Report 2016.
Retrieved from
http://wcet.wiche.edu/initiatives/research/WCET-Distance-Education-EnrollmentReport-2016.
Prabha, C., Connaway, L. S., Olszweski, S. L. & Jenkins, L.R. (2007) What is enough?
Satisficing information needs. Journal of Documentation, 63(1), 74-89.
Quinn, B. (2015). The McDonaldization of academic libraries? College & Research
Libraries, 76(3), 339–352.
Ritterbush, J. (2014). Assessing academic library services to distance learners: A
literature review of perspectives from librarians, students, and faculty. Reference
Librarian, 55(1), 26–36.
Robinson, C. M., & Reid, P. (2007). Do academic enquiry services scare students?
Reference Services Review, 35(3), 405–424.

68

Roccos, L. J. (2001). Distance learning and distance libraries: Where are they now?
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 4(3). Retrieved from
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/fall43/roccos43.html
Rudestam, K., & Newton, R. (1992) Surviving your dissertation: A comprehensive guide
to content and process. (4th ed.). New Park: Sage Publications.
Tang, Y., & Tseng, H. W. (2014). Distance students’ attitude toward library help seeking.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40, 307-312.
Van Hoeck, M. (2017). Playing for keeps: Rethinking how research is taught to today’s
college students. [Smart Talk interview with Barbara Fister over email, between
June 29 and July 26, 2012] http://www.projectinfolit.org/barbara-fister-smarttalk.html
Van Kampen, D. J. (2003). Library anxiety, the information search process and doctoral
use of the library (Doctoral dissertation, University of Central Florida, 2003.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 64, AAT3094823.
Van Kampen, D. J. (2004). Development and validation of the multidimensional library
anxiety scale. College & Research Libraries, 65(1), 28-34.
Van Scoyoc, A. M. (2003). Reducing library anxiety in first-year students: The impact of
computer-assisted instruction and bibliographic instruction. Reference & User
Services Quarterly, 42(4), 329-341.
Veal, R. (2002). The relationship between library anxiety and off-campus adult learners.
Journal of Library Administration, 37(3/4), pp. 529-536.
Wagner, W. E. (2015). Using IBM SPSS statistics for research: Methods and social
science statistics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Weiler, A. (2005) Information-seeking behavior in generation y students: Motivation,
critical thinking, and learning theory. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(1),
46-53.
Zembylas, M., Theodorou, M., & Pavlakis, A. (2008). The role of emotions in the
experience of online learning: Challenges and opportunities. Educational Media
International, 45(2), 107-117.

69

APPENDIX A
ABBREVIATED MULTIDIMENSIONAL LIBRARY ANXIETY SCALE

70

71

APPENDIX B
USC INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD APPROVAL LETTER

72

APPENDIX C
USC IRB AMENDMENT APPROVAL LETTER

73

APPENDIX D
MANCHESTER COMMUITY COLLEGE INVITATION LETTER

74

APPENDIX E
MCC INSTITUITONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE APPROVAL LETTER

75

APPENDIX F
INFORMED CONSENT

76

APPENDIX G- INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

How are your classes going? / How do you think you're doing this semester?
Are your professors available for on-campus office hours?
Are you working during this semester?
How many hours do you think you should be spending studying per week?
Do you use the library online?
When you got to college did you feel prepared?
Why did you choose to transfer to community to community college?
Are there any database names you know of?
When you go to the library to work on your assignments do you actually use the
resources to complete them?
10. What do you want to be when you grow up?
11. Tell me about your research skills/library usage
12. What do you think of the library?
13. Do you use the resources online?
14. When you were in high school last year, tell me about your library usage?
15. When you were in high school, did you visit the library?
16. Do you think you can increase your library skills?
17. What kind of books have you read this semester?

77

APPENDIX H
INTERVIEWS
*XXX’S ARE REDACTED TEXT TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF RESPONDENTS

#1
I: Today we're going to talk about the difficulty you experienced in your summer course
and how you're doing now.
I: How come you earned this bad grade?
S: Um .. chemistry is not one of my strong suits ... um I should say I could definitely
apply myself a little more in that class as in studying a little more but as with
memorization and tests I'm not a very good test taker-like I would study but when it
comes down to taking tests my mind gumbles up so I kinda 1ike second guess myself
which causes me to get bad grades
I: So, do you think you have test anxiety? Have you ever gone to support services?
S: No
I: Are you aware that they are here on the campus
: S: Yes
I: Do you think you would use the services now that we're talking about it? S: Probably, I
haven’t really thought about it.
I: Let's go back a little bit, where did you transfer from?
S: xxx l: Ok
I: When you were at xxx-tell me a little more about when you arrived there from high
school-did you feel prepared? Did you have any obstacles? How come you left xxx and
came to this community college?
S: Honestly, I didn’t feel prepared at all. My high school wasn't really a high school. It
was a high school but the teaching and teachers were more friends than teachers I should
say.
I wasn’t really prepared so when I uuh ... started xxx-I didn't really take it seriously-so
my first semester grades were ok-like the best they could be.

78

The second semester they were still ok but me and my mom made a decision ... uuh ...
you know to save money and for me to go to a community college-plus I didn’t really
like it on campus.
I: So, you spent two semesters there?
S: Yes
I: You lived in xxx? S: Yes:
I: So, you grew up in xxx but you were in a different environment in xxx?
S: My aunt went there so I thought it would be a nice fit but ya know ... being at home
has its benefits too ... like at the same time.
I: So, you feel more secure living at home?
S: A little more
I: than living on campus?
S: Yes
I: For financial reasons?
S: Yeah, I feel like at the time I wasn’t able to handle the responsibility of living by
myself so now the support at home-its better.
I: How do you think you're doing this semester?
S: This semester l... well except for psychology... keep having a problem in.
I: Explain a little bit more, what does trouble mean? Like you didn't pass some tests?
S: That's it-I didn't pass some tests. Class work is fine. I do all my classwork-it's just
tests. I: Ok: so, what about your midterm grade?
S: Uuh ... l don’t think there was a mid-term grade.
I: Have you gone to the professor for office hours? S: She doesn't have office hours: she's
part-time.
I: Can you contact her through email?
S: I have and sometimes she doesn't respond so it's been that way.
I: What plan do you have to more forward? Since you're experiencing difficulty and to
prevent
Yourself from failing the course?
S: Definitely take some time to study more.

79

I: Let me show me your transcript: When you came here-you started with a clean state in
essence because you didn't transfer any credits from xxx so the D from the summer
course created a low GPA and unfortunately you have to pass your courses to bring this
number up. You need to be aware about the academic policy here at xxx and that you
have to maintain satisfactory progress. The purpose of the Retention Services office is to
talk to you about the difficulty you're experiencing and the need to bring your GPA up.
If you don't bring the number up, you could be asked to sit out for a semester so that you
can re-evaluate your commitment here because we want you to have academic success
and work towards graduation. So, because you took different courses than taking CHEM
Ill over this semester, this D is going to drag the GPA number down. So, this is a good
point in the semester for us to have this conversation for you to know to buckle down.
I: How many hours do you think you should be spending studying per week? S: 2-3 hours
after class.
I: It should be at least 3-4 hours per course
I: Do you think you're putting in enough time?
S: Not enough-at least an hour per day so I when I go home-I'll look over notes and stuff.
I could probably study more.
1:0k
I: So now that you're a second-year student, tell me about your research skills? I: Tell me
what you think about the library?
S: Here. I: Yes.
I: Even about using the library in general.
S: I use the library here for a quiet space to study.
I: Do you use the resources online?
S: No. I used the MCC database once to write a paper.
I: Are you using the library resources for your psychology class?
S: No
I: Do you see why I am asking you this? S: Yes
I: Why am I asking you this?
S: Because it can probably help me
I: When you were in school last year, tell me about your library usage?
S: Uum…I went to the library, the tutoring sessions and they helped with on line
databases-stuff like that so I used the library at xxx a lot.

80

I: Did you go to any of the reference librarians for help? S: Yes
I: Could you tell me how you felt when you went there?
S: I felt better. I felt more confident in my work- a little more confident. I: So, when you
came here to xxx how did you stop using the Library? S: I don’t even know... uuum
I: So when you were at Southern-you went to xxx and its bigger-the library here is
smaller. I: Have you been in the library here?
S: Yes,
I: How do you feel about one versus the other? Community college vs state university?
S: Uuh ... It’s a lot smaller, less people-I don't know how to word it.
I: Do you like that? Like here there is a big quiet room, you can sit outside in the Fireside
Commons, it might look better, you can check out regular books ... Do you find it
appealing? S: No, a library is a library. Appearance doesn't really matter.
I: Some students like libraries that have Starbucks on them now ... some have nice seating
areas so you can meet friends or classmates. Some have separate study rooms where you
can go in and close the door. Have you ever thought about these things?
S: Not really. l: Ok.
S: But when I'm doing homework, I just look for a quiet place-doesn't really matter where
it is. I: Ok. Are you aware that xxx's Library has its own webpage?
S: Yes
I: Do you look at it every day?
S: No-I only log on when it's necessary-when I have to for papers and stuff.
I: For psychology, do you only rely on the textbook? How do you learn about the subject
matter?
S: Yes, I use the papers she gives us.
I: Perhaps you can extend your learning by going to the Library's webpage. You can click
around and discover resources you can use.
I: Is any part of your course on Blackboard that requires you to look for information
while you are off-campus?
S: No.
I: Would you be interested in taking a solely online course?

81

S: I thought about it. But I haven’t really done anything about it. I prefer online work. I
think I would like it because I take An Introduction to Computers course right now.
Everything is on line obviously. And I enjoy that. Handing in papers is not as fun.
I: If you took on line classes, how would you survive, if you don't log 'in online to the
Library's webpage especially if you never came onto the campus? How would you
manage yourself?
S: That's a good question. I would probably need to think about it because it's a learning
experience the way I see it so I wouldn't take all online classes. So, I'd take like 2 online
classes and 2 on campus because I like being on campus in the classroom but I also like
doing things on the computer-depends on the class.
I: It is a learning experience so that's why we use opportunities such as these to ask
questions to help get you started to think about things before they happen. You want to
make sure you have skills and strategies to be successful and one of them would be
knowing how to use the Library.
I: When you were in high school, did you visit the library? S: We didn't have a library.
S: It was a really small high school. Have you ever heard of xxx?
I: No.
S: It used to be called xxx, it's near xxx.
I: Ok, now I know where you're referring to-down xxx.
S: It's a xxx school-it's from xxx grade and there was no library
I: Did you ever go to xxx's town library-xxx Library?
S: No.
I: Did you ever go to the library where you live in xxx?
S: No.
I: Do you think you can increase your library skills?
S: I mean-I could. Obviously there a lot of things the library can offer. Uum ... do I?
I could use the library more. It would probably help me.
I: Ok-moving forward-do you want to get an Associate's degree or transfer to a 4-year? S:
I want to transfer somewhere-don't know yet.
I: The more you go to school, the more you'll need the library and academic research
skills. I: Do you think you could've benefitted from a library orientation?
S: Probably.

82

I: There are colleges that provide like a workshop or classroom session that goes over
how to use the library. Have you ever been to anything like that?
S: No.
I: You can stop by the library and ask a librarian for a tour and learn more about it if you
would like. You can ask one of xxx's librarians to help you with learning more about this
subject.
I: In conclusion, you're on GPA warning, the goal is for you not to come for another visit
and increase your GPA by the end of this semester. Our goal is always to help you be the
best you can be. It was nice to meet you and I wish you well.
S: Ok. Thank you. I: Thank you

#2
I: Good Afternoon ... So, we're going to talk a little bit about your academic progression
at xxx and then we'll move on to have a discussion about the library. So, tell me a little
bit about how your classes are going this fall.
S: My public speaking class is going good. I am going to drop my Math 183. I: So in
regards to dropping have you talked to a counselor?
S: I only spoke with xxx about it.
I: Here it says that xxx is your adviser, have you spoken with her? Did Florence
recommend that you drop the class?
S: I told her I would be dropping it because of how I'm going in the class like my test
scores aren't good. So, I was kind of failing it.
I: Before you got to this point did you go to support services? Did you go to office hours?
S: Nope. No.
I: So, at this point in the semester you are over the drop period. Did you check with
financial aid to see how it would affect you?
S: Yep.
I: And you're ok with it?
S: It is going to affect me, but I have no other choice.
I: Oh, so you rather not get the bad grand then.
S: Yeah, and even if I did the bad grade it still would affect the financial aid.
I: You already registered for Spring 2017 and according to the financial aid accounting
didn't you need the MATH 138.

83

S: No.
I: So how do you think you're going to make it for next semester without the MATH 138?
S: Well, I might change my classes around.
I: Ok what I'm saying is it's not that you "might", you-definitely should look for another
course until you finish your math sequence so that you don't have trouble in this course.
Do you plan on taking the math again in the Spring?
S: If I can get a good time, then yeah.
I: Ok, what do you mean by a good time?
S: Like, to fit in my schedule. Obviously, I would have to take off that other class.
I: Ok, so tell me what happened that you weren't doing well in your math class?
S: Well, I didn’t really like the way that the professor taught. It was like he just threw
stuff up on the board and like expected us to write it down and just go off your notes
which, I feel like I need more steps in order to help me get through for like MATH and
stuff.
I: So, if that was the only way a MATH course was taught; do you know other resources
that you can use?
S: Well, I knew there was the Tutoring Center to help me.
I: And then did you know you can go on line and look for things like KHAN Academy
where they put subject matters and you can watch course lectures. So, like if you're at
home and your confused about a topic, you can look it up and kind of piggy back on what
you learned in class.
S: I never knew that...
I: Also people can find the notes from professors at other universities. And you might
find: Oh, I
like to follow their notes but stay enrolled in your class. I don’t know if your shy, but you
can ask the professor; Do you think like you can do some of the things that you are
asking. Could you give a different example or can you present it a different way?
S: I wouldn’t say I'm shy, I just didn't care for the professor at all. Just how he is, attitude
wise too I just didn't really care for it.
I: Okay, well when you come to college, the difference from high school is that you
might not like any of the professors so you can't use that as a reason why you can't do
your school work because you might not like the way the person sounds. If you get a
person with a foreign accent it might be difficult just for you to figure out what they're
saying, but you still have to. So, those are some of the habits that you come up in high
school. Like you guys go on rate my professor and say that you didn't like the person,

84

didn't like the way they talked, didn't like the way they looked at you; but what if that was
a class you needed to graduate and that was the only person
S: Then you just have to suck it up.
I: Right. Okay, so went to xxx. When you came from xxx did you feel like you were
prepared for college?
S: I don’t think I was. I don’t think I was mentally prepared for it. I don't think I was
ready to come to college period. I wasn’t that motivated, so that's why I kind of did bad
my first semester.
I: So how did you enroll? Did you parents make you? Was it something you wanted to
do? S: It was more of like my parents were like you have to go do it. It wasn't my option.
I: So, what do you want to be when you grow up?
S: Well at first I was going to start off with radiation therapy, but then I realized I didn’t
really want to do that so I went to accounting.
I: Okay so, just remember to change you major- you have to change it yourself at the
Registrar's office.
S: Right.
I: Okay so you want to be an accounting major, but you're having trouble in your math
class so make sense of that for me.
S: Well, it's not that I'm always bad at math, that's the thing. I don’t know I just have to
have a good instructor to really show me the steps to know how to get through it. That's
just my way, but I don' think that I'm horrible at Math.
I: Well, we've looked at your transcripts and you have low scores in Math, so at some
point you have to prove what you're saying, and it has to be regardless of if you're
satisfied with the we'll say the quality of teaching. Like what if the person never shows
you, what are you going to do?
S: I don’t know.
I: Okay, so what do you think you could do in the future so that you can prove that you
do like
Math?
S: Get more help if I am struggling and ask questions more, maybe. I: How many hours
were you studying for Math?
S: I would study for about three hours, once a week.
I: Okay so that's definitely not enough time. You know that you need to put more time in
it. I: So, in the public speaking what grade do you think you're going to get?

85

S: I want to think that I'm going to get a B. I don’t think I'm going to get an A, but I think
I'll get a
B. All of my grades come back pretty good, like my papers and my speeches.
I: Okay so let's look moving forward, these developmental courses have no GPA, so right
now you have no GPA. So, if you cross these off all you have is the grade from here. So
always be mindful of that because you'll be on progress probation, meaning you didn't
complete the amount of classes that you've taken.
S: Okay.
I: So, tell me about your library usage?
S: I don’t use the library that much
I: What does that mean? Does not much mean- not at all? S: Yeah, basically.
I: You don't even go in the door?
S: I mean I probably went in there like once this semester because I had a group project
to do and that's about it.
I: You guys were in there using a study room and/or the equipment? S: Yeah, we were
using the computer.
I: Okay so do you see it as a friendly place?
S: Yeah, it's friendly in there. They're helpful when you ask them questions. I: Do you
feel like it's a place that you can go and study.
S: Yeah, it can be.
I: But it's just your choice not to go?
S: Yes.
I: Try and tell me a little more about why you choose not to.
S: I don’t know, I just don't feel the need to go there because even though it's a quiet
place to go and study I can do that at. home.
I: Okay, so let's go back when you were in high school did you visit the library?
S: Yeah, but it would be like we were assigned to go there to do things, but that's about it.
I: So, do you read on your personal time?
S: I used to, I don’t do it as much now.
I: So, when did you used to read?
S: When?
86

I: Yes
S: I would say my first semester I was reading a little more than I do now.
I: Like personal books for leisure or course related?
S: Just for like my entertainment.
I: What kind of books did you read?
S: I like all kinds of books, but I would say like mostly mystery kind of books.
I: Do you read any romance novels or urban literature? Do you know what I mean by
urban literature?
S: Yes, I read those sometimes, but not too much. I: Do you read any sci-fi thrillers.
S: No, not really.
I: So, did you grow up in xxx?
S: Yes.
I: Did you ever go to xxx?
S: No.
I: Do you know where it is?
S: Yes, I do. I know where both of them are actually.
I: So, you know that xxx is on xxx and you just ride by the buildings.
S: Yeah.
I: And you just feel like there is nothing in there for you?
S: Yeah, no. I can’t remember the last time I’ve been to either of those libraries.
I: Do you have a library card?
S: I do have a library card.
I: Okay, is it active or is the same one you've had since you were little?
S: I don’t know if it's active, but I have one.
I: Do you go to any other town's libraries?
S: No.
I: Do you go to the bookstore?

87

S: Sometimes, I'll see myself in there but I wouldn’t be in there for me. I only go there if
I'm with someone else who wanted to go there.
I: Do magazines interest you?
S: No.
I: Okay, well I encourage you to visit the library and explore its resources. It can help you
to be successful in your academic pursuits. In the spring semester, you're going to be
taking English, so looks like you maybe you might not find it relevant to go for your
public speaking and your math course, but for your English class you should find it more
and more relevant.
I: Tell me two databases that you know the name of? S: What do you mean?
I: Like when you go to the library to look for information.
S: Oh, like websites basically? I: Not websites, databases.
S: I don’t understand what you're asking me
I: Okay so do you know what library instruction is?
S: No
I: Library instruction is where librarians teach students how to look for information from
different resources. One of the resources are databases and they're on the school's library
web page.
S: I believe I've been to one of the things where one of the librarians taught us. I don’t
remember all the stuff, but I remember her teaching us some stuff.
I: Okay, so one just doesn't pop out in your head? S: Nope.
I: Okay, well if someone asks you this question again two that you can always remember
are
Academic Search Premier and the other one is EBSCHOST. So, if you go to the library
website you can find them under databases and it will bring you to peer-reviewed
journals. That's what your professor will mean when they tell you they don't want sources
from Google or Wikipedia. So, when you move on to your English class, you will need to
remember that you need to increase your library skills.
S: Ok.
I: Thank you for your coming and it was nice to meet you. Please remember to visit and
use the
Library.
S: Ok. Nice to meet you too.

88

#3
I: Hi-thank you for coming in today
S: Oh…of course
I: We’re going to discuss your transcript and see if you’re experiencing any difficulty or
obstacles that might impede you from progressing in your coursework here
S: Ok
I: This is your first semester…
St: Uh, yes, it is
I: Tell me how you think your classes are going
S: Right now, like my classes aren’t going the way I intended to go from the beginning
and how I have them planned and everything and so it was like a lot of family events that
happened. Like my grandmother-she passed away
I: I’m sorry to hear that
S: Like my aunt, her boyfriend attacked her and she had to move in to our house and like
things like that have been going on for the past several weeks. So, I sort of stopped going
to class-like you know all my classes and now I have like this rush of finishing this
project and this project.
I: So, I was going to ask did you notify all of them that your grandmother passed awayyes
S: So, the thing is like I’ll email them on Blackboard and then they don’t receive my
emails-so it’s like one of those things I had to learn was to email them through a different
source.
I: I’d through their regular email?
St: Right, like through their personal email
I: Do you mean the school email?
S: Because like I’ve been gone through blackboard and I’ll email a certain teacher like
my stats teacher-xxx? And he didn’t respond to me at all and then I spoke with xxx And I

89

was like I emailed you on blackboard and he was oh I don’t check my blackboard; I use
my other email that he put on the syllabus—that’s my own fault.
I: In all five of courses, have you gone over the syllabuses for alternate ways to contact
everybody?
S: Yeah, now I have learned after like receiving no responses- I was like receiving no
responses – I was like aah…I wonder what’s going on and I looked at them and they
were like the wrong was wrong or I sent it to the wrong email.
I: Do you think you need more time because you still have time to request an I? Do you
know what an I is?
S: Yes, an incomplete.
I: Do you think you should ask for incompletes instead of trying to rush to finish?
S: I don’t think so. I know…I know my capabilities and it’s not being lazy or anythingit’s like-my head wasn’t in the right place.
I: What I would like for you to recognize is that if you are still grieving or trying to
process things—you have a right to ask for more time. And if you feel you need more
time, you should ask for time.
S: For me, it’s like if my mom sees an I, like my report card, she would slip out, so that’s
why I’m trying to rush.
I: Let me explain more about an I, you can get a year from now to complete course at the
most, and you can also state that you only need 2-3 weeks. So, you can say Mom if I have
an I but it doesn’t mean I have a bad grade it just means a little more time. I don’t want to
get bad.
S: Yeah
I: That would be one way this would be an opportunity to speak with her to say grandma
passed away, I was sad—I need a little more time because by working over the xxx break
would be like you working when the clock stopped
S: because for psychology I know I can finish all the assignment— I just have one
thing—well actually two things to find another journal assignment but that’s due next
Thursday and really the only I need to focus on is statistics—I mean um…accounting.
Statistics is fine but accounting because it’s just a lot of work, the chapters are very
detailed.
I: Are these professors on campus? Have you gone to their office hours?

90

S: It’s like I don’t have a lot of time like I have ten minutes between getting classes and
like getting from work or something like that. And it’s like when one teacher is available,
I have class during that time and then have class, a different teacher is available.
I: I suggest that I try to stop by for accounting if nothing else
S: Because I don’t think the way the teacher, she is strict. I don’t feel like she would give
me an I. I just think…
I: Don’t assume that she won’t give you an I, you need to meet with her and have a
conversation with her. Sometimes it’s best to have a face to face conversations
S: Yeah
I: Meaning they want you to stay but that doesn’t mean they don’t know that life exists
and they don’t support you. So, they are here to support you. Sometimes they use
boundaries because people will abuse them with “playing the violin” everyday. So
sometimes, it’s for those reasons, but what you always want to know is that you tried.
The is that your transcript equals 4 points. This course is worth 4 points, which means it
has more impact on your GPA.
S: …Than a three credit course.
I: So, when you get 3 Ds and two Cs it would be hard to overcome. It would be better to
slow down to make sure that you do these well so that they don’t impact your GPA. Your
transcript is unfortunately the same as a police record and it never goes away, you don’t
get to change anything the only thing you get to do is retake a course.
St: So, it will be like, oh you failed this one and this next time.
I: That’s not necessarily a bad thing…what I’m saying to you is that you still have time to
adjust. So, if you don’t feel confident that’s something you have to think about.
Sometimes we feel pressure from parent about what we/they think we should be doing
but you have to determine what’s best for you.
S: yes, I was telling my mom that I fell a little behind in school work and she was like
“oh.” and I was like “well, a lot.” But that was about a few days ago and since then I’ve
been working hard to improve, doing all the make-up work and I have almost everything
completed. I do live with my mom.
I: It’s always better to stay in communication with your parents…which is easier said
than done. But it’s easier said than done. But it’s easier than failing your classes and then
having your mom say, “you should’ve come to me and talked to me about this!”
Especially if she is assisting you with tuition then she will feel like you’re taking

91

advantage of her money. A better option is for you to be an independent adult by starting
the conversation yourself.
S: Yes, I’ve been trying to be more proactive when before I was thinking that the
semester was already ending within a few weeks so “screw it” which afterwards I
reconsidered thinking that wouldn’t be fair to my mom because she works so hard…she’s
like a single parent, my dad doesn’t help her at all. Because like we moved here from xxx
and like she didn’t even speak English at all. Where we are now being like a thousand
times better than where we started off. It’s just been me and my mom. I have two other
sisters but one moved out when she was sixteen and the other one got deported
I: Right, so just try and make sure that you always make decisions while staying in
communication with her because that can turn into worse conversations
S: Yes, like when she opens up the mail and sees I failed all my classes. I asked her what
she wanted for Christmas and she was like the only thing you can’t give me: passing your
classes. That’s what’s really pushing me and driving me to fix it.
I: So, here’s the thing, you’re a person not a microwave. So, if you need a little bit more
time, then it’s ok to say that. It’s not an admission that you’re not doing what you’re
supposed to. As adults, we have to admit when things are moving too fast.
S: Exactly. Like with a pause…
I: So, that it doesn’t cost you later on. But what’s at stake is your GPA. You want to
have a good GPA so that you can move on from here, apply for scholarships and other
programs.
S: And then I don’t have to feel like next semester I must get all As.
I: Next semester you have a more vigorous course schedule. Do you work also?
S: I did but I quit my job about a week and a half ago. They told me when I got hired that
I would only be scheduled 15 to 20 hours per week…we understand you’re in school. I
ended up doing like 40 hours a week, plus school.
I: Tell me a little about your library usage skills.
S: Well here I feel like I get a lot of work done. More so, than at home. Just being in a
school environment promotes my ideas when writing papers.
I: Do you use the library online? Do you click on the webpage?
S: I’ve never used their databases, but to find their books and stuff I go on the
website…at the beginning of the year.

92

I: So, do you think you’re going to use the databases?
S: Definitely, that us one of the things I didn’t utilize while I was in high school. I went
to Glastonbury and they had spent all this money for all these databases to look for
information. I never used any of it even though it would’ve facilitated my writing skills
and make everything easier. I’m trying to develop better habits where I use the resources
available to me.
I: So, at xxx did they have library orientation class?
S: Yes, we had those a few times a year. Up until junior year they would give us small
writing assignments, then senior year we had to do it on our own. Because they expected
you to know by then.
I: When you got to college did you feel prepared?
S: I feel like I was a lot more prepared that most students. I’ll have conversations or ask
certain students “oh what’s this” and they don’t even know what I’m talking about and
they’ve been here like two years.
I: So, you can see the difference where you even know what the databases are
S: Yeah, or like someone will ask me where the library is after being here over a
semester.
I: Are there any database names that you can remember?
S: No…not really. The ones I sort of remember were all sectioned out by subject like one
for history, one for biographies. Which made it a lot easier if one of the sections matched
what your paper was about.
I: So, when you go to the library to work on your assignments do you actually use the
resources to complete them?
S: No, that’s like my problem that I think I need to fix. Like the resources are right there.
Like if you have a hammer and a nail on the table, why would you use your head?
I: So, it seems like you have a plan to move forward. It seems like you have also had
some tragedies or obstacles to overcome. It’s all about juggling your family life and
school life.
S: I feel like I let my family side control me a little. Like my dad who’s in xxx will all the
time like “get me this”, “look up this”, “translate this”.
I: He’s from xxx, as well?

93

S: Yes, he is. He is very demanding. But if I ask him to help me out he never does it,
especially for his kids.
I: What do you want to be when you grow up?
S: I want to be my own boss. Like my dad owned a slaughterhouse business in Xxx and
made a lot of money and stuff but we had to move here because he stile and the mafia
were going to kill him. I never thought the move was going to mean we lost a lot, like of
wealth. When we came over here I wanted to be able to provide for someone else, not be
told what to do. Not to make a lot of money, but to help other people like my mom.
I: So, when you see yourself owning your own business, do you see yourself with a
degree?
S: My sister owns her own business doing car accessories…but she dropped out of high
school and she told me how difficult it’s been for her. She is always having to learn new
things by trial and error. Education is key, my family taught me that.

94

