LIBRARIES AND THE CIRCULATION OF POWER: A HISTORICAL CASE STUDY
OF PITTSBURGH, 1924–2016

by
Michael Majewski Widdersheim
BA, Colby College, 2005
MSLS, Clarion University of Pennsylvania, 2012

Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of
the School of Information Sciences in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

University of Pittsburgh
2017








ProQuest Number: 10692631





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10692631
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH
SCHOOL OF INFORMATION SCIENCES

This dissertation was presented

by

Michael Majewski Widdersheim

It was defended on
March 29, 2017
and approved by
Sheila Corrall, Professor, University of Pittsburgh
Leanne Bowler, Associate Professor, University of Pittsburgh
Masanori Koizumi, Assistant Professor, University of Tsukuba
Dissertation Advisor: James D. “Kip” Currier, Assistant Professor, University of Pittsburgh

ii

Copyright © by Michael Majewski Widdersheim
2017

iii

LIBRARIES AND THE CIRCULATION OF POWER: A HISTORICAL CASE
STUDY OF PITTSBURGH, 1924–2016
Michael Majewski Widdersheim, PhD
University of Pittsburgh, 2017

This project explores how political power shaped the development of a regional public library
infrastructure in greater Pittsburgh, United States. The project is interdisciplinary in that it
addresses research problems from two fields. In library studies, research related to the public
sphere and public libraries uses an exhausted paradigm, one that is anachronistic and anatopic.
A new public sphere paradigm is needed for research about public libraries. Also in library
studies, historical accounts of libraries in greater Pittsburgh have overlooked the history of the
regional public library system. A history of the system has yet to be written. In political science,
Habermas’s Machtkreislauf, or circulation of power model faces several objections and it has not
received sufficient empirical testing. The model could be refined by applying it to an actual
case. To address these problems, this project dovetails them by asking the following research
question: How does the Machtkreislauf model apply to the regional public library system in
Pittsburgh? To answer this question, this project uses historical case study, a research strategy
that was newly developed for this project.

This study proceeds in several stages: source

collection and analysis, data collection and analysis, and data interpretation. Source collection
combines archival research, interviewing, and fieldwork to gather source materials, periodize the
case, and limn the boundaries of the case. Data collection uses qualitative content analysis to
construct a coding instrument, validate it, and apply it to the source materials.

Data

interpretation uses qualitative comparative analysis to identify and describe the causal conditions
iv

that explain the case’s outcomes. This project contributes new findings to multiple areas. To the
area of research methodology, it proposes a novel research design, historical case study. To
political science, it revises the Machtkreislauf model using new concepts, including circuits,
tessellations, broadcast/narrowcast, and formal decision. To library studies, it offers a historical
account of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh using the concept of decision cycles.
Also to library studies, it proposes a new theory where configurations of civil activity,
responsiveness, legitimacy, and resistance explain how the public sphere affects public library
development.


PREFACE

This dissertation project is a historical case study of a public library system. It explores the
notion of power, and to do so it uses concepts and methods drawn from history, political science,
sociology, and philosophy. Given this project’s scope and topic, it may seem problematic to
locate it in the information sciences. It might be asked, why libraries? Why history? Why
power? And why not do something more technical, something practical?
Reflection on the history of the School of Information Sciences at the University of
Pittsburgh reveals why information science is an appropriate field to locate this project. The
beginning of the school traces to 1901 when the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh established the
Carnegie Library School to train children’s librarians. Then, from 1930 to 1962, the school was
part of Carnegie Institute of Technology, or Carnegie “Tech.” Carnegie Library and Carnegie
Tech sponsored the library school until June 1963 when the University of Pittsburgh inherited it.
At the University of Pittsburgh, it was first called the Graduate Library School.
At Pitt, the Graduate Library School was first housed in the Cathedral of Learning, the
building that now houses the School of Arts and Sciences. The first class of the doctoral
program in library science was admitted in September, 1963 (Aspray, 1999, p. 6; Munn, 1970,
pp. 101-102). The master’s program in library science began the next year in 1964. That same
year, the school renamed to the Graduate School of Library and Information Sciences. In the
mid-1960’s, the school began to move to its current building on Bellefield (Bleier, 2001, p. 58).
xl

In 1969, the school organized into a Department of Library Science and a Department of
Information and Communication Science (Bleier, 2001, p. 58). The Department of Information
and Communication Science was led by Allen Kent, chair, and Anthony Debons, vice chair
(Levine, 2013, November 7; School of Information Sciences at the University of Pittsburgh,
2014, May 2).
In 1969, Kent and Debons accepted students into a new doctoral program, the
Interdisciplinary Doctoral Program in Information Science. This program was the beginning of
what is now the information science program. The program was advertised as liberally-focused
with an emphasis on theory:
The students come from very different backgrounds—some from engineering, others
from the social sciences, still others from the humanities. The program accepts students
with undergraduate majors in almost any discipline, but when they complete their studies
in information science they will have well-rounded backgrounds in the behavioral,
systems, computing, engineering, and basic sciences. It is one of the few information
science programs in the country with an interdisciplinary emphasis. Most other academic
programs in information science have stressed the technological aspect of the process.
(Pennsylvania Library Association, 1970, p. 322)
The first doctoral program in information sciences, while it was billed as a science, also
welcomed approaches from the arts and humanities.

Debons, the curriculum designer,

emphasized scholarship tied to communication, social life, and theory development (Aspray,
1999, p. 11).

Faculty and students today may be surprised to learn that at one time the

information science program emphasized interdisciplinary study and critical reflection as much
as it did system design.

xli

Changes at the information school continued from 1970 to the present day. In 1973, the
Department of Information and Communication Science renamed to the Interdisciplinary
Department of Information Science. In 1979, with the addition of a bachelor’s program, the
school renamed to the School of Library and Information Science (Bleier, 2001, p. 90). In 1996,
the school changed to the School of Information Sciences. Two departments formed at that time:
the Department of Library and Information Science and the Department of Information Science
and Telecommunications (Bleier, 2001, p. 120). By 2003, the School of Information Sciences
became an iSchool (Larsen, 2010). It has been said that work in an iSchool setting must, by
definition, explore the relationship between information, technology, and people (Larsen, 2010,
p. 3021). Faculty and students in the school today may conflate technologies with products, but
libraries were once considered a form of technology composed of artifacts, people, and the
practices surrounding them (Mumford, 1934).
The above historical sketch of the School of Information Sciences shows how this
dissertation project embodies many defining features of information science. This dissertation:
•

explores the nature of libraries and library systems;

•

examines the relationship between people, information, and technology;

•

understands libraries as a particular form of information technology;

•

addresses a set of interdisciplinary problems;

•

uses an interdisciplinary approach drawn from sociology, history, and network
theory;

•

maintains a close association between information and communication;

•

focuses on the human aspects of information systems; and

•

understands theoretical development as the purpose of scholarship.

xlii

Given these shared characteristics between the field and this project, it is clear that information
science is a perfect setting for this dissertation project.
In 2016, the School of Information Sciences at the University of Pittsburgh changed its
structure once again.

Two new departments were formed, the Department of Information

Culture and Data Stewardship and the Department of Informatics and Networked Systems. In
2017, Computer Science is scheduled to join the school as a third department, and at that time
the school will rename to the School of Computing and Information. Despite the change in name
and structure, it can only be hoped that the school will continue to encourage interdisciplinary
reflection.


INTRODUCTION

RESEARCH PROBLEMS

This dissertation project addresses three research problems from two research fields. Firstly, in
library studies, public libraries have been associated with the public sphere for several decades,
but the dominant paradigm in this area has come into question (Widdersheim, 2016;
Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2016b). Alternative frameworks have been proposed but not yet
applied. One proposed framework is the Machtkreislauf, or circulation of power, model put
forth by Peters (1993, 2008) and Habermas (1996). Secondly, in the political sciences, the
Machtkreislauf model has been discussed but not sufficiently tested (Baxter, 2011; Flynn, 2004;
Forbath, 1998). Several objections have been raised against the model, and the model could be
further enhanced using data from another actual case. Thirdly, in library studies related to the
history of Pittsburgh, United States, public libraries as a regional infrastructure have been
overlooked (Lubove, 1995; Tarr, 1989). Previous studies show that civil society, state, and
private groups legitimated and governed libraries throughout the 20th and into the 21st centuries
(Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2015a, 2016a, 2017). A public sphere perspective of this library
system is therefore appropriate and could lead to a fuller understanding of library development at
a regional scale. Table 1.1 below summarizes these research problems (RPs) from the library
studies and political science fields.

1

Table 1.1. Research problems by field.

Field

Problem description

RP1

Library
Studies

In the area of the public sphere and libraries, the Machtkreislauf
model has been proposed as an alternative paradigm but it has not yet
been tested in the area of library studies.

RP2

Political
Science

The Machtkreislauf model has been discussed and criticized
conceptually but empirical support is insufficient. The model
requires testing and revision.

RP3

Library
Studies

Regional public library infrastructure has been overlooked in
historical accounts of Pittsburgh, USA. A public sphere perspective
could lead to insights in this area.

1.2

RESEARCH PURPOSES

The overall purpose of this dissertation project is to develop a fuller historical understanding of
the public sphere and public library development. The study will apply a new public sphere
paradigm to the study of libraries, refine an existing political science model, and develop a fuller
historical understanding of public libraries in Pittsburgh.
summarized in Table 1.2 below.

2

These research purposes are

Table 1.2. Research purposes by field.

Field

Description of purpose

Purpose 1

Library Studies

Apply the Machtkreislauf model to a study of public libraries.

Purpose 2

Political Science

Refine the Machtkreislauf model using empirical data.

Purpose 3

Library Studies

Develop a historical account of public library infrastructure.

In order to accomplish these goals, this project adopts a historical case study approach, a
research design that was newly developed for this study. This project uses a mixture of archival
documents, interviews, and field observations as source materials. After the collection of source
materials, the materials are then coded and analyzed in a systematic way using qualitative
content analysis. To do this, a coding instrument is constructed, validated, and applied to the
source materials. The case for this study is defined as discourse related to a regional public
library system in Pittsburgh. The case is bounded temporally from 1924 to 2016. Spatially, the
case is bounded by Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. Within the time span of the case, 9
distinctive periods of public sphere discourse are identified, described, and compared. These
periods form embedded units of analysis. Qualitative content analysis is used to generate data
about the case, and this data forms the basis of comparison of the periods.
comparative analysis is the specific method used for comparison.

Qualitative

The purpose of the

comparative analysis is to develop a general theory of the public sphere and public libraries.
This study is significant because it presents a new research strategy, historical case study; it
makes substantive modifications to the Machtkreislauf model and develops new concepts for it;
3

it offers the first historical account of a regional library system in Pittsburgh; and it proposes a
new explanatory theory of the public sphere and public libraries.

1.3

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

The central, overarching research question (RQ) for this project is: How does the Machtkreislauf
model apply to the regional public library system in Pittsburgh? This research question is broad,
open-ended, and exploratory. It ties together the research problems from two fields: library
studies and political science (see Figure 1.1). This umbrella research question also incorporates
several sub-questions (SQs), each corresponding to one specific field. Table 1.3 shows these
sub-questions and how they align with each field.

Table 1.3 also shows what types of

knowledges the questions solicit and what type of intellectual products they expect. SQ1 and
SQ2 are what questions that call for descriptions in the form of narratives, graphical illustrations,
concepts, or models. SQ3 is a why question that calls for an explanation and prediction in the
form of a causal theory (Blaikie, 2010, 2014). SQ2 asks how the system evolved as it did; SQ3
asks why the system evolved that way. The approach adopted in this study is to compare the
periods of the case descriptively in order to address SQ2, then use these descriptions to develop
an explanation in order to address SQ3.

4

Political
science

Problem and
purpose

Library
studies

Problem and
purpose

Political science
results & discussion
Research
question

Case
study

Library studies
results & discussion

Figure 1.1. Alignment of research problems, purposes, question, and results by field.

Table 1.3. Alignment of research questions with fields, knowledges, and products.

Field

Question statement

Type of
knowledge
solicited

RQ

Both
fields

How does the Machtkreislauf model
apply to the regional public library
system in Pittsburgh?

Description
and
explanation

Model, theory,
narrative, graphical
illustration

SQ1

Political
science

What does a tested and refined
Machtkreislauf model look like?

Description

Concepts, model

SQ2

Library
studies

What does the evolution of the library
system in Pittsburgh look like?

Description

Narrative, graphical
illustration

SQ3

Library
studies

How does the public sphere affect
public library development?

Explanation,
prediction

Causal theory

5

Expected
intellectual product

2.0

2.1

LITERATURE REVIEW

THE PUBLIC SPHERE AND PUBLIC LIBRARIES

This section surveys how the public sphere concept has been associated with public libraries in
the library studies field. The survey shows that the topic of the public sphere and public libraries
is an important and longstanding one of international concern. The review then identifies two
underlying problems in the literature: anachronism and anatopism.

These problems are

explained. It is then shown that these problems are symptomatic of a larger latent problem,
namely that the research related to the public sphere and public libraries uses an exhausted public
sphere paradigm. It is suggested that the problems can be avoided by adopting a new research
paradigm for the study of the public sphere and libraries. A recommendation—Habermas’s
Machtkreislauf model—is made toward this end.

6

2.1.1

Overview

The term public sphere is the English-language translation for the German word Öffentlichkeit,
meaning openness or literally openliness 1. The public sphere refers both to a public of people
and to the communication they share. Associations between public libraries and the public
sphere began in 1962 following the publication of The Structural Transformation of the Public
Sphere by Jürgen Habermas in German (Habermas, 1962). Discussion about what the public
sphere is and how it relates to libraries continued in Germany, then broadened across Europe,
North America, and South America as Structural Transformation was translated into different
languages and the public sphere concept became more widely known.
At present, 71 works associate the public sphere and public libraries (see Appendix A).
The works were retrieved using searches for terms such as “public sphere” and “public libraries”
in databases such as Library Literature and Information Science, Library and Information
Science Abstracts, Library, Information Science, and Technology Abstracts, and Proquest
Dissertations and Theses; grey literature searches in popular Web search engines using both
English and non-English terms such as “Öffentlichkeit” and “esfera pública;” searches in
proceedings of relevant conferences, such as Conceptions of Library and Information Science,
Association for Information Science and Technology, and iConference; citation chaining; and
word of mouth.

1

Parts of this literature review section were previously published as conference papers, Widdersheim

(2016) and Widdersheim and Koizumi (2016b), at the Conceptions of Library and Information Science Conference
(CoLIS 9) in Uppsala, Sweden, June 27–29.

7

Figure 2.1 shows the linear trend in publications by year. The trend suggests a continuity
of interest in the topic.

8

7

7

6

6

Works

5

3

3

2
1

1
0 0 0 0

2

1 1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

1
0

1 1

2 2 2

2 2

2

1

0

1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

0

5
4

4

1

6

5

5

2

6

Year

Figure 2.1. Works that associate the public sphere and public libraries by year.

The authors of the works in Table 6.1 represent 11 countries, according to authors’
national affiliations at the times of their writings. A total of 59 unique individuals account for
the authorship pool. There were 120 total instances of authorship. Figure 2.2 shows the
instances of authorship by country. In the case of Brazil, for example, there were 4 instances of
authorship by 4 individuals. Each individual was an author 1 time. In the case of the UK, 5
individuals together served as authors 12 times, each one contributing 2 or 3 times. The volume
of authorship and its global distribution as shown in Figure 2.2 suggests that the public sphere
and public libraries is a topic of broad, international interest that concerns a significant number
of researchers in the library studies field.

8

Figure 2.2. Distribution and volume of authorship by country.

2.1.2

Theme 1: Media infrastructure

Within the above literature, there are two salient themes. The first explores how public libraries
form a material basis for public sphere communication and a place for publics to congregate,
both physically and virtually. In this theme of the literature, public libraries represent the media
infrastructure of the public sphere. They have replaced the coffee houses, salons, and table
societies of Enlightenment-era Europe. Public libraries are the “windows” of an information
society (Ventura, 2002), its public sphere “platforms.” As media infrastructures, public libraries
act as media suppliers, virtual and physical meeting places, and protected spaces for
communicative exchange.

Existing literature about the public sphere and public libraries

9

emphasizes various facets of this infrastructure. One prominent facet is the public library’s role
as a physical meeting place. Several studies survey how public libraries act as meeting places
(Aabø & Audunson, 2012; Aabø, Audunson, & Vårheim, 2010; Audunson, Vårheim, Aabø, &
Holm, 2007). In these studies, the asserted benefits of public sphere communication in public
libraries are positive by-products of the communicative process itself, such as the creation of
civic culture (Kranich, 2004, 2013; McCook, 2003, 2004) and social capital (Audunson et al.,
2007).
Existing literature also emphasizes the openness and diversity of media resources of
public libraries. Webster (1995) and Buschman (2003) foreground public libraries’ collections
that contain diverse viewpoints and are in principle open to anyone. At the same time, it is said
that public libraries are not neutral in the kinds of communication they support (Andersen, 2005;
Andersen & Skouvig, 2006). There is a strong current in the literature that expresses scepticism
about whether the types of culture and messages that are transmitted through libraries are
genuinely undistorted, whether they are not commercialized or hegemonic.

Following the

observations of Webster (1995), both Leckie and Hopkins (2002) and Buschman (2003) express
ambivalence about whether public libraries are too privatized and business-oriented to facilitate
public sphere communication.

Similar sentiments are expressed by Vestheim (1997a) and

Taipale (2006, 2009).
Some studies describe public libraries as part of a larger media infrastructure for the
formation of public opinion (Frota, 2014; Schuhböck, 1983). Widdersheim and Koizumi (2015a,
2015b) find that public libraries were used as a public sphere by civic groups, readings clubs, and
communities. In their historical surveys of public library developments, Richards, Wiegand, and

10

Dalbello (2015, p. 70) and Black and Hoare (2006, p. 7) remark that public libraries form part of
the public sphere infrastructure of modern societies.
There are several confusions in this category that are worth noting. First, in some studies,
the noun public sphere (der Öffentlichkeit) in the public opinion and public communication sense
is sometimes confused with the adjective public (öffentlich) in the sense of government
ownership. For example, Webster (1995, p. 176) states that public libraries are public sphere
institutions because they are “publicly funded” and “staffed by professional librarians”.
Similarly, Leckie and Hopkins (2002, p. 357) claim that “the library is becoming increasingly
co-opted by multiple private interests,” implying that public communication necessitates public
funding. These descriptions are mistaken because a public sphere does not require tax-based,
government management. Early public sphere meetings occurred in private clubs and salons in
private homes. Not privatization and commercialization per se, but certain types of privatization
and commercialization potentially distort the public sphere. A second confusion is between
public communication and information transfer. Jaeger et al. (2014) state that “libraries, schools,
and other public sphere organizations…exist specifically to ensure that information continues to
move between the small worlds.” Public sphere communication requires information exchange,
it is true; but this condition alone is insufficient for a public sphere in a normative sense to
materialize. The “information equals democracy” assumption has been previously interrogated
(Lievrouw, 1994).

Reducing the public sphere to information transfer leaves no room for

distinctions of information quality and use. Finally, M. J. Williamson (1998, 2000) makes a
third mistake by associating the public sphere with service provision. Services provided by
public libraries, such as those for job seekers, are not necessarily related to public sphere

11

communication at all—they are just services that don’t require an orientation to common concern
and argumentative exchange.

2.1.3

Theme 2: The metasphere

The second salient theme of existing literature observes how public libraries are themselves
objects of public sphere communication. This literature discusses how public libraries have been
or currently are legitimated by various groups in the public sphere. In some cases, public
libraries were created due to popular pressure from civil society groups (Schuhböck, 1994, p.
218; Widdersheim, 2015b). Once institutionalized, public libraries themselves mobilize support
on their behalf (Machado, Elias Junior, & Achilles, 2014; Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2015b).
Recent studies use interviews or discourse analysis to study how various stakeholders, such as
politicians, civil society groups, and librarians legitimate public libraries in the public sphere
(Evjen, 2015; Ingraham, 2015; Newman, 2007). Insofar as public libraries constitute public
sphere infrastructure, discourse about that infrastructure is said to be a “metasphere” of the
library (Ingraham, 2015, p. 156). Emerek and Ørum (1997) and Vestheim (1997a) establish that
this metasphere affected the historical development of public libraries in Denmark and Norway.

2.1.4

Problem 1: Anachronism

Besides the two salient themes described above, two problems in the literature are also
noticeable. These problems exist because the literature has focused on how public libraries and
the public sphere are similar, but it has neglected to account for how public libraries and the
public sphere are different.
12

The first significant difference between public libraries and the public sphere is that the
liberal model of the public sphere is a historically-bounded concept. As it was described in
Structural Transformation, the public sphere emerged in eighteenth-century France, England,
and Germany following a general shift from feudalism to mercantile capitalism and a gradual
growth of state bureaucracy. As a social-historical category, the public sphere represented an
unfulfilled promise, an ideology that failed to materialize authentically even in its heyday in the
mid-nineteenth century. By the mid-nineteenth century, due to economic and technological
changes, the public sphere in the liberal sense began to collapse into a mediatized, power-ridden
(vermachteten) public sphere, one that was “refeudalized” by state and corporate interests to
form a staged and acclamatory public (Eley, 1992; Habermas, 1989, p. 195). Habermas is
unequivocal regarding the temporal location of the liberal public sphere model described in the
first half of Structural Transformation:
Although the liberal model of the public sphere is still instructive today with respect to
the normative claim that information be accessible to the public, it cannot be applied to
the actual conditions of an industrially advanced mass democracy organized in the form
of the social welfare state. (Habermas, 1974, p. 54)
It is clear from this passage and from Structural Transformation that the public sphere only
describes cultural dynamics that peaked around the mid-nineteenth century but did not last
beyond the late nineteenth century (Habermas, 1989). Figure 2.3 below shows a simplified
historical transformation of the public sphere.

13

Year
Period
Economic Model
Public Sphere

1300

1400

1500

Late Middle Ages
Feudalism

1600

1700

1800

Early Modern Era

1900

2100

Late Modern Era
Liberal
Capitalism

Mercantilism

Liberal

Acclamatory

2000

Organized
Capitalism
Mediatized

Figure 2.3. Simplified history of the European public sphere (Widdersheim, 2016).

The year 1850 is an important date for the purpose of this discussion because public
libraries did not develop significantly in any nation before that date. Public libraries in this case
refer to state-sponsored libraries, not libraries that are privately owned but open for public use,
such as the Gebrauchsöffentlichkeit mentioned by Schuhböck (1994, p. 217) and Vestheim
(1997b, p. 121). Table 2.1 below shows significant formative developments in public libraries
internationally. The content in Table 2.1 is drawn from Richards et al. (2015).

Table 2.1. Formative developments in public libraries (Richards et al., 2015).

Nation

Significant early events in public library development

United Kingdom
of Britain and
Northern Ireland

Public Libraries Act of 1850
The Library Association founded in London (1877)

Denmark

State Libraries Agency (1882)
Professional association established (1915)
Public Libraries Act (1920)

Norway

Opening of Deichmanske Bibliotek (1898)
Professional association established (1915)

14

Sweden

Establishment of state funding (1905)

Russia

Founding of public library by Liubov Borisovna Khavkina (1886)

Poland

Founding of public library in Warsaw by Zaluski brothers (1747); removed
by Russia in 1795
Warsaw Philanthropic Society opens free readings rooms (1861)

Bulgaria

Law requiring all communities to form reading societies (1927)

Germany

Karl Benjamin established Sunday school with library open to public (1828);
accepted as town library in 1833
Friedrich von Raumer established four public libraries in 1850
Book hall movement (Bücherhallenbewegung) started by Eduard Reyer and
Constantin Nörrenberg (1895)

Czechoslovakia

Matica Slovenská founded in 1863 Martin (now the Slovak National Library
in Slovakia)

Belgium

Willemsfond establishes public library opens in Ghent (1856) and small
libraries across Flanders
Davidsfonds establishes small libraries across Flanders (1875)
Ligue de l’enseignement establishes small libraries with primary schools in
Brussels (1864)

Netherlands

Libraries established at Utrecht (1892) and Dordrecht (1898)
Central Association for Public Reading Rooms and Libraries established
(1908)

France

Establishment of hundreds of small libraries run by volunteers (1860-1900)
Eugène Morel publishes Bibliothèque (1908-1909) and begins training
courses for librarians (1910-1913)

Italy

Antonio Bruni opens the first popular library in Prato (1861)
Municipal libraries established in Milan (1867) and Turin (1869)

Spain

Small public libraries open (1869)

Portugal

Decree opens small public libraries (1870)

United States

Massachusetts passed legislation to fund a public library in Boston (1848);
Boston Public Library opened in 1854
American Library Association formed (1876)
New York Public Library established (1895)

Canada

Ontario (1882), Manitoba (1899), Saskatchewan (1906), Alberta (1907),
New Brunswick (1929), Nova Scotia (1937), and Quebec (1959) adopt
public library legislation

15

Supposing that Table 2.1 above is correct, and that few significant public library
developments occurred in any country before the mid-nineteenth century; and supposing also
that Structural Transformation is correct that the liberal public sphere—as a structural category
tied to economic and cultural conditions—began to disintegrate around the mid-1800s, then the
following question must be addressed: how can the public sphere describe public libraries when
the public sphere began to collapse just as public libraries began to develop? Existing literature
that associates the public sphere with public libraries must confront allegations of anachronism—
the application of the public sphere concept to a period where it does not belong (Figure 2.4).
Literature that associates the public sphere with public libraries appropriates the public sphere
concept, but only incompletely: it fails to account for its temporal boundedness. The same
literature that borrows the public sphere concept to describe public libraries in the late
nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries also implicitly repudiates the claim that the
public sphere is a temporally-bounded concept. How is it that contemporary public libraries can
be classed as public spheres in a way that is non-illusory and non-ideological? It remains to be
explained how public libraries can be associated with the public sphere in a non-anachronistic
way.

16

Year
Period
Economic Model

1300

1400

1500

Late Middle Ages
Feudalism

Public Sphere

1600

1700

1800

Early Modern Era
Mercantilism

2000

2100

Late Modern Era
Liberal
Capitalism

Liberal

Acclamatory

1900

Organized
Capitalism
Mediatized

Public Libraries

Figure 2.4. Minimal overlap of liberal public sphere and public libraries (Widdersheim, 2016).

2.1.5

Problem 2: Anatopism

A second significant difference between the public sphere and public libraries, besides temporal
location, is geographical location. Geography in this sense does not mean physical geography, it
means categorical geography. Traditionally defined, the public sphere inhabits a space in civil
society that mediates between civil society and the state. In this position, it affects both (Eley,
1992; Habermas, 1989).

The public sphere affects civil society through political-cultural

critiques of everyday practices (J. L. Cohen & Arato, 1995), and it affects the state by
influencing laws and legislation (Habermas, 1996). This in-between position of the public
sphere, as a specifically non-state entity, is explained in Structural Transformation (Habermas,
1989, p. 30). This conceptual geography is visualized in Figure 2.5.

17

Public Sphere

State

Private Sphere

Economy

Civil Society

System

Figure 2.5. Traditional location of the liberal public sphere (Widdersheim, 2016).

This conceptual geography differs significantly from the empirical reality of public
libraries because public libraries are state authorities—they are state-owned, state-managed, and
state-funded. It is true that public libraries vary in their specific relationships with the state
(Joeckel, 1935; Usherwood, 1993): some are trusts, some are non-profit organizations, and others
are municipal departments. Whatever the specific relationship to local governments, however,
public libraries are by definition state-sponsored agencies. Many are funded by wealth transfer
from the economy to the state, which is enforced through tax legislation. Because public
libraries are state authorities, literature that associates the public sphere with public libraries must
confront the objection of anatopism—the application of the public sphere concept to a
categorical location where it does not belong. Associations between the public sphere and public
libraries inadvertently shift the categorical location of the public sphere from civil society to the
state. This anatopic shift is visualized in Figure 2.6. Existing literature has not explained how
the public sphere concept can describe state authorities like public libraries without succumbing
to objections of conceptual anatopism.

18

Public Sphere
State
Private Sphere

Economy

Civil Society

System

Figure 2.6. Anatopic shift of the public sphere in library literature (Widdersheim, 2016).

2.1.6

Proposed solution: Multiple paradigms

Problems of anachronism and anatopism are obscured in existing literature that associates the
public sphere with public libraries. In light of these problems, it may be tempting to conclude
that any association between the public sphere and public libraries is misguided.

This

conclusion, however, is not the only possibility. There is at least one way to accommodate the
longstanding, widespread intuition that the public sphere and public libraries are related. To do
so would require stepping out of the public sphere paradigm of Structural Transformation and
into a new framework 2.

2

Revision of the substantive paradigm is another possible approach, one that is not adopted in this study.

See Widdersheim (2016) on how the substantive paradigm might be revised in light of public library history.

19

This accommodation strategy recognizes multiple public sphere paradigms, especially
those that are flexible in terms of their temporal and conceptual location. Existing literature
largely appropriates the conception of the public sphere from Structural Transformation
(Habermas, 1989). This work actually contains two conceptions of the public sphere: the liberal
model that existed from the late eighteenth century to the late nineteenth century, on the one
hand, and the power-ridden (vermachteten) model that began to form in the mid-nineteenth
century and continues today (Habermas, 2006). These conceptions are sociological categories:
they describe cultural and technological conditions. Because they make claims about the actual
content of the public sphere, they are “substantive” models of the public sphere (Fraser, 1990,
note 34).

Debates about the “existence” of the public sphere implicitly work within the

substantive paradigm (Leckie & Buschman, 2007, p. 13). It might be said that Structural
Transformation also contains a normative or transhistorical model of the public sphere as well
(Kramer, 1992), but this model actually developed in later works (Habermas, 1984, 1985).
Substantive models only represent one possible paradigm.

Since Structural

Transformation, the public sphere has been used by Habermas in a discourse-theoretic and
proceduralist way (Habermas, 1990, 1994), a functionalist or action-theoretic way (Habermas,
1985), as a synonym for communicative action (Habermas, 1992), and in a normative political
theory related to law and deliberative democracy (Habermas, 1996). Paradigms of the public
sphere have therefore evolved and changed over time (Baxter, 2011; P. Johnson, 2006). One
interpretation of these various public sphere paradigms is visualized in Figure 2.7 below 3. If

3

Works cited in Figure 2.7 use dates from English-language translations and therefore appear out of order.

The sequencing in the figure follows the original publication dates in German in order to accurately reflect

20

Structural Transformation represents the first set of public sphere models, then over time several
paradigms have emerged, coming “full circle” with a return to the substantive paradigm
(Habermas, 2006).

Substantive Models

Action-theoretic
and Functionalist
Model

Liberal Public Sphere

Power-laden Public Sphere

(Habermas, 1989,
first half)

(Habermas, 1989,
second half; 2006)

(Habermas, 1985)

Habermasian
Public Sphere
Paradigms

(Habermas, 1996)

Deliberative
Democratic Model

Time

(Habermas, 1990; 1994)

(Habermas, 1992)

Proceduralist
Model

Synonym for
Communicative Action

Figure 2.7. Habermasian public sphere paradigms (Widdersheim, 2016).

Literature that associates the public sphere with public libraries could better distinguish
between different public sphere paradigms and apply those that are not tethered to temporal and
conceptual locations. Existing literature mentions these alternative models: for example, the
deliberative democracy model (Kranich, 2013; Vestheim, 1997b) and the action-theoretic model

Habermas’s intellectual development. Structural Transformation was originally published in 1962, TCA in 1981,
Moral Consciousness in 1983, Justification and Application in 1990-1991, “Further Reflections” in 1990, and BFN
in 1992.

21

(Vestheim, 1997b). These models have not yet been associated with public libraries in detail.
That existing literature assumes a single, monolithic public sphere concept is belied by
statements such as “the library also appears to be a part of the public sphere in the Habermasian
sense” (Aabø et al., 2010, p. 25). As Figure 2.7 shows, however, there is no single Habermasian
sense. Alternative paradigms present attractive future research directions because, unlike the
substantive models, normative, proceduralist, and ideal-typical models do not describe the
culture of a particular place and time, but instead explain hypothetical rules and normative
possibilities. Habermas’s Machtkreislauf model has been proposed as a potential framework for
future work on the public sphere and public libraries (Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2016b).

2.1.7

Selecting a new paradigm for library studies

Within political science literature, there are four main conceptions of the public sphere that
correspond to four traditions of democratic theory. These conceptions are representative liberal,
participatory liberal, discursive, and constructionist (Ferree, Gamson, Gerhards, & Rucht, 2002).
In the library studies field, literature about the public sphere and public libraries tends to work
within the discursive tradition. The discursive tradition emphasizes the popular inclusion of
equal citizens in a non-coercive process of opinion formation. This process happens through
continued dialogue about issues of mutual concern.
Of the four conceptions, the discursive conception is an appropriate one to use to
understand the public sphere and public libraries. This is due to the discursive tradition’s
emphasis on inclusivity, its emphasis on reasoned debate, and because the tradition offers a
useful general model that can serve as a starting point for understanding the public sphere and

22

public libraries. This general model is the circulation of power model. This model can be used
to study change processes over time, which is the purpose of this study.
In the discursive tradition, which is sometimes referred to as deliberative democracy, the
central figure is Habermas (1996). Other proponents of a discursive conception of the public
sphere include J. Cohen (1991) and Gutmann and Thompson (1996). The circulation of power
model is a prevailing description of discursive politics. While other authors such as J. Cohen
(1991) and Gutmann and Thompson (1996) highlight the microsociological aspects of discursive
democracy, such as the criteria and normative standards for defining quality discourse, the
circulation of power model is the only model of discursive democracy that describes
macrosociological, or structural, patterns and processes. The circulation of power model is
therefore an appropriate one to adopt in library studies to better understand the public sphere.
The circulation of power model of the public sphere sidesteps the problems of
anachronism and anatopism.

In addition, as a framework, the model solves several other

research challenges. First, the model is poised to extend a network-actor perspective of the
public sphere that was proposed in earlier studies but remains underdeveloped (Widdersheim &
Koizumi, 2015b, 2016c, 2017). Second, the model can be used to track changes in public sphere
activity over time, a goal that was proposed for future work but not yet accomplished
(Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2017). And third, application of the model to an empirical case could
yield quantitative data about the public sphere, another proposed goal (Widdersheim & Koizumi,
2015a, 2016a). For these reasons, the circulation of power model is an attractive framework for
the study of libraries.

23

2.1.8

Summary: The public sphere and public libraries

The above section reviewed the literature related to the public sphere and public libraries. It was
shown that the topic of the public sphere and public libraries is one of continued international
importance. There are two themes in the existing literature. The first theme emphasizes how
public libraries form a material basis—a media infrastructure—for public sphere discourse. The
second theme emphasizes how public libraries are themselves objects of and actors in public
sphere arenas related to library governance and legitimation.

Despite the knowledge

contributions that existing literature offers, however, two problems have yet to be addressed:
anachronism and anatopism. The problem of anachronism means that the public sphere concept
seems to have been applied to a time period for which it was not intended. The problem of
anatopism means that public libraries are incongruent with the public sphere concept because
public libraries are by definition government entities whereas the public sphere exists somewhere
between civil society and the state. To address these problems without entirely abandoning the
literature related to the public sphere and public libraries, several alternative public sphere
paradigms were identified. The Machtkreislauf model in particular was seen as an attractive new
potential research framework for library studies. This model is the focus of the next section.

2.2

THE CIRCULATION OF POWER MODEL

The following section surveys various meanings of the public sphere with a particular emphasis
on Habermas’s Machtkreislauf model. The key components of the model are identified and
described. Following this, several criticisms of the model are presented. These criticisms are
24

important to point out in advance because if the field of library studies is to adopt the
Machtrkreislauf model as a research paradigm for the study of the public sphere and public
libraries, then the criticisms must be addressed. This is because any study that incorporates the
model as a framework also inherits its shortcomings. The criticisms of the model include a lack
of clarity regarding where the core, inner periphery, and outer periphery begin and end, an
ambiguity within the concept of communicative power between formal and informal types of
communicative power, and the omission of social and economic forms of power within the
model.

2.2.1

The public sphere defined

The public sphere refers to transparent, undistorted communication that is open to anyone,
oriented to common interests, and focused on argumentative give-and-take. A public sphere also
refers to people who form this discourse. Research about public libraries and the public sphere
has clarified how a public sphere requires a media infrastructure to facilitate physical and virtual
communication.
Public spheres occur in face-to-face or mediated contexts, and they represent
communicative interactions at various societal scales.

While public sphere themes can be

literary or cultural in nature, this study focuses on the political public sphere. In its most basic
and generalized sense, the political public sphere expresses a reciprocal speaker-audience
relationship (see Figure 2.8). On the one side of this interaction are networks of private people
who form a public. As a public, these people deliberate to reach an understanding about a given
situation. On the other side of the interaction are governing bodies, people such as legislators or
engineers whose decisions affect the social lives of the public in question. Because they remain
25

under scrutiny by a critical public, the decision-makers must justify their actions in a way that is
more than just a display, a way that uses reasons and justification to account for their decisions.
Publics in turn petition decision-makers for resolutions that reflect their concerns. The public can
at any point question the truth, sincerity, or normative rightness of the actions of the decisionmaking body and demand further warrants or grounds from them. While it may be the case that
publics or decision-makers can resort to strategic action, the public sphere relationship
emphasizes a bond of reciprocal communicative power, not coercive power. Decision-making
bodies wield authority because their decisions are valid; the public legitimates the decisions
because they pass the tri-fold test of truth, sincerity, and rightness. The public sphere is a
normative concept that emphasizes a deliberative process (Habermas, 1992, p. 452).

Political Power

Public
composed
of private
people

Communicative
Exchange

Formal
decisionmaking
body

Legitimacy

Figure 2.8. General features of the political public sphere (Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2016b).

26

The public sphere concept is most commonly associated with German philosopher Jürgen
Habermas, whose work on the subject animated English-language research in a number of fields
beginning in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Habermas, 1984, 1985, 1989), and whose more
recent work has continued to resonate with media and political science scholars (Habermas,
1996, 2006). A central feature of the public sphere concept is it ambivalent nature—the question
of whether the public sphere is “there” in an authentic sense or not, whether it has been overrun
by power and money, and whether it might be reconstituted from a deteriorated state (Habermas,
1989). Though originally conceived as an intermediary between civil society groups and state
bodies, globalizing economic tendencies and the formation of the European Union have resulted
in a transnationalization of the public sphere concept (Habermas, 1998). The public sphere
continues to be revisited and revised in secondary literature (e.g., Crossley & Roberts, 2004), a
sign of its continued relevance.

2.2.2

Formative conceptions of the public sphere

The concept of the public sphere has been developed extensively by Habermas since his first
deployment of the term in 1962. The basic criteria of public sphere discourse—inclusiveness of
participants, unrestricted exchange reasons for and against validity claims, orientation toward
mutual understanding and consensus—have not changed since that time, but they represent only
one dimension of the concept. The public sphere concept from Habermas (1962) is a sociological
category that characterizes large-scale cultural and political shifts in Europe from the Late
Middle Ages to the Early Modern Era, and then from the Early Modern Era to the Late Modern
Era. This is but one conception. Another conception that is also sociological is tied to social
action.

It is an “action-theoretic” notion of the public sphere developed in the Theory of
27

Communicative Action (TCA). Habermas takes a communicative approach to explaining action,
one with a strong systems theory flavor. In the theory of society developed in Habermas (1984,
1985), the public sphere is presented as an area of overlap between system and lifeworld (see
Figure 2.9). In this model, the public sphere is situated in the societal component of the lifeworld
along with the private sphere. The two other components of the lifeworld are culture and
personality. In this application of the public sphere concept, the public sphere forms an area of
interchange with the administrative system, or state, a subsystem on the system side of
Habermas’s action model. In the public sphere arena in this model, private actors fill the roles of
citizens and clients.

System

Lifeworld
Culture

Society

Public
Sphere
Private
Sphere

State

Economy

Personality
Figure 2.9. The public sphere in TCA (Habermas, 1984, 1985; Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2016b).

As

clients,

private

actors

input

taxes

(money)

and

receive

organizational

accomplishments (power), and as citizens, they input mass loyalty (power) and receive political
decisions (power) as outputs (Habermas, 1985, p. 320). In the end, the model is supposed to

28

demonstrate how the state and economic systems have come to dominate people’s actions and
have led to pathological consequences for culture, institutional orders, and identity formation.
The public sphere is one channel through which this colonization occurs.

2.2.3

The Machtkreislauf model

As Baxter (2011) points out, the action-theoretic model from Habermas (1984, 1985) suffers
from numerous problems, and perhaps partly due to these problems, the model has been revised
in Habermas’s more recent theories of society and politics. In Habermas (1996, 2006), the
lifeworld/system and public/private distinctions are still present, but they form continua rather
than sharp contrasts. Baxter (2011) also points out that in more recent models, the “private
sphere” from Habermas (1984, 1985) has been replaced by “civil society” (Habermas, 1996,
2006) and “media system” has been added as a system (Habermas, 2006).
Habermas’s recent societal theories situate the public sphere concept in a Machtkreislauf,
or “circulation of power” model (Baxter, 2011). In this model from Habermas (1996), the public
sphere is an intermediary network located between civil society groups, economic groups, and
media groups, on the one hand, and the decision-making bodies of the political system, on the
other (see Figure 2.10). Using the public sphere, the various groups on the political system’s
periphery influence political decisions by transmitting “communicative power” to the political
system’s core. Their communicative power affects the “administrative power” wielded by
decision-making bodies at the center. As Baxter (2011) notes, Habermas (1996) equivocates on
this point, but the public sphere appears to be situated outside the political system to form the
system’s environment. Various groups and associations that inform public sphere
communication are also located beyond the political system on its outer periphery. The function
29

of the public sphere is to receive and package various messages from the outer periphery and
relay them to decision-making bodies. When functioning without distortion from money and
power, the public sphere ensures that collective values and interests are translated into
legislative, judicial, and executive decisions. As Habermas (2006) notes, however, the perennial
danger is that public sphere discourses are influenced by economic, media, and social power in a
way that marginalizes certain perspectives and privileges others. The challenge is to check these
powers in a way that protects rights to free speech.

Key

System Environment

Communicative Power

Economic Groups

Administrative Power

Civil Society
Groups
Media Groups
Real Periphery

Political
Public
Sphere
Outer Periphery

Political System
Quasi-State
Institutions
Self-governing
groups
Inner Periphery

Executive Bodies
Legislative Bodies
Judicial Bodies
Political Center

Figure 2.10. Habermas’s circulation of power model (Habermas, 1996; Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2016b).

Habermas’s circulation of power model has also been called the “two-track” (P. Johnson,
2006) or “sluice-gate” (Downey, Stephens, & Flaherty, 2012) model. The model can be reimagined using the metaphor of a canal network organized as a single set of concentric rings.
Political issues in the form of barges are pulled uphill on the canals by communicative power,
moving from the outer rings to the inner rings. A combination of communicative power and
administrative power is required to “raise” issues through the series of channels and locks until
the issues are unpacked at the core, the central ring. Resulting goods and services from the core

30

are then released outward and downward by administrative power. These deliverables are
unloaded at their destinations throughout the network, from innermost to outermost rings.
This model of the capitalist mass-democratic social-welfare state incorporates ideas from
several figures. With Arendt (1969), the model defines power as a positive communicative
force, one opposed to the instrumentalities of violence (Habermas, 1996, p. 148). Power is “the
human ability not just to act but to act in concert. Power is never the property of an individual; it
belongs to a group and remains in existence only so long as the group keeps together” (Arendt,
1969, p. 44). From Etzioni (1968, p. 31), the model borrows the idea of a society with upward
and downward flows of communication: “We refer to combined sources of social regulation and
change, the downward and the upward flows, as social guidance, while we reserve the term
social control for downward flows and consensus-formation for upward ones.” Following Fraser
(1990, p. 75), the model distinguishes between “strong” or formal publics, on the one hand, and
“weak” or informal publics, on the other, where strong publics wield decision- and law-making
capacity while weak publics are opinion-forming publics only. From Luhmann (1981, 1987), the
model borrows the idea of a political system comprised of two communication cycles, or
Kommunikationskreislauf (see Figure 2.11). The official cycle runs in one direction, from
parliament, to the administration, to the public: “The parliament makes the laws and provides the
means to get things done. The executive carries out the programs decided politically, while the
public obeys the decisions and elects the parliament” (Luhmann, 1990, p. 49). In the unofficial
cycle, power runs the opposite way:
The administration drafted the bills for politics and dominated parliamentary committees
and similar institutions. Politics, with the help of its party organizations, suggested to the
public what it should vote for and why. And the public exercised its influence on the

31

administration through various channels, like interest groups and emotional appeals.
(Luhmann, 1990, p. 49)
As Figure 2.11 shows, the parliament, administration, and public share different relationships in
each of the cycles (Luhmann, 1990, pp. 49-64). Finally, using ideas developed with his late
student, Bernhard Peters (1993), the model by Habermas (1996) adopts a concentric, coreperiphery design. Core-periphery models have been used to describe political and economic
relationships between cities and hinterlands and between countries (Calhoun, 2002, p. 95).

Persons
Bills
Politics

Administration
Agenda

Public
opinion

Appeals
Law
Public

Figure 2.11. Luhmann’s circulation of power model (Luhmann, 1981, 1987, 1990)

32

2.2.4

Criticisms of the circulation of power model

In the political sciences, Habermas’s model has been criticized in a number of ways. Baxter
(2011, pp. 177-191) points out that distinctions between center and periphery, system and
environment are unclear because the terms are ill-defined. Flynn (2004) identifies an ambiguity
in Habermas’s use of communicative power: Habermas does not clearly distinguish between
informal and formal types of communicative power. Forbath (1998) argues that Habermas’s
model ignores economic power and therefore cannot fully account for political decisions. A later
reformulation by Habermas (2006) incorporates social and economic power into a public sphere
model, but the objections by Flynn (2004) and Baxter (2011) have yet to be addressed.

2.2.5

Empirical studies using the circulation of power model

Habermas’s Machtkreislauf model could be studied and revised using an empirical case. Only a
single case study was retrieved using searches such as “circulation of power,” “sluice-gate,” and
“two-track” in political science and communication databases as well as Web searches. Downey
et al. (2012) studied the case of mass media communication about a national DNA database in
the UK as a way to understand how peripheral and core communication relate. The study
identified peripheral actors and core actors in the case, and it proposed narratives, tipping points
and recruitment as concepts to describe how core decision-makers and peripheral actors relate.
The study examined a national-scale issue and used newspaper articles and interviews as data
sources. The methodology and findings of this study are helpful to consider, but there is still a
need for a fuller application of the circulation of power model to an empirical case. It would be
helpful if a future case were atypical for the model because such a study would test the model’s
33

generalizability. Perhaps instead of a national issue or case such as the DNA database in the UK,
the issue could be of local significance and use local sources in a non-European nation. Future
studies should also address the various criticisms of the model and propose conceptual
developments. Existing criticisms of the model were not addressed in the UK case study.

2.2.6

Summary: The Machtkreislauf model

The above section reviewed literature related to Habermas’s Machtkreislauf model, the model
proposed to serve as a research framework in future studies of public libraries and the public
sphere. The model uses a center-periphery design where core actors are the decision makers,
intermediary actors supply services to the public and relay public opinions to the core, and
periphery actors generate public opinion through public sphere discourse.

Communicative

power flows inward from the periphery to the core, and administrative power flows outward
from the core to periphery. There are several outstanding criticisms of the model that were
identified. These criticisms must be addressed if the model is to serve effectively as a viable
research framework for the study of the public sphere and public libraries. The criticisms are:
the differences between inner and outer periphery are not clear, the model does not fully account
for social and economic power, and communicative power requires further elaboration regarding
formal and informal types. Only a single case study from the UK was found to have used the
model as a research framework. This application of the model did not address its existing
criticisms. The model has yet to be applied to a complex non-national and non-European case
such as a public library system in the US. The case of the greater Pittsburgh regional public
library system could serve as a valuable case to enhance the Machtkreislauf model and use it for

34

the study of the public sphere and public libraries. The case of the Pittsburgh regional public
library system is discussed in the next section.

2.3

REGIONAL LIBRARY INFRASTRUCTURE IN PITTSBURGH

The following section sketches a preliminary outline of the case of a regional library system in
greater Pittsburgh, United States. The case of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh is
one that has not received significant attention in library history or in local historical accounts of
Pittsburgh infrastructure. The case seems well-suited as a testbed for the Machtkreislauf model
and for the study of the public sphere and public libraries, but because there is not yet a historical
account of the case, some spadework is first needed to identify source materials for analysis and
to limn the spatial and temporal boundaries of the case.

2.3.1

Pittsburgh history and infrastructure

In historical accounts of Pittsburgh as a city and Pittsburgh as a region, public libraries have not
been considered in a regional way and they have not been viewed as a class of large-scale
infrastructure (Lubove, 1995).

This is true even in focused historical accounts where the

connections between infrastructure and city-building have been explored. Public libraries as a
form of regional infrastructure have not been included together with accounts of water,
sewerage, transportation, and communication infrastructures (Tarr, 1989). It is true that public
libraries developed individually and locally according to the circumstances in their communities,

35

but a regional perspective of public libraries in Pittsburgh was proposed as early as 1924, and
libraries since then have developed in a way akin to other regional health and human services.

2.3.2

Pittsburgh history and Carnegie libraries

Accounts of libraries in the Pittsburgh region are dominated by Andrew Carnegie’s philanthropic
legacy. A steel industry magnate during the Gilded Age, Carnegie famously donated much of
his fortune to the construction of library buildings worldwide. Several of the earliest Carnegie
libraries in the US are located in Pittsburgh, including the Carnegie Free library of Braddock
(1889), Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny (1890), and Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh (1895).
These libraries still carry his name. Perhaps due to the prevalence of Carnegie-named libraries in
the area, “Pittsburgh libraries” are sometimes seen as “Carnegie libraries.” In fact, not all
libraries in the Pittsburgh region were donated by Carnegie, and not all libraries with “Carnegie”
in their name are part of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the system of libraries located within
the city proper. A traditional emphasis on Carnegie as a biographical figure and his legacy of
library buildings may explain in part why a regional perspective of public libraries has yet to take
hold in historical accounts of Pittsburgh.

2.3.3

The current state of libraries in Pittsburgh

Significant regional library developments have occurred in Pittsburgh that are at a regional scale
and are not directly associated with Andrew Carnegie’s philanthropy. In 1924, the public library
committee of the Civic Club of Allegheny County proposed an extension of the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh’s services into county schools (Civic Club of Allegheny County, 1924-1925).
36

These proposals are the first accounts of a system concept that evolved through the 20th century
and into the present day. Today, a consortium of 46 libraries exists in the Pittsburgh region (see
Appendix B). This consortium is called the Allegheny County Library Association. This system
represents a form of inter-municipal cooperation in a region regarded as one of the most
politically-fragmented areas in the US (Sleeper, Willis, Rattien, & Lanczos, 2004). A history of
how this system developed has yet to be constructed.

Figure 2.12. Political map of North America with Pennsylvania highlighted.

37

Figure 2.13. Map of Pennsylvania with Allegheny County highlighted.

38

Figure 2.14. Political map of Allegheny County (US Census Bureau, 2000).

39

2.3.4

Summary: Regional Public Library Infrastructure in Pittsburgh

The above section surveyed the existing literature about the case of a regional public library
infrastructure in greater Pittsburgh. Existing historical accounts of libraries in the Pittsburgh area
have focused on the legacy of Andrew Carnegie: his biography, philanthropy, and the library
buildings he donated. Local histories not limited to those of libraries that have examined the
development of regional infrastructures have focused not on libraries but on services like water,
sewerage, and transportation. A regional historical perspective of libraries in the Pittsburgh area
therefore has yet to be studied. Due to the complex political environment of the Pittsburgh
region, and given also the strong library presence in the region and the large numbers of political
actors tied to libraries, the Pittsburgh case would serve as an ideal one for the study of the public
sphere and public libraries.

It would also serve as a suitable case to test and refine the

Machtkreislauf model.

2.4

LITERATURE REVIEW: PROBLEM STATEMENT

Several conclusions can be drawn from the above literature review. Firstly, the public sphere is
an important topic in library studies. The question of how the public sphere and public libraries
relate has formed a sustained research area within the field. The current paradigm for this area,
however, faces the problems of anachronism and anatopism. Habermas’s circulation of power
model has been proposed as an alternative paradigm to overcome these problems. From the
literature in the political sciences, it was found that the circulation of power model has been
discussed and criticized.

Only one case study was found that applies the model, but this
40

application did not address outstanding criticisms. The model could be enhanced or revised by
applying it further to an empirical case. It would be necessary to address the problems of the
model if it is to be used as a research paradigm in the library studies field. Finally, in libraries
studies and in local Pittsburgh history, a regional library system in the Pittsburgh area is an
understudied topic. A public sphere perspective of this library system could lead to a fuller
understanding of its development.

At the same time, the case of the regional system in

Pittsburgh could serve as a testbed for the study of the public sphere and public libraries using
the Machtkreislauf model. The above literature review therefore recommends a case study of a
regional library system in Pittsburgh using the Machtkreislauf model as an orienting framework.
The results of such a study could contribute to the fields of library studies and political science.

41

3.0

METHODOLOGY

This section discusses the overall research design and specific methodological details for this
study. The general research design for this study is called historical case study. Historical case
study consists of 3 stages, each with its own method, tasks, and results. The method for stage 1
is theoretical sampling, the method for stage 2 is qualitative content analysis, and the method for
stage three is qualitative comparative analysis. Each of these stages, their methods, their tasks,
and their results are described in more detail below. Also discussed below are issues related to
case selection, the research journal, research ethics, and researcher’s stance.

3.1

WHY CASE STUDY?

The central research question (RQ) for this project is: How might the circulation of power model
lead to a fuller understanding of regional library developments in Pittsburgh? This is an openended question that calls for description and explanation (Blaikie, 2010, 2014). The three subquestions (SQs) of this study include both what and why questions. The 3 SQs are:
SQ1: What does a tested and refined Machtkreislauf model look like?
SQ2: What does the evolution of the library system in Pittsburgh look like?
SQ3: How does the public sphere affect public library development?

42

This project adopts historical case study as a research strategy in order to address these SQs.
Case study is an effective research approach for exploring new ideas and theorizing about
mechanisms in an in-depth way (Gerring, 2007, pp. 41, 43). It is said that “case studies often
tackle subjects about which little was previously known or about which existing knowledge is
fundamentally flawed.

The case study typically presents original research of some sort”

(Gerring, 2007, p. 79). Case study is therefore an appropriate strategy for this project.

3.2

CASE SELECTION

Section 1.1 explained that this project addresses research problems from library studies and
political science. Section 1.3 then explained that the 3 research problems dovetail in such a way
that they can be tied together with a single research question. Given that each research problem
is warranted in its own right, it might still be asked how the problems and purposes are
justifiably connected in this study in a way that is not arbitrary or merely convenient. Section
1.1 noted why, given the findings of past studies, a public sphere perspective is appropriate for
the study of libraries in Pittsburgh. The case of Pittsburgh is in need of a research perspective,
and the public sphere fulfills that need. It might still be asked why the case of libraries in
Pittsburgh is an appropriate one to 1) test and refine the Machtkreislauf model and 2) understand
the public sphere and public libraries generally. A dual-faced rationale is therefore needed to
justify case selection from the perspective of political science and from the perspective of library
studies.

In other words, it is still necessary to explain why the case of Pittsburgh is an

appropriate one to test and refine the Machtkreislauf model and to say something more broadly
about libraries and the public sphere.
43

For a test-case for the Machtkreislauf model, the case of a regional library infrastructure
in Pittsburgh is both an extreme case and a crucial case (Gerring, 2007, p. 89). It is extreme in
the number and types of public and private actors. Allegheny County, the region surrounding the
city of Pittsburgh, is infamous for its many municipalities, special districts, and school districts.
Moreover, private businesses have often worked closely with governmental units to develop
regional infrastructures (Tarr, 1989). Pittsburgh also has a vibrant third sector of non-profits and
foundations. It is this large number of municipalities and the various activities and types of
private and third-sector entities that make Pittsburgh an extreme case. The case of Pittsburgh is a
crucial case because it encompasses regional-scale political events in a non-European context. If
the Machtkreislauf model is to be considered a general model of political power, then it must
effectively describe not only national patterns in European contexts, but also regional-scale
patterns in US contexts. The model has not yet been proven effective in such a context.
As a case that speaks to the public sphere and libraries more generally, the case of
Pittsburgh is an extreme case and it is a pathway case (Gerring, 2007, pp. 89-90). It is extreme
in the sense that the number of libraries in the region is extraordinary both in-state and
nationally. Many of these libraries inherited the iconic architecture and legacy of Andrew
Carnegie. The case is a pathway case in the sense that it can be used to probe public sphere
mechanisms of system development. An in-depth study of the case may reveal causes that
explain why the system developed as it did, and these findings can be generalized and applied to
libraries more broadly.

44

3.3

3.3.1

HISTORICAL CASE STUDY

What historical case study is

Historical case study is a variation on case study design that was newly developed for this
dissertation. Historical case study is a distinctive research strategy. It is a way to think about
and imagine the overall design of the research process. Historical case study uses source
materials from past and present in order to identify and describe changes in a case over time. It
does this by identifying periods within the case, by applying the same interpretive lens to each
period, then comparing the periods. Historical case study is a form of “longitudinal comparison”
because it uses before/after comparisons of the periods of a treatment group, the case (Gerring,
2007, pp. 152-157, 160-164).
Historical case study is a particular genre of case study research, and as such, it shares
some of the defining characteristics of case study design. Like case study as it is defined by Yin
(2014, pp. 16-17), historical case study is used to research complex, real-world phenomena in
context using a variety of evidentiary sources. A historical case study is best described as a
single-case study with multiple embedded units of analysis. These embedded units are its
periods. The object of a historical case study is to describe a case over time—from past to
present—and to identify causal factors by comparing and contrasting the case’s periods. To do
this, historical case study uses an interpretive instrument to describe a case’s periods in a
standardized way, then identify causal conditions that account for the changes (see Figure 3.1).

45

Time

Past

Present
Archival Documents

Sources

Interviews
Observations

Case

Period 1

Period 2

Period 3

...

Period n

Common interpretive framework

Figure 3.1. Concept of a historical case study.

3.3.2

Historical case study compared to other research approaches

Historical case study is a particular kind of case study, but it differs somewhat from how Yin
(2014) and others define case study. Unlike a single-case study of an organization, for example,
where embedded sub-units of analysis might focus on different aspects of that organization, the
embedded units of analysis in a historical case study are periods of time. This periodization is
constructed using historical methods, and the resulting historical narrative that is developed
during the first stage of a historical case study informs the theoretical sampling protocol for each
period (see section 3.4). Second, unlike case study as it is defined by Yin (2014, pp. 16-17),
where a case is some contemporary phenomenon only, historical case study is also retrospective
46

in the sense that it accounts for phenomena that extend well into the past, say, 50 years ago or
more.

Historical case study therefore uses archival documents as well as interviews and

fieldwork as source materials. The source materials serve as the basis for measuring how and
why the case changes across periods of time. Historical case study is a distinctive case study
strategy because 1) its embedded units of analysis are periods of time, 2) the case stretches from
the present into the distant past, and 3) changes in periods are tracked over time using a common
interpretive lens.
It is helpful to situate historical case study within a typology of case study designs
developed by Gerring (2007, pp. 27-28). In Gerring’s typology reproduced in Table 3.1, case
studies are gray and non-case studies are green. Historical case study resembles Type 2 in the
typology: it is both single-case and diachronic. There is no spatial variation within a historical
case study, only temporal variation.

Table 3.1. Typology of case studies and non-case studies (Gerring, 2007, p. 28).

47

Gerring’s typology is useful for distinguishing case studies from large cross-case studies
like surveys; however, the problem with this typology is that there is no way to distinguish
within diachronic studies between histories and case studies. This conflation of history and case
study means that all histories are case studies. This does not make sense: a distinction should be
maintained between the two types of diachronic studies, those that study cases in the distant past
(history) and those that study cases in the recent past and present (case studies). The distinction
between history and case study is important, especially when trying to understand what historical
case study is. The distinction is maintained by Yin (2014, pp. 9, 12), in a widely-read text on
case study design. This difference between case study and history should be maintained even if
it is only a matter of degree.
In order to allow for overlap between case study and history, and in order also to
maintain the distinction between the two, the typology by Gerring (2007) can be amended to
accommodate Yin (2014) and to show where historical case study lies in relation to case study
and history. In Table 3.2, a column is added to distinguish among diachronic studies with a
contemporary emphasis (gray) and those with an emphasis on the distant past (blue). The gray
cells in the table represent case studies; the blue cells represent histories. Historical case studies
(blue-gray) cut across these columns because historical case studies examine cases that span
from the distant past into the present. This revised typology establishes historical case study as a
unique strategy, accommodates important distinctions established by Gerring (2007), and
maintains the intuitive distinction between histories and case studies that is espoused by Yin
(2014).

48

Table 3.2. Revised typology of case studies, histories, and historical case study.

Historical case study overlaps in some ways with other research methods, but it remains a
distinctive research approach. These similarities and differences with other research approaches
are summarized in Table 3.3. Importantly, historical case study as it is presented here does not
mean “studying a case from the past” or “studying a historical case.” Other authors have used
the term historical case study in these ways to refer to the study of past events (Amenta, 2009) or
past people (Currier, 2007). These studies might be better described as historical or biographical
studies, respectively, because any type of case study, even a historical one, still uses sources
from the present and still touches on contemporary phenomena (Yin, 2014, pp. 12, 14).

49

H

ist
o

r
Co ic al
c
m
pa as e
Em rat
st
be ive udy
Et dde cas
hn d
es
c
o
Bi gra ase tud
og ph st y
ud
r
H a ph y
y
ist y
or
Lo y
ng
itu
di
na
ls
tu
dy

Table 3.3. Historical case study compared to other research methods and techniques.

Studies a case in the present

x

Studies a case in the distant past

x

Studies a case over time

x

x

x

Sources Uses archival documents

x

x

Uses interviews

x

Uses fieldwork

x

Time

3.3.3

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

How historical case study works

The general process of historical case study consists of 3 stages: 1) source collection and
analysis, 2) data collection and analysis, and 3) data interpretation. Each of the stages has its
own method, each is subdivided into tasks, and each task produces distinctive results.
Each stage of historical case study requires a distinctive method to achieve that stage’s
result. The stages proceed in sequence and the results are cumulative. This means that the
results of previous stages inform the tasks and methods of successive ones. At the same time,
each stage can also stand alone because it produces its own knowledge. Table 3.4 shows the
stages of historical case study, together with their methods, tasks, and results. The final column
50

of Table 3.4 draws from Table 1.3 to show which sub-questions are addressed by each task.
Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.3 show alternative ways to imagine the overall research process. Figure
3.2 shows how the stages connect and also shows the different knowledge products of each
stage. Figure 3.3 shows in which stages research questions are addressed according to field.

Table 3.4. Stages, methods, tasks, and results of this historical case study.

Qualitative Content
Analysis

Theoretical Sampling

Method

Qualitative
Comparative
Analysis

3

Data Collection and
Analysis

2

Data
Interpretation

1

Source Collection and Analysis

Stage

Task

Task description

Result

RQ

Define the
case

Establish temporal,
geographical, and
conceptual boundaries for
the case.

Definition of the case

SQ2

Periodize
the case

Using sources, divide the
case into periods according
to actors, events, and cycles.

Chronology and
narrative summary of
each period

SQ2

Collect
sources

Using descriptions of
periods as a guide, collect a
variety of relevant source
materials.

List of relevant
sources to use in
stage 2

SQ2

Develop
the
instrument

Construct a concept- and
data-driven instrument for
analyzing the periods.

-A concept- and datadriven instrument
-New concepts

SQ1

Pilot
coding

Test and modify the
instrument.

A valid and reliable
instrument

SQ1

Main
coding

Apply the instrument to all
source materials.

Coding matrices and
data to use in stage 3

SQ2

Compare
periods

Use tables, graphs, and other
tools to describe summary
data.

Summaries,
comparisons, and
patterns in data

SQ2

Explain
changes

Use comparative techniques
to explain changes in the
case’s periods.

Outcomes,
conditions,
configurations

SQ3

51

Process
Stage 1
Sources

Stage 2
Data

Knowledge
Source analysis
Case definition
Chronology
Narrative
Data analysis
Concepts
Models

Description

Description

Data interpretation Description
Stage 3
Explanation
Models
Prediction
Causal theory
Figure 3.2. The research process and its knowledge products.

Political
science
Stage 1
Stage 2

Library
studies
SQ2

SQ1

SQ2
SQ3

Stage 3

Figure 3.3. Research process and research questions according to field.

52

The first stage of historical analysis is source collection and analysis. The metaphor of
an excavation can be used to describe this stage because the first tasks of historical case study
resemble an archaeological dig. As in the process of finding and uncovering an artifact, the first
task of historical case study is to determine the scope of the case by revealing its full form. It is
first necessary to define the case—to determine its boundaries, whether they are spatial,
temporal, or conceptual in nature. Historical case study is challenging because, like an artifact
that is fragmented, a case’s pieces may be scattered across multiple collection sites. This means
that establishing a case’s contours requires detective work, such as tracking down leads and
guessing where new ones might be discovered. Defining the case is like solving a jigsaw puzzle.
The first step when solving a jigsaw puzzle is to construct the border. These edges of the case
can be geographical, temporal, or conceptual in nature. The first task of historical case study
therefore identifies where these boundaries lie; it begins with a small visible section of surface
area, continues by brushing away sediment and running one’s fingers along the edges, and
concludes by lifting the case up out of the soil. This task results in a definition of the case.
The next two tasks of the source collection and analysis stage are periodize and collect
sources. These tasks are carried out in tandem. Periodization is a process of dividing the case
into like pieces according to distinctive themes, events, actors, and cycles. Periodization is a
necessary step of historical case study for two reasons. First, as cases change over time, so do
relevant source materials and their collection sites. As periods become better defined and
understood, new potential sources are identified and collected, and these new sources are used to
further define the case and its periods. Second, case study requires some form of comparison,
and the conditions and outcomes of each period become the units of comparison in the final

53

comparative analysis. It is by comparing periods that why questions can be answered. The
second and third tasks of the excavation stage therefore complement one another in a reciprocal
way: as the case is better defined in periods, more sources are identified and collected, leading to
further conceptual development of the case. These two tasks result in a chronology of key events
for each period, a narrative summary of that period, and a pool of relevant sources to use in the
next stage. The overall method that guides the first stage of historical study is theoretical
sampling—chasing leads, imagining new directions, evaluating the trustworthiness of sources,
and collecting new sources in a way that leads to a fuller understanding of the case’s contours.
The next stage of historical case study is data collection and analysis. This is the stage
where an analysis method is applied to the sources in order to generate data about the case. In
this study, data collection and data analysis are two sides of a single, integrated process. Data
collection in this study cannot be separated from data analysis because data are collected through
an analysis process. The specific technique or method of this analysis should include some
means or instrument for generating data about the case according to the theoretical framework of
the study. Data happen or exist at the point where the coding instrument meets the source
materials.

Because archival documents, interview documents, and fieldwork documents

constitute the source materials, some content analysis is an appropriate method for this stage.
The data collection and analysis stage has 3 tasks: 1) develop the instrument, where categories
and definitions are developed for data collection, 2) pilot coding, where the categories are tested
and refined using a sample of the total source materials, and 3) main coding, where the
interpretive instrument is applied to all sources in the study in a systematic way. The pilot
coding phase results in a valid and reliable coding instrument that is both data- and conceptdriven; the main coding phase results in data that created from the application of the coding

54

instrument. The precise method used in this dissertation project is qualitative content analysis
(see section 3.5). Qualitative content analysis is a distinctive method that differs from other
types of qualitative coding.
Some authors, such as Blaikie (2010, pp. 21-25) combine terms such as source collection,
data collection, and data analysis. Other authors may proclaim that data collection precedes data
analysis. This may be the case in other kinds of studies, but this study differs in several ways: it
maintains a careful distinction between source collection and analysis (stage 1) and data
collection and analysis (stage 2); data collection and data analysis are combined into a single,
integrated process; and source collection and analysis precedes data collection and analysis and
must be completed before data collection and analysis can begin. There are good reasons for
maintaining these distinctions and this order. In this study, source collection and analysis must
be handled separately from data collection and analysis and it must be completed before data
collection and analysis can begin. This is because, first, the coding instrument that is developed
in stage 2 must account for the full variety of sources to be coded. This is to ensure a good fit
between the source material and the coding instrument during the coding process. Source
collection must therefore be completed before stage 2 can begin in order to ensure that the
coding instrument can describe all sources in a valid and reliable way. Second, the pilot coding
in stage 2 requires that a minimum percentage of sources are coded. All sources must therefore
be collected by the end of stage 1 in order to calculate that minimum number. Third, the pilot
coding in stage 2 must incorporate sources across all periods in the case. This is to ensure
validity and reliability of the coding frame across the entire case. Sources from all periods must
therefore be collected by the end of stage 1 in order to ensure that the coding frame tests well
across all periods. Finally, it is paradoxical to assert that data collection precedes data analysis.

55

This is because data can only happen through an analysis process: data are not “found” or
“plucked” from the world. It therefore does not make sense to say that data collection occurs
before data analysis, for how can data be collected before they exist? To resolve this paradox,
this study establishes source collection and analysis as the first stage and data collection and data
analysis as the second, subsequent stage.

Data are created at the point where the coding

instrument meets the source material, and this point is located in the coding process of stage 2.
The third stage of historical case study is data interpretation.

Interpretation is an

appropriate name for this stage because it means to infer a cause or explanation for an observed
set of facts. Interpretation consists of two tasks: compare periods and explain changes. The
interpretation stage is where data are presented and new models and theories are constructed in
light of the data. Compare periods means to report on the results from the main phase in a
summary way, using graphs and charts. These means of data display make patterns more visible
across the periods of the case. Explain changes is the final task of historical case study where
data are used to infer explanations relevant to the research question. The method that guides the
interpretation is qualitative comparative analysis. It is through comparative analysis that why
questions are addressed. This particular project uses qualitative comparative analysis as an
analysis technique to identify and describe causal conditions that explain why the case evolved
as it did (see section 3.6). The overall name for stage 3, data interpretation, implies that in this
stage abductive inferences are drawn from the data in a way that is at once based on the data but
at the same time goes beyond them. Interpretation requires an abductive leap to theories that can
explain why the case is as it is.
Historical case study is best understood as a mixed methods research strategy, meaning
that it uses both qualitative and quantitative data as a basis for theoretical conclusions.

56

Periodization may use either qualitative or quantitative data, the main phase may also generate
qualitative or quantitative data depending on the analysis method, and theorization in the final
stage can draw from both numbers and narrative.

3.4

3.4.1

THEORETICAL SAMPLING

What theoretical sampling is

Historical case study draws from a sample of source materials. Unlike a survey study where a
sample size and respondents’ characteristics are predefined, in a case study the sample is not
known in advance. Altheide (1996, p. 33) states that a sampling strategy should “emerge as the
researcher inspects and reflects on some initial materials.”

In the first stage of research,

therefore, the study develops a sample of sources as the nature of the case becomes better known.
Sources are identified that are relevant to the case. During this stage, preliminary sources are
used to define the boundaries of the case and to divide it into periods. As source collection
continues, the definition of the case and its periodization become clearer. Potential source pools
may continue to expand as a conception of the case is clarified.
The process of collecting sources in stage 1 of a historical case study is called theoretical
sampling. It is the process of setting a working definition or theory of a case, then searching for
sources in light of that understanding. The theoretical sampling protocol is a working list of
existing or potential sources to be gathered for data analysis, combined with a set of questions or
characteristics of the case that warrant a closer look. The list of sources is informed by the

57

research question and the nature of the case. Theoretical sampling is a trial-and-error process.
Researchers cannot know in advance what sources will be relevant or accessible.
The term theoretical sampling and its conception are associated with grounded theory
(Glaser, 1978, p. 36; Glaser & Strauss, 1967, p. 45; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p. 176). Unlike
some flavors of grounded theory, however, historical case study proceeds with a predefined
research question and framework in mind.

Theoretical sampling should be treated as a

distinctive part of the research process because a preliminary theory of the case is formed
(Altheide, 1996, p. 27). In historical case study, theoretical sampling is used during the source
collection and analysis stage as a “first round” of theory development. It is used to complete the
tasks of define the case, periodize, and collect sources.

3.4.2

Why theoretical sampling is important

It is impossible for any study to incorporate all possible sources. This is because some sources
may no longer exist, some are inaccessible, and some are expensive to obtain. Theoretical
sampling is important because it ensures that sources are collected that are relevant to the case
and to the research question. It also ensures that sufficient sources are collected from all aspects
of the case.

This sample of sources forms the basis of the data collection and analysis.

Theoretical sampling is important because it defines parameters to ensure that all relevant
sources are collected (recall) and to ensure that non-relevant sources are excluded (precision).

58

3.4.3

Principles of source collection

The basic principles of source collection for this study were to collect a wide variety of types of
sources from many diverse actors relevant to the case. From the beginning, there was no
minimum or maximum number of sources to collect. The goal was to collect as many relevant
sources as possible. One shortcoming of previous studies related to the public sphere and
libraries was that they used only a single type of source, annual reports (Koizumi &
Widdersheim, 2016; Widdersheim & Koizumi, 2015a). Reliance on a single type of source from
a single author is problematic because it raises the risk of bias. A large number of sources from a
diversity of perspectives was therefore important in this study in order to overcome past
deficiencies and to reduce the risk of sample bias. Sources that vary in type and origin constitute
a more trustworthy and credible basis for generating data and drawing conclusions. Accuracy
was an important consideration when collecting sources, and for that reason direct observations
and primary sources were emphasized as source materials.

3.4.4

Types of source materials

Altheide (1996, p. 2) defines a document as “any symbolic representation that can be recorded or
retrieved for analysis.” A number of different types of documents were gathered for this study to
serve as source materials. Documents included archival materials such as letters and internal
reports; newspaper, magazine, and journal articles that reported on relevant people or events;
interviews; and field observations. Interviews were conducted in an unstructured way so as not
to introduce bias into the interview (Rubin & Rubin, 2012, p. 29). Fieldwork was conducted at
public meetings and hearings.
59

3.4.5

Source Management

All source materials were saved as digital files and entered as records into EndNote reference
management software. Source materials were saved as digital copies because they would later
be coded and analyzed. A source management library was constructed using EndNote for
several reasons: 1) metadata could be added to the files for organization and retrieval; 2)
metadata could be used to sort the source files according to period; 3) the source documents
could be easily exported into NVivo for coding and analysis; and 4) metadata from the files
could be used to generate citation lists for the final write-up.

3.5

3.5.1

QUALITATIVE CONTENT ANALYSIS

What qualitative content analysis is

The second stage of historical case study is data collection and analysis. During this stage, a
method is used to generate data about the periods of the case using a common interpretive
framework. The development of a common means for describing the periods, and a systematic
process for applying those means to the sources, are important in order to compare the periods of
the case on equal terms and to ensure that all relevant data are included.
The data collection and analysis method adopted for this project is qualitative content
analysis. Qualitative content analysis is defined as “a method for describing the meaning of
qualitative material in a systematic way” (Schreier, 2013, p. 1). The defining characteristic of
qualitative content analysis is the coding frame. The coding frame is an interpretive instrument
60

that is used to analyze source materials in a way informed by the research question and
framework of a study.

3.5.2

Why qualitative content analysis?

There are several reasons why qualitative content analysis was selected as the data collection and
analysis method for this study. First, qualitative content analysis is appropriate for describing
hidden content in source material.

One characteristic of qualitative content analysis that

distinguishes it from quantitative content analysis is its focus on latent meaning as opposed to
manifest meaning (Schreier, 2013, pp. 15-16).

Understanding latent meaning requires

understanding the context of the material being coded. Second, qualitative content analysis
develops and applies a standardized coding instrument across the source material. This is
appropriate for a historical case study where sources in each period must be analyzed with
respect to the same categories. Third, qualitative content analysis emphasizes both validity and
reliability.

Reliability is ensured during the pilot phase where the coding frame is tested.

Validity is also ensured in how the coding frame is developed in light of data from actual
sources. Fourth, qualitative content analysis is flexible enough to incorporate concepts from an
existing framework. Since this study is informed by a model of the public sphere, the circulation
of power model, the coding frame was constructed with these concepts in mind. And fifth,
qualitative content analysis produces a variety of data, both qualitative and quantitative. This
diversity of data is used to strengthen final interpretations.
It might be asked why qualitative content analysis was used instead of grounded theory or
other similar qualitative coding techniques. First, it should be pointed out that there is no single
definition of grounded theory. It should also be noted that qualitative content analysis and
61

grounded theory are not mutually exclusive methods. Construction of a coding frame, for
example, requires constant comparison of source materials and the development of categories.
Qualitative content analysis diverges from grounded theory, however, because 1) qualitative
content analysis builds coding categories using a mix of both source data and concepts derived
from an existing framework; 2) qualitative content analysis tests the coding frame, often using a
second coder; and 3) qualitative content analysis applies the coding frame across all source
materials in a systematic way. The two additional steps of testing the categories and applying
them across all the source material in a systematic way give qualitative content analysis an
advantage over grounded theory. This is because the categories of the coding frame are more
reliable than in grounded theory, due to the testing, and because the systematic application of the
coding frame generates a large coding table whose data forms the basis of interpretations. This
coding table is not produced in grounded theory, and it is important because it forms the basis of
theorization in the data interpretation stage of a historical case study.

3.5.3

The coding frame

A coding frame is defined as “a way of structuring your material, a way of differentiating
between different meanings vis-à-vis your research questions” (Schreier, 2013, p. 61). Coding
frames are constructed using categories and sub-categories. Categories are the key aspects or
dimensions of source material (Schreier, 2013, p. 59). They focus the analysis of a source
material.

Sub-categories provide a more focused analysis.

Together, categories and sub-

categories are used to summarize the content of source material in light of a research question
and research framework.

62

There are four requirements for an effective coding frame (Schreier, 2013, p. 71). The
first is unidimensionality. Unidimensionality means that each category of the frame captures one
aspect of the material only.

The second requirement is mutual exclusiveness.

Mutual

exclusiveness means that the sub-categories do not overlap that that content can be assigned to
only one sub-category in each dimension. The third requirement is exhaustiveness. This means
that each document of source material must be coded somewhere in the coding frame. The
fourth requirement is saturation. This means that the categories and sub-categories in the coding
frame are used at least once during coding and that none are left empty.
A coding frame is constructed using concepts from an existing theoretical framework and
by modifying categories and sub-categories in the frame in light of source material. Categories
are created with a name, a definition, a description or set of indicators, examples, and, where
necessary, decision rules (Schreier, 2013, pp. 94-102).

3.5.4

Segmentation

Segmentation is the process of dividing up source material into smaller units in order that the
units fit into the categories of the coding frame (Schreier, 2013, pp. 126-127). Segmenting is
important because: it ensures that all relevant source material is accounted for in the coding; it
keeps the research focused on the research question and research framework; and it facilitates
comparisons of coding at different points in time or between different coders. A segment of
material that is coded according to a category in the coding frame is called a unit of coding
(Schreier, 2013, p. 131). Source material can be segmented into units of coding using two types
of criteria: formal criteria and thematic criteria. Formal criteria are features of a text other than
content, such as sentences, paragraphs, pages, or sections.
63

Thematic criteria are based on

meaning. This project adopts a thematic criterion for identifying units of coding. This criterion
is the concept of communicative event (see 4.2.1.1). A communicative event is defined as a
selection of meaning that is transmitted from an actor to an audience. This thematic criterion
was chosen because it is non-arbitrary and because it is based on the public sphere framework
that informs this study.

3.5.5

The pilot phase

The pilot phase is an essential part of qualitative content analysis. In the pilot phase, the coding
frame is tested and refined by applying it to a portion of the total source material to be used in
the final, main analysis (Schreier, 2013, p. 146). The part of the pilot phase where testing occurs
is called the trial coding. The pilot phase is crucial because there is no way to know in advance
how the coding frame will work when applied to the source materials. Testing the frame in
advance hones the instrument and reduces the likelihood that it will fail to account for all
relevant aspects of the source material during the main phase. The pilot phase is also important
because it enhances the reliability and validity of the results.
There are three main components of the pilot phase: trial coding, consistency check, and
revisions (Schreier, 2013, p. 146). During the pilot phase, a portion of the total source material is
selected and used. There should be a variety of source material from all aspects of the project.
Testing the frame on a diverse sample of source material ensures that the instrument is reliable
across the study (Schreier, 2013, p. 149). As a general rule, between 10 and 20 percent of the
total source material should be used in the pilot phase (Schreier, 2013, p. 151). In addition to
source variety, a second principle of the pilot phase is that the entire coding frame should be used
and tested (Schreier, 2013, p. 150). The pilot phase is an important time in a study because data
64

begin to be generated and coding routines take hold. Decisions about the nuts and bolts of the
coding process are made at this time.
A central purpose of the pilot phase is to test the reliability of the coding frame. This can
be done in two ways, either by intra-coder comparison or by inter-coder comparison, or both.
An intra-coder method is when a single coder codes the same material at two points in time, then
measures the consistency of those codings. An inter-coder method is when two or more coders
code the same material, then compare and measure the consistency of their codings.
This study adopts the inter-coder option. This method is preferred because inter-coder
reliability is the stronger of the two measures (Schreier, 2013, p. 191). Inter-coder reliability will
be measured both qualitatively, through discussion, and quantitatively, through Cohen’s kappa
and percent agreement scores.

3.5.6

The main analysis phase

The main analysis phase is where all source material is coded using the coding frame developed
and tested during the pilot phase. No modifications are made to the frame during the main
coding. The result of the main coding is a coding matrix where, for instance, rows represent the
units of coding, and columns represent the categories of the coding frame (see Appendix K). For
this study, NVivo qualitative data analysis software was used to perform the main coding.
Coding data was then transferred from NVivo to Excel spreadsheets in order to create coding
matrices.

65

3.5.7

Data presentation

Excel was used to generate tables and graphs of the coding data. Gephi network graph analysis
and visualization software was also used to create network visualizations and interpret coding
data.

3.6

QUALITATIVE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS

The foregoing section discussed how qualitative content analysis is used in stage 2 of this study,
data collection and analysis, as a way to generate data and present it in tabular and graphical
form. The data can be presented in a way that describes the various features of the case, and
these descriptions answer how the system developed as it did, who was involved, what
happened, and when. Still, qualitative content analysis by itself is not a suitable method for
answering why questions—there is no explanation offered in the descriptions it provides. An
additional research technique is therefore needed, one that builds on the data generated from
qualitative content analysis in order to create an explanatory theory. The explanatory theory
answers why the system evolved as it did. It does this because a theory posits an underlying rule
that accounts for observable data (Reichertz, 2014). Qualitative comparative analysis is the
method that accomplishes the tasks of stage 3, compare periods and explain changes.
Qualitative comparative analysis is therefore combined with qualitative content analysis—
QCA2—as a way to fully answer the sub-questions of this research project.

66

3.6.1

What qualitative comparative analysis is

Qualitative comparative analysis is a method for comparing in a systematic way several complex
cases. It is a form of configurational comparison because the purpose of the analysis is to
identify among the cases their common factors, variables, ingredients, or conditions whose
various configurations or arrangements explain why one outcome obtains in some cases and
another outcome obtains in others (Ragin, 1987; Rihoux & Ragin, 2009).

Qualitative

comparative analysis is used in studies where between 3 and approximately 15 cases are
compared according to several variables (Berg-Schlosser, De Meur, Rihoux, & Ragin, 2009, p.
5). Qualitative comparative analysis accommodates the idea of multiple conjunctural causation,
the idea that multiple constellations or paths of variables may lead to the same outcome (BergSchlosser et al., 2009, p. 9).

Using qualitative comparative analysis, both necessary and

sufficient conditions can be identified. A necessary condition is one that is present in every
combination of conditions that leads to a positive outcome. A necessary condition alone may be
insufficient to produce the outcome, but the outcome cannot obtain without it. By contrast, a
sufficient condition is one that, by itself, produces the outcome. It may not be present in every
combination, but it alone can produce the outcome.
Qualitative comparative analysis is a method used in a variety of fields, including
sociology, history, and political science. It offers an attractive alternative to statistical methods
that use few variables, a large number of cases, and different assumptions of causality (Ragin,
1987).

There are several variations of qualitative comparative analysis, including crisp-set

(csQCA), multi-variable (mvQCA), and fuzzy-set (fsQCA) (Rihoux & Ragin, 2009).

This

project uses crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis because the conditions and outcomes
identified in the case can be reasonably dichotomized.
67

3.6.2

Why qualitative comparative analysis?

One of the research questions in this study is a why question that calls for a causal account, or
explanatory theory.

Qualitative comparative analysis is a systematic way to develop an

explanatory theory, one that is logically consistent, theoretically justified, and empirically
supported. As a method, qualitative comparative analysis fits well with a historical case study
approach.

Historical case study may only focus on a single case, but that case’s periods

constitute multiple embedded units of analysis that require comparison. Just as qualitative
comparative analysis is used to compare separate cases in a cross-case study, so too can the
method be used to compare the embedded periods within a historical, single-case study.
Qualitative comparative analysis is a method that can be used to describe what is similar or
different about the case’s periods and also explain, using configurations of conditions and
outcomes, why the case evolved as it did. In other contexts, for example, qualitative content
analysis has been used to explain the conditions that lead to deforestation of the Brazilian
Amazon (Scouvart et al., 2008) and the conditions that lead to democratic mobilization in
authoritarian regimes (Osa & Corduneanu-Huci, 2003). Due to its focus on time and causal
conditions, qualitative comparative analysis fits well methodologically with the design of
historical case study and it helps to answer the research question guiding this project. An
attractive feature of qualitative comparative analysis is that each step in the theory-building
process is documented and described in a transparent way so that readers can assess the validity
of the theory.

68

3.6.3

How crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis works

3.6.3.1 Outcomes. An important first step for any version of qualitative comparative analysis is
to define what the outcomes are and to explain why a particular case exhibits a particular
outcome. If cases are arguments that consist of conditions (the premises) and outcomes (the
conclusions), then outcomes are important to define because qualitative comparative analysis
(QCA) is a method used to show why a case arrives at a particular conclusion.
Crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis (csQCA), like other forms of QCA, uses the
conventions of Boolean algebra to describe conditions and outcomes in a formalized notation. In
the following configuration, O represents a positive outcome:
A*b + B*D  O
The  symbol designates that O is the outcome of the configuration, meaning that those
collections of conditions that precede the  symbol are the causes for that outcome.
Definitions of outcomes are important to know from the beginning of a research project
because the definitions inform case selection. In QCA, it is better to include similar cases with
different outcomes—cases that fail as well as cases that succeed—in order to show why some
cases fail and others succeed (Berg-Schlosser et al., 2009, p. 21).

3.6.3.2 Conditions. Another important first step in QCA generally and csQCA in particular is to
define the conditions. Conditions are defined according to the general theoretical framework
guiding a study. There are several principles for the development of conditions:
•

they should vary across the cases;

•

they should be relatively few in number, around 4 to 7; and

69

•

they should be accompanied by hypotheses of how they affect outcomes (BergSchlosser et al., 2009, p. 28).

The notation for conditions also follows Boolean conventions. The following notation states that
a collection of several conditions results in a particular outcome:
A*b + B*D  O
In csQCA, conditions are dichotomized to show presence (capital letters) and absence (lowercase letters). Logical operators connect these conditions. An asterisk (*) means AND, and a
plus sign (+) means OR. The above statement therefore can be rewritten to describe how two
separate sets of conditions both result in outcome O:
A*b

the presence of condition A AND the absence of condition B

+

OR

B*D

the presence of condition B AND the presence of condition D

O

cause outcome O

3.6.3.3 Dichotomization. CsQCA is based on Boolean algebra, one used to express binary,
true/false statements. In binary logic, true values are expressed using a [1] and false values are
expressed using a [0]. In order for csQCA to work, conditions must be dichotomized into true
and false values. To do this, thresholds must be established in a non-arbitrary manner, a way that
makes sense within the context of the case. There are several principles for dichotomization:
•

“be transparent when justifying the threshold;”

•

“justify the threshold on substantive and/or theoretical grounds;”

•

“avoid artificial cuts dividing cases with very similar values;” and

70

•

“code the conditions in a way that is theoretically expected” (Rihoux & De Meur,
2009).

The steps of dichotomization are described and explained throughout the process of the analysis.

3.6.3.4 Data table. When cases and conditions have been identified and defined, a data table is
then constructed where the columns represent conditions and rows represent cases.

3.6.3.5 Dichotomized data table. After a data table is constructed, the data for each condition is
then assigned a [1] or [0] according the dichotomization rules for each condition. This creates a
dichotomized data table.

TOSMANA software can be used for this and subsequent steps

(Cronqvist, 2016).

3.6.3.6 Truth table. A truth table is a table of all the configurations—the various sets of
conditions and outcomes.

The truth table is important because it highlights contradictory

configurations—those with the same conditions but different outcomes.

3.6.3.7 Resolving contradictory configurations. Contradictory cases must be resolved in order
to show why some outcomes occur in some cases and other outcomes occur in others.
Contradictory configurations can be resolved in several ways, such as adding conditions,
adjusting thresholds, and reconsidering outcomes (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009, pp. 48-49).

3.6.3.8 Minimization. QCA favors parsimony—a small number of core conditions that can
explain outcomes. Boolean minimization is the process of identifying superfluous conditions

71

and removing them, thus distilling the configurations to any necessary and sufficient conditions
or combinations (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009, pp. 35-39).

3.6.3.9 Interpretation. The somewhat technical process of QCA generally and csQCA in
particular—the dichotomization of variables, creation of truth tables, Boolean minimization—
can adequately explain causation to a degree, but it cannot by itself fully explain causal
mechanisms. A final step of QCA is therefore to interpret the findings of QCA using examples
and narrative from the actual case.

3.6.4

Configurations or sequences?

QCA accounts for causal complexity, but by itself it fails to account for temporality. Following
the works of (Abbott, 1983, 1984, 1988, 1990, 1995), several authors have attempted to
overcome this limitation by combining sequence analysis with configurational analysis (Borgna
& Struffolino, 2016; Caren & Panofsky, 2005). The assumption is that both the arrangement of
factors and their temporal order matter when explaining the historical development of a case or a
set of cases.
Historical case study does not face the same limitations of other case study approaches
with respect to combining configurational comparative analysis and sequence analysis. This is
because temporality is built into a historical case study approach. Both sequence analysis and
configurational comparative analysis can be used in a historical case study by first applying QCA
to each of the period of study, then analyzing the configurations of each period to identify a
temporal pattern. Such a dual analysis reveals an overall trajectory of the case, one that accounts
for both causal complexity and temporal order.
72

3.7

RESEARCH JOURNAL

A research journal was an essential part of this research project. The journal was used for
brainstorming, tracking progress, and documenting significant events in the research process. To
make the research process more transparent, notes from the research journal are interspersed with
the results.

3.8

RESEARCH ETHICS

This research was approved by the Institutional Review Board (now the Human Research
Protection Office) at the University of Pittsburgh. The study was classified as exempt. An
approval letter can found in Appendix C.
Several types of sources were used in this study, including interviews with human
subjects. In order to protect interviewees from any potential harm, interviewee identities remain
confidential. Any identifying information was excluded from the dissertation report. The names
of interviewees were anonymized using gender-neutral pseudonyms, such as Librarian 1 and
Administrator 2. All interview participants were informed of the nature of the study prior to
their participation. A copy of the informed consent form used in this study can be found in
Appendix D.

73

3.9

RESEARCHER’S STANCE

This project operates within critical theory, interpretivist, and social realist paradigms (Blaikie,
2010, 2014). A critical theory approach develops solutions to problems with people and for
people, and it regards the study of communication and power as essential to this process (Blaikie,
2014, p. 12). Interpretivism regards reality as co-constructed meanings shared by social actors.
Fully understanding the nature of an event requires understanding the subjective meaning that
social actors ascribe to it. Social realism recognizes the existence of social structures that affect
social action.

3.10

SUMMARY: METHODOLOGY

The above section presented the general research design and specific methodological details for
this study. This study falls under the general heading of case study design. Case study design
was selected as a research approach because this study is exploratory in nature, not much is yet
known about the case or the concepts used, and the intended results of this study include the
development of new theories. The case for this study is the regional public library system in
greater Pittsburgh. This case is an appropriate one in order to test and refine the Machtkreislauf
model and in order to develop a fuller understanding of the public sphere and public libraries.
This is because Pittsburgh is an extreme case and a crucial case for the study of the
Machtkreislauf model, and it is an extreme case and a pathway case for the study of the public
sphere and public libraries.

74

Within the general category of case study design, this study adopts historical case study
as a specific research strategy. Historical case study was newly developed for this project. As a
concept, historical case study is a retrospective longitudinal comparison of the various periods
within a single case. The periods of a case serve as its embedded units of analysis. Historical
case study blends history with case study because it examines the case from the distant past into
the current moment. It does this by collecting and analyzing several different source materials,
including archival documents, interview notes and transcripts, and field notes from direct
observations. The periods of the case are analyzed using a common interpretive framework. In
this study, the framework is informed by the Machtkreislauf model. A common interpretive lens
used across the periods of the case allows the case to be viewed over time. Comparison of
certain features of each period can reveal why the case evolved as it did.
As a research process, historical case study consists of 3 stages: source collection and
analysis, data collection and analysis, and data interpretation. Each of the stages uses its own
method, undertakes specific tasks, produces its own results, and addresses certain research
questions. The stages proceed in sequence, and the results of this process are cumulative. This
means that earlier stages inform later ones: stage 1 produces sources that are used in stage 2 for
coding, and stage 2 produces data that is used in stage 3 for interpretation. At the same time,
each stage also stands on its own as a distinctive stage because each stage produces its own
knowledge: stage 1 results in a definition, narrative, and chronology of the case, stage 2 results in
new concepts and models related to the Machtkreislauf model, and stage 3 results in an
explanatory theory of the case. In this study, the method used in stage 1 is theoretical sampling,
in stage 2 the method is qualitative content analysis, and in stage 3 the method is qualitative
comparative analysis. Each of the stages aligns with different research questions for this study:

75

stage 1 addresses SQ1, stage 2 addresses SQ2 and SQ3, and stage 3 addresses SQ3. Different
types of knowledges, including narratives, chronologies, concepts, models, and explanatory
theories, are developed in each stage in order to address these questions.
Before beginning this study, proper steps were taken to ensure the protection of research
participants. Identifying information of interviewees will remain confidential, and interviewee’s
names will be replaced with gender-neutral pseudonyms. Before participating in the study, all
interviewees must provide informed consent.

Details of this study were submitted to the

University of Pittsburgh’s Institutional Review Board where the study was classified as exempt.

76

4.0

4.1

RESULTS

STAGE 1: SOURCE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS

The following section reports on the findings from the 3 stages of this historical case study.
Source collection and analysis is the first stage of this historical case study. It consists of 3 tasks:
define the case, periodize, and collect sources. This stage results in a definition of the case, a
chronology and narrative for each of the embedded periods, and a collection of relevant sources
to use in the next stage, data collection and analysis. Source collection and analysis begins to
address research question SQ2 of this study, which is: What does the evolution of the library
system in Pittsburgh look like? It does this by developing a preliminary description of the case
and a theoretical sampling protocol that serves in stage 1 as a guide for source collection. The
overall objective of stage 1 is to define what the case and its periods are, and to gather relevant
source materials for further analysis.

4.1.1

Definition of the Case

The first task of stage 1, source collection and analysis, is define the case. Defining the case is
important because it establishes what the object of study is and what it is not. A definition of the
case cannot be fully known in advance until it is excavated, that is, until sources are collected
and a sampling protocol is constructed.
77

In this project, the case is defined as discourse related to a regional library system in the
greater Pittsburgh region. The geographical boundaries for the case are Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, the unit of government that includes the city of Pittsburgh proper and its
immediate suburbs. The case is bounded temporally by the years 1924 and 2016. The year 1924
was identified as a temporal boundary for the case because it is the first year that a regional
library system idea was proposed. The year 2016 serves as a second temporal boundary for the
case because no sources about the case were collected beyond that year. The case involves
public libraries. Other types of libraries are therefore excluded from the study.

4.1.2

Periodization

Historical case study depends upon the comparison of time periods.

Periods serve as the

embedded units of analysis within the historical case study. The second task of stage 1, source
collection and analysis, is periodize. To periodize means to establish what the case’s embedded
units of analysis are.

4.1.2.1 Decision cycles. In this study, a concept that is central to distinguishing one period from
another is decision cycle. The concept of decision cycle was developed during the source
collection and analysis of stage 1. The concept of decision cycle was developed because it was
seen in the source materials that waves of a repeating, formal decision process combined over
time to form a pattern (see Figure 4.1; also described in section 4.3.2.1). The concept of cycles
is not uncommon in social life: there are annual cycles (seasons, calendar years), economic
cycles (shopping trends, fiscal years), and political cycles (election years). Similarly, in the case
observed in this study—the public library system in greater Pittsburgh—the evolution of the
78

system occurred gradually and in waves. Each wave of development was issue-driven and was a
confluence of multiple types of power. During each cycle, power built up and accrued until a
pivotal formal decision was made. The outcome of the peak formal decision determined how the
system evolved, whether there was a substantive change or a continuity. These observations led
to the development of the concept of a decision cycle.

Formal
decision

Formal
decision

Period x

Period y

Figure 4.1. Decision cycles in 2 periods.

Decision cycles in this case are used to distinguish periods. Decision cycles are issuedriven and do not necessarily correspond to artificial or predefined intervals of time. In other
words, the time internals of each period are not uniform, but instead depend on when formal
decisions were made about issues. Each period has a central, primary issue, and the travel or
course of the issue defines each period’s cycle (see Figure 4.2). While there are certainly
multiple issues observed in each period, in each period there is a single, salient issue whose
decisions can be tracked and traced. The salient decision cycle of each period is used to
distinguish one period from another.

79

Formal Formal
decision decision

Formal
decision

Formal
decision

Formal
decision

Issue A
Issue B
Issue C

Period x

Period y

Figure 4.2. Decision cycles across periods for 3 issues.

Each decision cycle is composed of micro-decisions that lead up to a larger, allencompassing macro-decision regarding a particular issue. The smaller decision steps can be
distinguished from the general, overarching decision trend. Figure 4.3 shows in a generic way
the micro-decisions in blue and the macro-decision trend in red. It is the macro-decision trend
that is relevant when using decision cycles to distinguish periods.

Formal
decision
Formal
decision
Formal
decision

Formal
decision

80

Figure 4.3. Micro-decisions and macro-decision in a decision cycle.

The distinguishing feature of a period in this case is a change in process from its previous
period—a new decision cycle. The result of the new process may produce a substantive change
or it may maintain the status quo. Each process is comprised of a formal decision or a set of
formal decisions that result in an outcome. Each iteration of the cycle constitutes a period.

4.1.2.2 Periods. There are 9 periods identified in this case. The concept of a decision cycle was
used to carry out the overall periodization of this case as illustrated in Figure 4.4. Table 4.1
shows these periods, their year ranges, and their working titles.

Formal decision dates
(peaks)

Period dates

1924

1956

1945

Decision cycle

1920

1941

Period 1

1930

1961

1961

Period 2

1940

1979

1950

1970

Period 3

1960

Period 5

1980

Period 7
Period 6

1990

2000

Figure 4.4. Decision cycle and formal decisions across periods.

Table 4.1. Period year ranges and working titles.

Period

Year range

1

1924–1945

Working title
Periphery and Center
81

2009

1994
1993 1998

1980

Period 4

1970

1991 1994 1997

2015

2011

Period 8

2016

Period 9

2010

2020

2

1945–1961

County Contract

3

1961–1970

The Rise of District Services

4

1970–1979

Unification Revisited

5

1980–1993

Fiscal Crises and Digital Visions

6

1993–1994

The Pursuit of RAD

7

1994–1997

System Dreams

8

1998–2011

Formula Wars

9

2011–2016

Compliance Culture

4.1.2.3 Period chronologies. Chronologies for each period are found in Appendix F.

4.1.2.4 Period summaries.

Period 1: 1924–1945. In 1907, the city of Pittsburgh annexed its northern neighbor,
Allegheny City. This section of the city is known as North Side. When Allegheny City was
annexed, however, control of the library there was transferred to Pittsburgh City Council, not the
trustees of the already-existing library system in the city, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. Some
of the first battles for a regional system in the Pittsburgh area therefore concerned administration
of the library in North Side. Several civil society groups, particularly the Civic Club, joined
forces with Ralph Munn, the director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, in an effort to merge
Allegheny Library with the city’s Carnegie system. At the same time, civil society groups
fought to extend library services into the county, particularly for schools. A 1937 article in a
local progressive journal identified nearly 20 public libraries in the county and outside the city.
Library services outside the city were thought to be insufficient by some education advocates.
82

Efforts for extending library services to county schools began in 1924, and proposals to
merge the old Allegheny library with the Carnegie system were made in 1926. These efforts
continued into the 1930s and early 1940s. In the background during this time was a movement at
the state and county levels to consolidate county municipalities with the city of Pittsburgh. This
effort failed to pass a county referendum in 1929. This failure of “metropolitanism” initiated a
pattern of fractured regional governance in Pittsburgh that continued throughout the 20th
century. The failed effort of city-county consolidation also undercut efforts to design a regional
library system.
In 1940, efforts for countywide services culminated with a meeting of several civil
society groups, library leaders, and school leaders who jointly petitioned the County
Commissioners for county library funding. The proposal was rejected by the Commissioners in
1941. By 1942, the Second World War had begun, funding became scarce, and efforts toward
regional library services in the Pittsburgh area were abandoned until after the war.
Period 1 is characterized by a flurry of activity by civil society groups who petitioned
multiple decision-makers for library services. Despite a seeming abundance of support, these
efforts resulted in a series of political failures for the progressive regionalists and a series of wins
for the local autonomists. Efforts by the regionalists were stymied by the decision-making
bodies they targeted: the city Mayor, the City Council, and the County Commissioners. It is also
the case that the decisions by these officials were made within a restrictive economic climate of
the Great Depression and then the Second World War. Parochialism, therefore, does not fully
explain why a regional system did not emerge. Key actors in this period were the Civic Club of
Allegheny County, the Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teachers’ Associations, the Mayor

83

and City Council of Pittsburgh, Ralph Munn of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, and the
Allegheny County Commissioners.
The arc of the decision cycle of period 1 began in 1924, when a regional library system
was first proposed. Public sphere pressure built up throughout the 1920s and 1930s until the
hearing with the County Commissioners in 1941.

The arc peaks in 1941 when the

Commissioners decide not to fund the library system.

Period 2: 1945–1961. Following the Second World War, population in the Pittsburgh
area continued to increase. This was especially true in the county suburbs that surrounded the
city. In 1948, the Civic Club of Allegheny County renewed its efforts to extend library services
into the county. With the help of Ralph Munn, they convinced the Allegheny Conference on
Community Development to sponsor a survey of libraries. The survey found 31 libraries in the
county and uneven service quality outside the city. The study recommended as a distant goal a
county library system operated as a division of county government and supported by county
funds. In the interim, the study suggested a bifurcated, city-county system.
Efforts toward metropolitanism were still underway in the state legislature. In 1951, a
Metropolitan Study Commission was enacted by the state to survey county and municipal
services in Allegheny County. One aspect of the study was libraries. The study of libraries was
designed and written largely by Ralph Munn. Published in 1955 as part of a larger home rule
charter, the library survey recommended a federated, voluntary county system with the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh as its nucleus.
A new civil society group formed out of the Allegheny County Council of ParentTeachers’ Associations, the Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County. The group first
met in 1955 and began to petition the County Commissioners for funding for a county services.
84

On behalf of the group, Ralph Munn presented a plan to the commissioners. The efforts were
successful, and the commissioners contracted with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh in 1956.
The Munn plan had 4 components: 1) free lending privileges for all Allegheny County residents
from the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, 2) bookmobile services to areas of the county without a
library, 3) inter-library loan services between the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and other
county libraries, and 4) centralized cataloging and purchasing services by the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh. In 1956, the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh became the county library.
Two other major events occurred in 1956.

First, under the new mayor David L.

Lawrence, the Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny was merged with the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh. Second, at the national level, the Library Services Act was passed by the US
Congress and signed into law by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. This Act would allocate
federal dollars to state library agencies to enhance library services.
At the state level, the Pennsylvania Library Association and the State Library worked
toward developing a statewide library plan. In 1957, the State Library sponsored a survey of
libraries in Pennsylvania. Recommendations based on this survey would become known as “the
Martin Plan” after the study’s lead surveyor, Lowell A. Martin. The Martin Plan would form the
basis for a new state library plan passed in 1961. At the county level, the Library Planning
Committee and Ralph Munn continued to petition the County Commissioners for enhanced
county services. Discussions with the County Commissioners continued into the early 1960s,
but these local efforts did not produce any tangible changes because they were overshadowed by
the statewide adoption of the Martin Plan in 1961.
Period 2 was characterized by major wins for regional library system advocates. The
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh became the county library and began to offer enhanced services

85

to libraries and patrons outside the city. The North Side library merged with the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh system. Several major studies proposed, in various ways, a single countywide system. Civil society groups at the local and state level were essential for advancing the
regional concept. The key actors during this period were Ralph Munn and the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, the Civic Club of Allegheny County, the Library Planning Committee of
Allegheny County, the Allegheny Conference on Community Development, the County
Commissioners, the Mayor and City Council of Pittsburgh, the Pennsylvania Library
Association, the State Library of Pennsylvania, and the Library Services Branch of the US
Department of Education.
The decision cycle for period 2 began with the close of the Second World War. Public
sphere pressure continued to build through the early 1950s due to the efforts of civil society,
library, and government groups. The cycle peaked in 1956 with the decision to merge libraries
and to form a county-funded system. The late 1950s witnessed early implementation of this
newly-created system.

Period 3: 1961–1970. Period 3 marks a transformation in the nature of a regional
system in Pittsburgh.

A new state code in 1961 initiated state funding for libraries and

broadened the state’s oversight of them. This legislation also added a new role for the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh: district center. The state plan of 1961 instituted up to 30 district service
centers throughout the state. Larger libraries were designated as district centers, and Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh was selected as center for the Pittsburgh district. In addition to its roles as
a local library for city residents and a county library for patrons outside the city, the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh also became a district center whose responsibilities included reference
services to all libraries and patrons in the district, advisory and consulting services to libraries,
86

and instructional meetings for county library personnel. With the extended services also came
state funding for all district centers and all local libraries that met service standards. Funding
and oversight of the new state plan was administered by the State Library, whose offices in
Harrisburg were until then limited mainly to managing the library in the state capital. At the start
of its new role as district center, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh served 27 district libraries and a
population of 1,335,977 outside the city. Geographically, the district jurisdiction included all of
Allegheny County and parts of Butler County and Westmoreland County.
In 1966, Lowell A. Martin, the architect of the state plan, was again commissioned by the
State Library to evaluate how the plan actually fared. He published the results of a re-survey in
1967. His recommendations included mandating county library agencies in counties without a
county library, establishing intermediate units in the sparsely-populated central areas of the state,
and banning the creation of new local libraries. The Library Development Committee of the
Pennsylvania Library Association initiated discussions about the findings in order to determine
what legislative action to take. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, as District Center Library in
Pittsburgh, led discussions throughout Allegheny County. These discussions began in 1967 and
continued into 1969.
Period 3 was characterized by an important change in regional library system
development. If periods 1 and 2 were a bottom-up process where local civil society groups
mobilized to petition local decision makers for county services, then period 3 was a top-down
process where a new state law mandated district services. The combined roles of local, county,
and district center library created a complex arrangement for the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
and at the same time began to draw county libraries together into a system.

87

The decision cycle for period 3 begins in or around the year 1961 when efforts by state
library groups led to the development of state library legislation. The cycle peaked that same
year with the decision at the state level to implement the plan. The mid- to late-1960s saw the
implementation and administration of this new state plan in greater Pittsburgh.

Period 4: 1970–1979. Period 4 was characterized by a continuation of earlier system
developments and a series of discussions about modifying the regional system.

These

discussions ultimately led nowhere. The period began in 1970 with a study published by Ralph
Blasingame, former State Librarian of Pennsylvania. In 1969, the County Commissioners asked
Blasingame to develop a plan for a county library system. At this point in time, population in the
county still seemed to be trending upward, even if the manufacturing base characteristic of
Pittsburgh had begun to shift to services. The Blasingame study reached the same conclusion as
the 1955 Metropolitan Study Commission report: a unified county library system was needed.
The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, with some civil society support, continued to push for a
centralized system.
In the background, actors at the county and state level continued efforts to restructure
Allegheny County government. Like the commissions formed in the 1923 and 1954 to study
home rule, a government study commission was formed in 1972 to study government
restructuring. These efforts again failed in 1974 and 1978 when charters were rejected in county
referenda.
The State Library continued to create long-range plans and continued to receive and
distribute federal Library Services and Construction Act funding. This funding was used in
Pittsburgh in two major ways during this period. First, the money was used to fund a regional
reference center, an idea proposed by Ralph Munn in 1961 and initiated by Keith Doms and the
88

County in 1966. Second, in 1976, LSCA was used to fund a citizen’s study on libraries in the
county. The study was an extended criticism of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. It suggested
that a county board should be established in order to distribute county money away from the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and toward other county libraries. The study was significant
because it established a rift between the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and surrounding county
libraries, claiming that the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh received county money and dominated
policy-making, but failed to offer adequate county services.
Civil society groups were active in a minor way during this period. Dorothea (Dotty)
Strang, a founding member of the Library Planning Committee from the 1950s and 1960s,
continued library advocacy from within the Allegheny County League of Women Voters. She
participated in discussions about the Blasingame study, served on the committee for the 1978
citizens’ study, and led library-related meetings in the League.
Despite a proliferation of studies and discussions during period 4 that seemed to agitate
for a unified regional library system, these efforts failed. Key actors during this period were the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the County Commissioners, the State Library, and Dorothea
Strang.
The decision cycle for period 4 began in 1970 with the publication of the Blasingame
study. Minor efforts and other library studies continued throughout the 1970s. The cycle peaked
in 1978 with the publication and distribution of the citizens’ study. No action was taken by
decision-making bodies in reaction to this study, and a chance was missed for substantive system
change.

Period 5: 1980–1993. During period 5, populations in the city and county continued to
decline from their heights in the 1950s and 1960s.
89

In the early 1980s, the steel industry

collapsed, leaving empty land, lower wages, and an overall weakened tax base to support public
libraries. The 1980s and early 1990s were therefore difficult financial years for libraries in the
region. Some independent libraries, particularly those in the Monongahela Valley region that
were once attached to mills, approached the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh to discuss
annexation. In 1989, the financial crisis for libraries came to a head. The Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh commenced a President’s Advisory Committee on the Library to study new funding
options and the possibility of branch closings. The committee’s final report published in 1990
found to no one’s surprise that the library was underfunded. The report also proposed several
options for countywide system formation that, if adopted, could help to curtail library closings.
Digital, linked computer technologies also came to the fore during this period. In 1989,
the main branch of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh unveiled several public access terminals to
connect to its online catalog, CAROLINE. By 1992, this catalog would be accessible to other
Carnegie branches and to some libraries in the county. The vision of a digital, networked library
system was promoted by Bob Croneberger, director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.
In 1990, a new actor took the stage: Frank Lucchino. Lucchino, a lawyer and magistrate,
was a progressive liberal who was active on city council since the 1970s. He was unsuccessful
in his bids for mayor and state Auditor General, but now he hoped to leave a mark as County
Controller. In 1990, Lucchino issued a special report on county restructuring, calling again for
home rule and inter-municipal coordination. He mentioned libraries specifically as an attractive
area for inter-municipal consolidation. Then, in 1991, Lucchino published a second special
report that focused exclusively on libraries. The report encouraged greater cooperation among
county libraries outside the city and urged for increased county funding for them.

90

It is difficult to overstate the effect that Lucchino had on the mobilization of county
libraries. Following the publication of his report in 1991, county libraries joined together to
form the first county wide library association, County Library Association Serving the People
(CLASP).

The group was based in part on an existing regional cooperative, the Library

Association of South Hills (LASH). Also following the report in 1991, Lucchino formed and
chaired the Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County (CFLAC).

The

Commission obtained funding from the Buhl Foundation to support a County Library Director,
who began in 1992. The Commission, together with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and
CLASP, coordinated several projects, including Project Link-Up, which installed computer and
telecommunication equipment to connect libraries across the county to CAROLINE. This was
the start of a union catalog and an automated circulation system in the county.
Period 5 began with several fiscal woes that led to several new regional system
developments. The central actor during this period was Frank Lucchino, a veteran of local
politics but a library outsider. Lucchino’s vision of a regional political system merged with
Croneberger’s vision of a digital one. The county libraries were drawn together organizationally
as well as technologically.
The decision cycle for period 5 started in the politically and economically challenging
times of the early 1980s. Political power began to grow toward the end of the 1980s with the
resolution by CLP to find alternative funding models and to connect libraries digitally. Lucchino
further energized the regional idea, leading to the peak of the cycle and the decisions to form
CFLAC and CLASP in 1991. The years 1992 and early 1993 witnessed administration of these
new organizations.

91

Period 6: 1993–1994. In period 5, Croneberger initiated an online catalog at the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and, together with Lucchino, took preliminary steps toward
constructing an integrated county library system. With his publications and political savvy,
Lucchino rallied county libraries, resulting in CLASP and the Commission on the Future of
Libraries. By early 1993, however, the momentum of the county movement had dwindled.
Meeting attendance at CLASP was down, and funding had not yet been found to connect all
libraries in a digital network.
Period 6 began in mid-1993. During this time, there were several political initiatives in
the background at the state and county levels. The Allegheny Conference on Community
Development and the Pennsylvania Economy League, together with County and City leaders,
developed a plan for a new funding source for cultural entities in the city and county. The plan
was to develop a Regional Asset District, a special governmental unit in Allegheny County that
would raise sales tax by 1 percent. Half of the revenue from the tax would be redistributed to
municipalities throughout the county. The other half would be administered by a city-county
board and distributed to eligible cultural assets, organizations like the aviary, conservatory, zoo,
stadium, and libraries. The proposition of funding from the Regional Asset District sparked
further developments in a countywide library system.
In June and July of 1993, the Pennsylvania Economy League contacted the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh and CLASP to inform them of the pending legislation. The legislation
passed the state legislature in December 1993 and was signed by the Governor. The County
Commissioners also approved the special district in early 1994. The sales tax went into effect in
July. Eligible regional assets were decided by the board by the end of September 1994.

92

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh would most certainly receive funding from RAD: it was
the county and district library, and it offered services to all county residents. At the time, it was
initially unclear whether other county libraries were also eligible funding because their services
were limited mainly to their local areas. CLASP and CFLAC struggled to imagine how county
libraries could receive a portion of the new funding source without endangering existing funding
from their municipalities.
CLASP, Lucchino, and the County Library Director, while working together with the
Allegheny Conference on Community Development and strategic consultant Bill Dodge, agreed
that several principles must guide their proposal to RAD. First, the libraries must speak with one
voice: they must approach the RAD board as an association of libraries, not as individual
libraries.

To do this, CLASP restructured and became the Allegheny County Library

Association (ACLA), a non-profit association.

Second, as a condition for receiving RAD

funding, individual county libraries must serve the entire county, not just their own areas. Third,
to be eligible to receive RAD funding, a library must be a member of ACLA and it must already
be state-funded. Fourth, RAD was intended as a supplement to local funding, not a replacement.
RAD money could be used to leverage more local funding. Fifth, the funding distribution would
follow a formula. Several factors in the formula determined how much RAD money a library
received, including population, distress, and local funding. And sixth, libraries could join ACLA
to receive RAD funding voluntarily, but if they did, then they must agree to the terms of the
association.
ACLA developed a convincing proposal and presented it to the RAD board in September
1994. In October, together with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, they received RAD funding:
ACLA received 5 million dollars and CLP received over 11 million dollars. Both ACLA and

93

CLP became statutory assets, meaning that their RAD funding was guaranteed for at least 10
years.
Meanwhile, as libraries pursued RAD funding, Lucchino, Croneberger, CLASP, and the
County Library Director worked toward expanding Project Link-Up, a project that would
become the Electronic Information Network. Croneberger hired a consulting firm, RMG, to plan
the expansion. Lucchino and Croneberger approached Doreen Boyce of the Buhl Foundation for
funding. By December 1993, they announced plans for the network to all libraries in the county.
In July of 1994, a comprehensive plan was developed for the new network. Lucchino and
Croneberger pitched the Electronic Information Network to several foundations for capital
funding.

This was the last step of the planning phase before EIN transitioned into the

implementation phase.
Period 6 was characterized by cooperative efforts made toward funding for countywide
projects. The groundwork for these projects was laid during period 5. ACLA and EIN became
new means of unifying libraries into a countywide system. The key actors during period 6 were
CLASP, Lucchino, CFLAC, the County Library Director, the Allegheny Conference on
Community Development, the RAD board, and state and county officials.
The decision cycle for period 6 lasted approximately a year starting from the time in mid1993 that the county library organizations were informed about plans for RAD and began
preparing their proposal. A movement for a regional library system grew in early- to mid-1994,
led by local library organizations, CLP, and Lucchino. The cycle culminated in late 1994 when
ACLA and CLP received RAD funding, the EIN received foundation support.

Period 7: 1994–1997. ACLA was successful in obtaining RAD funding, but prior to
October of 1994, the association had not fully considered how to distribute the money in an
94

equitable way to libraries throughout the county.

CLP received its own funding that was

supposed to replace its city and county money. For ACLA, however, the RAD money was not a
replacement, it was completely new. How much would each library get, and what would each
library do with the money it received? Period 7 follows the initial RAD funding when county
libraries tried to resolve basic organizational issues such as funding and governance. In the early
years of ACLA, not all libraries in the county chose to join the association due to perceived
economic losses. As a condition of receiving RAD funding, libraries had to serve all the county.
This meant sharing collections with other libraries. Smaller, less-well-funded libraries would
certainly benefit from this resource sharing because they wouldn’t have to buy new books—they
could just borrow them from other libraries in the system. Larger, more-well-funded libraries
therefore risked exploitation if they joined the county system.
At the same time, in late 1994 the Electronic Information Network became a reality. The
board was appointed and began creating policies. Foundation funding for EIN began in late
1994. EIN consisted of both physical infrastructure and personnel. As a physical thing, EIN was
a secure, intra-county network that connected libraries to a shared catalog and circulation system.
As an organization of staff, EIN personnel provided the complete hardware, software, and
networking capabilities to all county libraries. EIN infrastructure was initially housed at the CLP
main branch. Initial capital funds were provided by Foundations and the County. Funding then
came from RAD through ACLA and CLP. During this period, EIN was an organization in a
liminal state: it was embedded between CLP, ACLA, and the Commission on the Future of
Libraries. Its board consisted of 7 members: 2 from CLP, 2 from ACLA, 2 from CFLAC, and 1
from the School of Information Sciences at the University of Pittsburgh. At the same time, it had
its own director and staff.

95

In period 7, the ACLA libraries took on another challenge. Almost as soon as the dust
from RAD funding and EIN had settled, ACLA leaders launched efforts to re-organize to
become a federated system. From its founding in 1994, ACLA was a non-profit membership
association: libraries could join voluntarily, agree to uphold the membership agreement, and in
return they could expect a share of the RAD funding. The ACLA board mediated between all
the county libraries and the RAD board. ACLA was a pass-through organization. As far as
RAD funding went, this structure worked. The problem was state funding. As a non-profit
member association, ACLA was not recognized by the State Library as a library system: though
individual libraries in ACLA still received state funding and were still part of the library district
headed by the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, ACLA the organization was not eligible for state
benefits. Some ACLA founders recognized that if ACLA became a federated library system in
the eyes of the state, then the association could receive state benefits above and beyond what
individual libraries received. ACLA leaders such as Marilyn Jenkins, the new executive director,
and Al Kamper, an ACLA board member who was also District Coordinator at Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, campaigned for ACLA to become a federated system. Many libraries opposed the
transformation because the reorganization compromised the autonomy of individual libraries.
By the end of 1997, however, the association became a federated library system.
Period 7 was characterized by formula and membership conflicts by ACLA after
achieving the status of a regional asset, maturation of EIN, a movement toward federation status,
and increasing oversight of county libraries by ACLA and the RAD board. The key actors
during period 7 were the ACLA board and executive director, ACLA member libraries, the RAD
board and executive director, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the EIN board and staff, and local
foundations.

96

The decision cycle for period 7 began in 1994 as a new countywide library
organizations—ACLA and EIN—began to work out administrative issues. Almost immediately,
the issue of a federated library system created a new decision process. After extended debate,
the cycle peaked in 1997 when libraries voted to become a federated system.

Period 8: 1998–2011. Period 8 follows ACLA’s turbulent reorganization as a staterecognized federated library system. The association initiated a long-range planning process and
hired Library Planning Associates, the same consulting firm that helped them with a 5-year
planning project in 1996. The consultants’ second report published in early 2001 proposed
several changes, including a dissolution of the Commission on the Future of Libraries, a takeover
of bookmobile services, a change of EIN to a 501(c)3 corporation separate from CLP, and a
takeover of district services from CLP. Some of these changes occurred immediately. In 2002,
EIN renamed to eiNetwork and became a separate corporation with two members, CLP and
ACLA. That same year, the Commission dissolved and ACLA took over administration of
bookmobile services.
During period 8 there was a prolonged debate among ACLA libraries and between the
ACLA membership and the RAD board about the distribution formula. As early as 2001, an
ACLA task force recommended adding performance factors to the distribution formula. The
ACLA membership developed several distribution formulas during this period. In 2009, the
proposed formula was rejected by the RAD board. A revised formula was then approved by the
RAD board, but ACLA soon revisited formula revisions in 2010. Despite over a decade of work
on the funding formula, the association failed to develop a solution that satisfied all libraries and
met the approval of the RAD board.

97

Key actors in period 8 were the ACLA member libraries, the Electronic Information
Network, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the RAD board, and the State Library.
The decision cycle of period 8 was a more protracted one compared to the previous two
accelerated cycles. The period began following the creation of a federated system and with the
rise of a new issue: the distribution formula. The county libraries held extended discussion
regarding this issue, and also consulted with the RAD board. The height of the cycle occurred in
2009 and 2010 when formula revisions were voted down by the RAD board.

Period 9: 2011–2016. Period 9 begins with the completion of a review of ACLA’s
operations by an independent consultant, ParenteBeard. The consultant was hired by the RAD
board to assess ACLA’s finances and to identify areas for improvement. The report found
duplication between ACLA and CLP, and it also identified communication and transparency
issues with ACLA’s governance.
In 2013, in light of the findings of the report, ACLA and CLP leadership resolved to
undertake a re-envisioning process. They hired another consultant, Nicole Swerhun, to facilitate
a countywide conversation about libraries. The study was called Library Service in the 21st
Century. The envisioning process lasted until 2014 when a County-City Library Service panel
issued another report. The report called for a further centralization of services between CLP and
ACLA. It also called for mandatory standards for county libraries.
In 2014, service standards were already mandated and monitored by the State Library.
Compliance with state standards was required to receive state funding. ACLA-specific standards
had been promoted intermittently by the group since 2001, but they were never adopted. Many
libraries objected to the idea of ACLA-specific standards, but by mid-2015 the ACLA board
implemented system-specific standards for all county libraries. The issue of standards caused
98

significant tension between ACLA member libraries and ACLA leadership, exacerbating the
very problems identified by ParenteBeard in 2012 that prompted the city-county library study.
The decision cycle for period 9 started at the beginning of the re-envisioning process.
After the study’s report was issues, several discussions were held with local libraries regarding
the implementation of system standards. Despite objections, the height of the cycle occurred in
2015 when the ACLA board decided unilaterally to implement standards.

4.1.3

Source Materials

4.1.3.1 Overview of source materials used. A third task of stage 1 is to collect source materials
to use in stage 2, data collection and analysis. The collection and analysis of sources occurs in
conjunction with the development of a case definition, period summaries, and period
chronologies described above. Historical case study uses a variety of source types and source
collection techniques in order to collect relevant, trustworthy source materials.
For this study, a total of 967 unique source items were collected. These sources included
archival documents, interview transcripts and notes, and fieldnotes from direct observations.
The segments of coding in some sources applied to different periods in the study. Some reports,
interviews, and historical accounts stretch across multiple periods of time. These documents are
later coded as separate items in stage 2. In order to account for how the same documents may be
coded separately for each relevant period, some sources are counted more than once in the tallies
below. The total number coded sources for the entire study is therefore 988. These source items
consist of a total of 7,553 pages (see Table 4.2). Full citation lists for all source materials used in
each period can be found in Appendix E. Figure 4.5 shows the ratio of source items and pages
collected and used for each period.
99

Table 4.2. Summary of sources and pages by period.

Period

Sources

Pages

1

55

536

2

57

1,266

3

46

559

4

61

973

5

74

640

6

164

626

7

327

1,381

8

110

844

9

94

728

Total

988

7,553

100

0.33

0.35
0.30

Ratio

0.25
0.20

0.17
0.13

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0.18

0.17

0.07
0.06
0.06

1

2

0.07 0.06
0.05

3

0.08
0.07

4

5

0.11 0.11 0.10 0.10

0.08

6

7

8

9

Period
Sources

Pages

Figure 4.5. Ratio of sources and pages by period.

4.1.3.2 Archival and document sources. Documents such as those from archives and
newspapers are the first type of source used in this study. Several relevant archival collections
were visited in order to gather these archival documents. These collections were located at the
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room at the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, the Heinz History Center Detre Library and
Archives, and the Allegheny County Library Association office in West End, Pittsburgh. Virtual
archives on the Allegheny County Library Association Wiki were also used. Details about these
collections are found in Table 4.3.

Table 4.3. Archival collections used in this study.

Collection name

Archive location
101

1

Director’s Office Collection

William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Oakland, Pittsburgh

2

District Services Collection,
Series 2

William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Oakland, Pittsburgh

3

Civic Club of Allegheny County

University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Point
Breeze, Pittsburgh

4

County Commissioners Minutes

Detre Library and Archives, Heinz History Center,
Strip District, Pittsburgh

5

History File, Allegheny County
Library Association

Allegheny County Library Association office, West
End, Pittsburgh

6

Allegheny County Library
Association Wiki

http://acla.pbworks.com

In addition to archival collections, newspaper collections were also used. Newspaper
articles were found on microfilm and in the Pennsylvania Room at the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh.
Additionally, documents were used from the Allegheny County Law Library and the
libraries at the University of Pittsburgh.

102

4.1.3.3 Interviews. Interviews are a second source type gathered for this study. Unstructured
interviews were conducted with key informants in a snowball-like process.

The interview

process began with an interview with a key informant central to the case. Subsequent potential
interviewees were identified in that initial interview. Each subsequent interview also identified
further potential interview candidates. Potential candidates were chosen who might address
outstanding questions about the case or who could further elucidate certain details or events. A
variety of interviewees of different positions were sought. Candidates were contacted by phone
or by email at which time the details of the study were explained.
Interviews were conducted in an unstructured way. This means that interviewees were
asked as an introductory question a broad, open-ended prompt such as “Could you tell me
about…?” Follow-up probes were then interjected into the interview when necessary. No
universal interview protocol was used for all participants. Instead, several key questions were
prepared in advance of each interview that related specifically to that interviewee and their
experiences. The objective of the unstructured format was to have interviewees recall their own
thoughts and experiences in a way dictated by their own sense of importance and their own
perspectives. The unstructured format was also adopted to avoid introducing interviewer bias.
In order to incorporate diverse perspectives on the case, interviews were conducted with
different types of actors, including library administrators, librarians, trustees, and politicians.
Library administrators are those in administrative positions who have management
responsibilities. Librarians are those who carry out library services but have no management
responsibilities. Trustees are those who serve or have served on library boards. And politicians
are those who hold or have held elected office and who have been involved in library-related
organizations.

103

In order to protect the confidentiality of interview sources, gender-neutral pseudonyms
were assigned that reflect the sources’ positions. A total of 25 interviews were conducted with
15 unique individuals for a total time of more than 34 interview hours (Table 4.4).

The

interviews were conducted from December 2014 through April 2016. All interviews were held
in-person with the exception of one phone interview. Notes were taken during all interviews,
and interviews were recorded whenever possible. Transcripts of the interviews were created in
the event that an interview was recorded. A single interview might produce both interview notes
and an interview transcript. Both were used as source materials when they yielded different
coding segments. Segments from a single interview often spanned across more than one period.

Table 4.4. Interviews conducted for this study.

Interview

Interviewee

Duration (minutes)

1

Library Administrator 7

60

2

Library Administrator 7

67

3

Library Administrator 6

60

4

Librarian 2

60

5

Trustee 3

70

6

Trustee 2

56

7

Library Administrator 2

50

8

Library Administrator 4

123

9

Library Administrator 5

101

10

Library Administrator 3

86

11

Politician 1

66

12

Library Administrator 1

130

13

Library Administrator 6

60

104

14

Trustee 1

45

15

Library Administrator 1

360

16

Library Administrator 9

15

17

Library Administrator 6

56

18

Librarian 1

125

19

Library Administrator 3

56

20

Library Administrator 5

75

21

Library Administrator 2

35

22

Trustee 2

74

23

Library Administrator 1

120

24

Librarian 1

62

25

Library Administrator 8

56

Total (minutes)

2,068

Total (hours)

34.46

4.1.3.4 Fieldwork. In addition to archival and interview sources, this study used observations
and artifacts collected from fieldwork as source materials. Fieldwork began in March 2015 and
continued until March 2016. Fieldwork was conducted at public meetings. Several different
types of meetings were attended in order to different aspects of the case. The meetings included
Allegheny County Library Association general membership meetings, Board of Director
meetings, and Librarians Advisory Council meetings.

A Regional Asset District proposal

hearing was also attended. Fieldwork was conducted at a total of 9 public meetings for a total of
over 14 observation hours (see Table 4.5).

105

Table 4.5. Durations of meetings.

Meeting

Duration

1

1 hour

2

2 hours

3

2 hours

4

2 hours

5

2 hours

6

2 hours

7

2 hours

8

1 hours 16 min.

9

30 minutes

Total

14 hours 46 min.

4.1.3.5 Other sources. A number of other miscellaneous sources were retrieved for this study.
Sources were retrieved from the World Wide Web, the Wayback Machine of the Internet
Archive, a videocassette, social media such as Facebook, and online discussion board posts.

4.1.3.6 Source material types. Source types can be distinguished into several categories,
including meeting minutes, letters, and reports. These categories are described in Appendix G.

106

4.1.3.7 Source material collections and origins. Sources were collected from a variety of
different locations. The number and ratio of sources collected from each location for each of the
9 periods is shown in Appendix G.

4.1.4

Summary: Stage 1 Results

Stage 1, source collection and analysis, developed a full and detailed description of the case.
This was done by producing several results: a case definition, periodization of the case complete
with narratives and chronologies for each period, and a collection of several types of source
materials relevant to the case. The concept of a decision cycle was introduced as a way to think
about the case over time and to distinguish one period from another. Nine different periods were
identified from 1924 to 2016. The source materials gathered in stage 1 for each period will be
used in stage 2 for systematic coding and analysis.
The 3 tasks of stage 1—define the case, periodize, and collect sources—occurred in
tandem: as more sources were found and analyzed for relevance and meaning, fuller descriptions
of the case were developed, leading to more detailed descriptions of each period and further
possible sites for source collection. Theoretical sampling was used as a method to fill out the
description of the case while consulting with a sample of source materials. Principles of source
collection included collecting as many source materials as possible from as broad and as diverse
an array of perspectives as possible.
The collection of source materials gathered in stage 1 included archival documents,
interview notes and transcripts, and field observations. A total of 988 sources and a total of
7,553 pages of source material were collected. The archival documents were gathered from
several sites in Pittsburgh, including the Oliver Room at Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the
107

Heinz History Center Detre Library and Archives, the University of Pittsburgh Archives Service
Center, Allegheny County Law Library, Allegheny County Library Association headquarters in
West End, various Web-based online collections and social media, and local newspapers. A total
of 25 separate interviews were conducted with 15 individuals related to the case.

These

participants were identified through snowball sampling and contacted via phone or email. In
addition to archival documents and interviews, fieldnotes were taken from direct observations at
9 public meetings. These specific meetings were attended because they were sites of formal
decision-making—formal public spheres—where important decisions and discussions related to
the case could be observed.
During the process of source collection, all source materials were digitized and then
managed using EndNote in order to facilitate the addition of metadata and in order to later export
them into NVivo for coding in stage 2.

4.2

STAGE 2: DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS

Data collection and analysis is the second stage of historical case study. The 3 tasks of data
collection and analysis are: develop the coding instrument, pilot coding, and main coding. This
study uses qualitative content analysis to complete these tasks. Qualitative content analysis is a
distinctive kind of qualitative coding technique where a coding instrument is developed, tested,
and then applied systematically to source materials. The data collection and analysis stage in this
study results in a data- and concept-driven coding frame, one that is valid, reliable, and one that
incorporates new concepts related to the circulation of power model. The stage also produces
data to be used in stage 3, the data interpretation stage. Stage 2 addresses research questions
108

SQ1 and SQ2. SQ1 asks: What does a tested and refine Machtkreislauf model look like? SQ2
asks: What does the evolution of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh look like?
Stage 2 develops new concepts and models to address SQ1, and it develops a coding instrument
that is used to address SQ2.

4.2.1

The Coding Frame

The first task of stage 2 is to develop the coding frame.

The coding frame is a set of

hierarchically-organized categories and sub-categories that are used to describe the source
materials gathered in stage 1. The data generated using the coding frame is then used to form a
theoretical understanding of the case. The coding frame is an interpretive instrument, and like
any instrument, it must be developed and calibrated with respect to an existing theoretical
framework while using source materials particular to a case. Development of the coding frame is
done in an iterative way by establishing categories, then applying these categories to the source
materials in order to determine how well the categories adequately describe the material. The
full coding frame for this project can be found in Appendix I. Below are descriptions of the
categories and sub-categories of the coding frame.

4.2.1.1 Concept-driven foundations. Data is the intersection of source material and existing
theory. The framework of a project is its theoretical backdrop—it determines what aspects of the
source materials are examined, in what way, and in a way that produces data.

Without

understanding the framework of a project, data from that project are without context—they are
meaningless. The central ideas of this project are used to build the categories and sub-categories
of the coding frame, which is then used to generate data. It is therefore important to understand
109

the foundational ideas of the coding frame so that the data from this project are meaningful. This
project uses ideas drawn from sociology, communication, political science, and information
science. The central concept-driven ideas of the coding frame are explained below. Conceptdriven means that the ideas were borrowed from others and integrated into the coding frame
before the coding frame was applied to source materials.

Generalized media and communication. The first idea undergirding this project is
that communication includes transmissions of not only linguistic, but also non-linguistic
information. In other words, communication is not only the exchange of words; it is also an
exchange of power. This idea is drawn from sociology and the works of Talcott Parsons and his
student Niklas Luhmann.

Luhmann explains what is meant by a generalized media of

communication:
Generalized symbolic patterns that fulfill these requirements can be concepts that
organize individual selection chains. They can embrace different systems and organize
the selectivity of one system in relation to the· way in which others use their power of
selection. This type of pattern we call generalized media of communication. (Luhmann,
1976, pp. 511-512).
Luhmann goes on to say how power is a form of generalized media:
They employ their selection pattern as a motive to accept the reduction, so that people
join with others in a narrow world of common understandings, complementary
expectations, and determinable issues. Media are not only words, symbols, or, codes;
they are meaningful constellations of combined selectivity which can be signified by
words, symbolized, and codified legally, methodologically or otherwise. Prominent

110

examples are money and power, and we would like to add truth, love, and perhaps art.
(Luhmann, 1976, p. 512)
The idea that power is communicated between actors as a way to coordinate action is central to
this project.

Social and economic power. The Machtkreislauf model introduced by Habermas
(1996) contains two forms of power: communicative and administrative. Habermas’s later work,
however, contains other forms of power, including social power. This project therefore adds two
types of social power in order to update the Machtkreislauf model with ideas from Habermas
(2006). The first addition is economic power. Economic power means transmissions of money.
The second addition is what are called “backroom deals.” Backroom deals are a form of social
power—they rely on social status and personal connection as a means to influence decision
making.

Components of communication. The social theory of Habermas, including the
Machtkreislauf model, assumes a communicative approach to political science and sociology.
Because communication is so central to the ideas in the social theory used in this project, it is
important to identify the general components of communication and explain how these
components are incorporated into the coding frame.
The general components of communication are described by Harold Lasswell and Claude
Shannon. Lasswell defines communication as:
Who
Says What
In Which Channel

111

To Whom
With What Effect?
(Lasswell, 1948, p. 37)
In Lasswell’s schema, there is a sender and receiver, a medium (channel), a message, and a
result.

The general communication system visualized by Shannon (1948) uses these same

components, but also recognizes that noise can interfere with a signal transmission (see Figure
4.6).

INFORMATION
SOURCE

RECEIVER

TRANSMITTER

SIGNAL

DESTINATION

RECEIVED
SIGNAL
MESSAGE

MESSAGE

NOISE
SOURCE

Figure 4.6. A general communication system (Shannon, 1948, p. 2).

The coding frame uses the basic ideas from Lasswell and Shannon. The sender and
receiver are called actor and audience, respectively. Power is one medium or channel of
transmission. The other means of communication is legitimation. Legitimation refers to the
context out of which a message is sent, whether a message was discussed or agreed upon. The

112

message of the exchange is called the issue. The effect of a communicative exchange is called
its implementation.

Who or what is an actor? Actors are essential components of communication and of
the coding frame in this project. But what counts as an actor? Parsons (1951, p. 26) defines
actors as bundles of units. The units are the social acts performed by the actor and oriented
toward other actors, and statuses and roles of the actors and audiences, and the composite of all
the actor’s acts, status, and roles within the social system. Importantly, actors can be individual
or collective in nature. This definition of actor is used for this project, where actors can be both
individual, biological beings and abstract entities such as formal groups.

Communicative events. Analysis and coding of the sources requires some definition of
a standardized unit of coding, some way to identify what the coding segments will be. Following
Luhmann (1995, p. 154), this study adopts the notion of a “communicative event” for the
smallest analyzable unit of coding, the unit to form single coding segments in the source
material. A communicative event is a selection of meaning that is transmitted from an actor to
an audience.

The medium of transmission can be linguistic (e.g., requests, proposals,

explanations) or non-linguistic (e.g., money, power). The event terminates with some response
or reaction from the addressee. Similarly, Parsons (1951, p. 24) calls events “acts” and defines
an act as “a unit in a social system so far as it is part of a process of interaction between its
author and other actors.” This study adopts the notion of event or act as the unit of coding and,
by coding and compiling these events, uses these units to sketch out a general communicative
process for each period.

113

4.2.1.2 Data-driven foundations. The data-driven nature of this project—the application and
comparison of existing concepts in the Machtkreislauf model to source materials—led to
conceptual refinements and new conceptual ideas. These developments are described below.
Unlike the concept-driven ideas described above, the data-driven ideas were added to the coding
frame in the preliminary applications of the coding frame to source materials.

Formal decision. Flynn (2004) identified an ambiguity in the notion of communicative
power used by Habermas (1996). The problem is that communicative power is used to refer to
two things: 1) discursive power generated through discussion in the public sphere that then
influences decisions, and 2) the formal decisions themselves. In order to solve this ambiguity,
this project develops a distinct type of power besides communicative power, administrative
power, and social power. This new type of power is called formal decision. Formal decision
refers to a binding decision made by a formal body. Communicative power, therefore, retains a
single meaning—discursive power generated in a public sphere that influences formal decisions.
A conceptual drawing of formal decision can be found in Figure 4.7. A more polished
concept image showing formal decision and its relation to other types of power is shown in
Figure 4.8. These figures illustrate the relationships of formal decision, communicative power,
administrative power, and social power. As seen in the figures, formal decision occurs at a
decision point—the crest of the wave. Leading up to the decision is communicative power—the
influence that a public sphere has on decision making body with respect to a certain issue. The
decision point marks the difference between communicative power and administrative power.
Once a decision is made and formal decision power is cast, the issuing body can base
administrative power on that formal decision. Administrative power may take the form of
enforcement, sanctions, grants, and so on. Like both communicative power and administrative
114

power, formal decision power has an actor and an audience—those who transmit the power and
those who are targeted by the power.

Figure 4.7. Research journal conceptual sketches on formal decision (3-7-16).

115

Communicative Power

Formal decision

Administrative Power

Public
Private

Social and Economic
Power

Social and Economic
Power

Figure 4.8. Formal decision and its relation to other forms of power.

Narrowcast vs. broadcast. Besides formal decision power, a second distinction that
was found necessary after preliminary applications of the coding frame was the distinction
between narrowcast and broadcast. The distinction is needed because in some communicative
events, there is a distinct, targeted, and identifiable audience. These are cases of narrowcasts. In
other cases, however, the audience is not a distinct individual or group. The audience may be
whoever can be reached by the transmission or whoever is tuned in.

These are cases of

broadcasts. Audiences in the coding frame were therefore distinguished into broadcast audiences
and narrowcast audiences.

Diffuse public vs. coalesced public. Consistent with the distinction between broadcast
and narrowcast is that between diffuse public and coalesced public. These two types of publics
have different roles in a communication system. A diffuse public is the audience of a broadcast.
The public is diffuse because it is not clear who exactly receives or responds to a broadcast. A
diffuse public cannot create or respond to a transmission without taking on a more substantive
form. A coalesced public is a public with a more discernible identity. A coalesced public can
both receive and send transmissions.
116

Circuits of power. A central data-driven idea of this study is the circuit. During the
early development of the coding frame, it was determined that the Machtkreislauf model did not
adequately fit the source material. The problem with the Machtkreislauf model is that it assumes
a single decision-making core. The original model is organized using a single set of concentric
circles and a single set of pathways for communicative and administrative power. This model
did not fit with the case of libraries in Pittsburgh because, in reality, there is more than one
decision-making core, there are multiple concentric rings, and there are several pathways for
communicative and administrative power. The first realization that the circulation of power
model did not fit the case came when sketching out the various relationships of the Allegheny
County Library Association with other entities (see Figure 4.9). Fieldnotes about the library
system show that it is complex with multiple decision-making bodies that, taken together, do not
display a concentric, hierarchical structure.

117

Figure 4.9. Sketches on the distributed, non-hierarchical structure of ACLA (2-22-16).

Rather than force the existing model to fit or search for a different model, the
Machtkreislauf model was instead modified to fit the case. The ideas of a single core and a
single set of concentric rings were abandoned. Other ideas, including the two types of power and
the three components—core, inner periphery, and other periphery—were salvaged because they
accurately describe the case. The result of this process of modification was the idea of a circuit.

118

The basic idea of a circuit is that there are multiple decision-making cores, inner
peripheries, and outer peripheries throughout society.

Looking back, it might be said that

formative ideas for a circuit emerged as early as August 2014 (see Figure 4.10). These ideas
were further developed while constructing the coding frame and during the pilot phase (see
Figure 4.11). Ideas for how to visualize and combine circuits were developed during the main
phase (see Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13).

Figure 4.10. Formative ideas for a circuit (8-26-14).

119

Figure 4.11. Research journal sketches on formative ideas for circuits (4-10-16).

120

Figure 4.12. Circuits take on a new structure; the idea of tessellation emerges (9-17-16).

121

Figure 4.13. Newest iterations of circuit and tessellation structures (9-18-16).

A circuit has 4 positions and multiple types of power that flow between them (see Figure
4.14). The first three positions resemble those of the original Machtkreislauf model, but the
fourth position is new. The first position is the core. The core of a circuit is its decision-making
body, such as a board, a director, or a court. A core can be polycephalous. The second position
is the inner periphery. The inner periphery administers functions or tasks as assigned by the
core. The third position is the outer periphery. The outer periphery is where the core and inner
periphery come into contact with actors from the circuit’s environment. The fourth position in a
circuit is its diffuse public, where the core and inner periphery transmit broadcasts.

122

Actor 2

Core

Diffuse
Public
Circuit 1
Actor 1

Inner
Periphery

Actor 3
Outer
Periphery

Figure 4.14. Positions in a circuit: core, inner periphery, outer periphery, diffuse public.

Individual circuits can combined to form tessellations. That is, tessellations are larger
social structures that consist of interlocking circuits and actors (see Figure 4.15). The term
tessellation was chosen due to the repeated, polygonal pattern that emerges as circuits combine.

123

Actor
Core
Circuit

Inner periphery
Outer periphery
Diffuse public

Figure 4.15. Tessellated circuits.

A circuit is an example of what Parsons (1951, p. 25) calls a relational institution. A
relational institution has two aspects: positions and roles. A position is the place in an institution
that an actor occupies relative to other positions in the institution. The position accords an actor
certain powers relative to actors in other positions of the institution. In a circuit, for instance,
actors can inhabit the positions of core, inner periphery, outer periphery, and diffuse public. In
each of these positions, actors play certain roles. A role is what the actor does in that position,
whether it is a sender or receiver, whether it transmits meaning through one type of power or
another. In a circuit, there are two main roles—sender and receiver—and four main types of
power that can be exchanged: communicative, administrative, formal decision, and social.
Actors can occupy multiple positions in a circuit or a tessellation. Actors can also play multiple
roles simultaneously. Parsons (1951, p. 26) calls actors “bundles” of positions and roles.

124

Circuits compose tessellations, and the concept of a tessellation can be combined with
case data using network visualization software in order to form an empirical model (see Figure
4.16). In the far-right tessellation can be seen the actors (black nodes), circuits (red nodes) and
the various positions and directionalities of the actors within the circuits (colored edges).
Directionality in graphs is shown using curved edges where the flow follows the curve
clockwise.

Figure 4.16. Transformation of circuits to tessellation using case data and graphing software.

4.2.1.3 Categories and sub-categories of the coding frame. A full coding frame that was used
in the main coding is found in Appendix I. Below are short descriptions of each of the main
categories and sub-categories in the coding frame. Fuller descriptions complete with examples,
indicators, and decision rules can be found in Appendix I.

Power. Power is the first category of the coding frame.

Power is a form of

communication, a transmission from sender to receiver. In a circuit or tessellation of circuits,
power is visualized as a vector or edge.

There are four types of power: administrative,
125

communicative, formal decision, and social. Administrative and communicative power can take
the form of narrowcasts or broadcasts depending on the audience. Social power can take the
form of economic power or backroom deals.

Year. Years are coded to indicate the time when a communicative event occurred. The
year range in the coding frame is from 1924 to 2016.

Actors. The actors were organized by type to facilitate coding. There are several types
of actors in the coding frame. These include federal government, state government, county
government, municipal and city government, school districts, the Regional Asset District, library
groups, civil society, economic system, and other.

Actor positions and roles. Actors occupy positions and play roles in circuits. There
were 13 circuits identified in this study: 1) national, 2) state, 3) county, 4) city, 5) ACLA, 6),
intra-library, 7) municipal, 8) school district, 9) RAD, 10), EIN, 11) civil society, 12) economic,
and 13) unknown. Circuits are identified and distinguished from other circuits by their decisionmaking cores. The basic structure for each of the circuits is the same: circuits have four
positions—core, inner periphery, outer periphery, and diffuse public—and they display patterns
of power transmissions. In the outer peripheries of circuits are suppliers and customers. These
terms are borrowed from the Machtkreislauf model. A customer is a coalesced public that
attempts to procure benefits from the core for their particular constituency.

Suppliers are

coalesced publics that attempt to influence core decision-making through moral-practical
discourse. Despite a common structure, however, there are nuances specific to each circuit. In
many cases, certain actors consistently occupy certain positions in the circuits. This does not

126

mean that exceptions do not occur, but the stability and recurring nature of some actor positions
provides a general idea of how the different circuits are organized.

Audiences
Audiences in the coding frame are largely the same as actors.

The key difference

between actors and audiences are the case of broadcasts. There are several kinds of audiences
that receive broadcasts and are not included in the list of actors. These audiences are described
below.

Audience positions and roles. The audience positions and roles are largely the same as
actor positions and roles.

The exception to this rule are cases of audiences that receive

broadcasts. In a circuit, these audiences occupy the position of a diffuse public. During coding,
then, in any communicative event where an audience received a broadcast, that audience was
coded as a diffuse public.

Issues.
The issues contained in the coding frame and coded for in the main analysis phase are
described below in Appendix I.

Legitimation. As described in sections 2.2, legitimation is a public sphere process. It
refers to argumentation about an issue where all those affected by a decision attempt to reach a
consensus about it. There are several types of legitimation included in the coding frame of this
study, described in Appendix I.

127

Implementation. Implementation is the effect of a communicative event. There are
several types of implementation included in the coding frame in this study, described in
Appendix I.

4.2.2

The Pilot Phase

After the development of the coding frame, the next task of stage 2, data collection and analysis,
is testing of the coding frame in the pilot coding phase. Pilot coding is necessary in order to
ensure consistency of the coding frame.

This study used a second coder and inter-coder

reliability testing during the pilot phase. A total of 116 sources, or 11.7 percent of all sources
collected, were coded during the pilot phase. Sources were coded from all periods of the case.
There were 9 trial coding rounds, and during each coding round different sources were coded.
Inter-rater reliability was measured qualitatively and quantitatively. The average Cohen’s kappa
score for all rounds was 0.967. The pilot coding is explained in further detail in Appendix H.

4.2.3

The Main Analysis Phase

Following the development of the coding frame and the pilot coding phase, the third task of stage
2 is the main coding. During the main coding phase, the coding frame is used to analyze all the
source materials of the case. The main coding results in coding matrices for all the periods of the
case. These coding tables constitute the data of this project. This data is then used and
interpreted in stage 3 in order to construct an explanatory account of the public sphere and its
effects on the development of public libraries.

128

4.2.3.1 Timeline. The main coding took place over a 3-month span, from August 6, 2016 to
November 6, 2016.

Importantly, qualitative content analysis is done manually.

A paced

schedule was therefore used to manage fatigue and ensure consistent progress (see Table 4.6).
At least 10 sources were coded each day, 70 each week, and 300 each month. Additional sources
were coded per day when feasible. A qualitative data analysis software package, NVivo, was
used during the coding process to manage the source material, coding frame, and data.

Table 4.6. Number of sources coded per month.

Month

Date range

Sources coded

1

August 6–September 5

355

2

September 6–October 5

300

3

October 6–November 6

333

Total

988

129

4.2.3.2 Overview of coding data. A total of 988 sources were coded during the main coding
phase. These sources consisted of 7,553 pages of material. A total of 1,773 segments were
identified and coded from this material (see Table 4.7). This is an average of 1.8 segments per
source. The main coding resulted in a total of 19,503 data points because there are 1,773 rows
and 11 columns in the coding table. The ratios of sources, pages, and segments by period are
shown in Figure 4.17. In the interests of research transparency, open data, and data re-use,
coding tables have been included in Appendix K. Keys for these tables are included in Appendix
J. Data were transferred manually from NVivo to Excel after the main coding was completed.

0.33

0.35
0.30

0.26

Ratio

0.25
0.20

0.17

0.05
0.00

0.18

0.13

0.15
0.10

0.17 0.16

0.09

0.07
0.07 0.06
0.06

1

2

0.11
0.11 0.11 0.10 0.10
0.10

0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.05

3

4

5

6

7

8

Period
Sources

Pages

Segments

Figure 4.17. Ratios of sources, pages, and segments by period.

130

9

Table 4.7. Summary data for main coding phase.

4.2.4

Period

Total
coded
sources

Total pages of
source material
coded

Total coding
segments

Data points
(segments x 11)

1

55

536

121

1,331

2

57

1,266

166

1,826

3

46

559

135

1,485

4

61

973

97

1,067

5

74

640

157

1,727

6

164

626

284

3,124

7

327

1,381

455

5,005

8

110

844

188

2,068

9

94

728

170

1,870

Total

988

7,553

1,773

19,503

Summary: Stage 2 Results

Stage 2, data collection and analysis, used the sources gathered and the periods identified in
stage 1 as the basis for conducting a systematic coding process. The purpose of the coding
process was to describe each of the periods of the case using a common lens informed by the
Machtkreislauf model. The coding process produced data about the case that will be used in
stage 3 for interpretation. The name for the systematic coding technique used in stage 2 is
131

qualitative content analysis. Qualitative content analysis proceeded in 3 steps: development of
the coding frame, pilot coding, and main coding. During stage 2, several results were produced
from the completion of these 3 tasks.

During the development of the coding frame, the

Machtkreislauf model was used to inform in a concept-driven way the main categories of the
frame. This resulted in new concepts that were introduced to the frame, and while doing so the
Machtkreislauf model was revised in order to better fit the case. These new concepts included
formal decision, narrowcast and broadcast, diffuse public and coalesced public, and circuits of
power. A new general model, called a tessellation, also resulted during the development of the
frame. The tessellation was introduced as a way to model the case’s periods using network
visualization techniques. These new concepts and the new modelling technique, together with
the combination with other existing concepts, resolved existing criticisms of the Machtkreislauf
model identified in the literature review. They resulted in a coding instrument that fit the case
well. The main categories of the finalized coding frame included power, year, actors, audiences,
positions and roles, issues, legitimation, and implementation.
Following the development of the coding frame, the frame was pilot-tested by applying it
systematically to a portion of the source materials. An inter-coder comparison was conducted by
the principal researcher and another qualified individual using both qualitative and quantitative
metrics. Over 9 trial coding rounds, 116 sources—11.7 percent of the total number of sources in
the study—were coded across all 9 periods of the case. At this time, minor revisions to the
coding frame were made. At the completion of the pilot phase, the average Cohen’s kappa score
for all rounds was 0.967. Through the pilot coding process, the coding frame was found to be
valid and reliable according to qualitative and quantitative measures. The pilot phase resulted in
a coding frame ready to use for main coding.

132

After the pilot coding phase was completed, the main coding phase was conducted.
During the main coding, all 988 source materials in the study and all 7,553 pages of source
material were coded using the coding frame established in the pilot phase. The main coding
identified 1,773 segments of coding and generated 19,503 data points. The coding process was
conducted using NVivo coding software. Following the coding, the codes were transferred into
Excel in order to create coding matrices. Organization of the data in this tabular form will
facilitate data interpretation in stage 3. The main coding therefore resulted in data matrices.

4.3

STAGE 3: DATA INTERPRETATION

Data interpretation is the third stage of historical case study. This stage uses the data generated
in stage 2 as a basis for forming descriptive and explanatory accounts of the evolution of the
case. Stage 3 in this project addresses SQ2 and SQ3. SQ2 asks: What does the evolution of the
regional public library system in greater Pittsburgh look like?

This question calls for a

descriptive account. SQ3 asks: How does the public sphere affect public library development?
This question calls for an explanatory account.
The method used in stage 3 is qualitative comparative analysis. Comparative analysis
here means to observe the changes or continuity in the case over time, then describe and explain
the changes or continuity. Some form of comparison is essential for the tasks of describing and
explaining because it is through the act of comparison that relevant causal mechanisms can be
identified.

For example, for two periods with seemingly similar conditions but different

outcomes, it might be asked what was significantly different about the periods that caused the
two different outcomes to occur. Likewise, for periods with seemingly different conditions but
133

the same outcomes, it may be asked what shared conditions were significant in each period that
led to the same outcomes. Comparative analysis is the process of identifying the conditions that
matter—the causes—that explain why certain outcomes obtain in some periods and not others.
There are two tasks achieved by comparative analysis in this data interpretation stage: 1)
compare the periods over time; and 2) explain the changes.

In this stage, the descriptive

component occurs first. Data displays are used to present summary data from the case. The data
from stage 2 is used as the basis for these displays. The displays are interpreted and described as
a means for identifying how the case remained the same or changed over time. In other words,
the similarities and differences in each period are described.

Following this, the second,

explanatory component of stage 3 develops a causal account. The descriptions are used as the
basis for developing a causal theory that can explain why the outcomes occurred as they did.
The explanatory component also uses data from stage 2, but it uses the data to identify the
outcomes and the causal configurations that explain them. The second, explanatory task uses a
specific technique called crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis (csQCA) as a way to develop
the causal account.

4.3.1

Comparison of periods

The first task of stage 3 is to compare the periods of the case descriptively. This is done by
presenting the data about the periods in a summary way. At the outset of this task, it is not clear
what the causal conditions might be. The data must therefore be interrogated broadly and in an
open-ended way. Summary data for the case is useful for observing the entire case over time in
order to compare its periods. The summary displays use ratios as a means for comparing the
periods on an equal scale. Ratios are used because the numbers of sources and segments differed
134

in each period. More granular descriptions of the data from each period that are not intended to
be compared across periods can be found in Appendix L.

4.3.1.1 Power. Figure 4.18 shows the types of power and how they differed by period.
Communicative narrowcast was proportionally the greatest type of power in every period.
Period 1 and period 4 were the two periods where communicative narrowcasts were the greatest:
communicative narrowcasts represented over 50 percent of the power types exhibited in those
periods. In all periods, communicative narrowcasts represented over 30 percent of power types.
Formal decisions, communicative broadcasts, and administrative narrowcasts were present in all
periods in a moderate way. Administrative narrowcasts seemed to trend upward over time,
whereas communicative narrowcasts seemed to trend downward. Social economic power was
first exhibited in period 2, and for all following periods it was consistently exhibited.
Administrative broadcasts and social backroom deals represented relatively minimal proportions
of the power types found in each period. There were two small spikes in social backroom deals:
one in period 5 and one in period 9.

135

0.600

0.546

0.537
0.474

0.500

0.324

0.190

0.306

0.261

0.259
0.223

0.100

0.406

0.337

0.300

0.200

0.459

0.389

0.400

Power ratio

0.444

0.191

0.170

0.217

0.163
0.102

0.133

0.144

0.211

0.185

0.113

0.176

0.127
0.057

0.063
0.078 0.052 0.093
0.062
0.074
0.033
0.006
0.038
0.032
0.007
0.041
0.008
0.000
0.000 0.000 0.013
0.000
0.000 0.000 0.008
1
2
3
4
5
6

0.185
0.141
0.136
0.079

0.160
0.133
0.122

0.000

0.000

7

8

0.112
0.094
0.065
0.012
0.006
9

Period
Communicative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Administrative broadcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Social backroom deals

Figure 4.18. Types of power over time.

4.3.1.2 Actors. Figure 4.19 shows the 10 most prevalent actors across the case. It can be seen
from this figure that there is no consistently-dominant actor across all periods. In period 1, the
Civic Club of Allegheny County initiated a high proportion of activity, but influence by the Civic
Club largely disappeared in subsequent periods. The Board of County Commissioners was a
consistent actor in periods 1 through 5, but its influence waned from period 6 onward.
Pennsylvania General Assembly also initiated some activity in early periods, as well as in
periods 6 and 8, but in periods 5, 7, and 9, the influence of the state legislature was minimal.

136

Mass media outlets were a prevalent actor in several periods, including period 1, period 2, and
from period 4 onward. There was an especially high proportion of transmissions sent by mass
media outlets in period 8. The Pennsylvania State Library exhibited a strong presence in the
early-middle periods, from period 3 to period 5. Similarly, though not as strongly, local libraries
in Allegheny County were moderately active from period 3 through period 7. CLASP and the
Commission on the Future of Libraries both appeared as strong actors in period 5. They
continued to exhibit a large proportion of activity in period 6. Beginning in period 6, however,
two other strong actors appeared: ACLA and the Regional Asset District. The Regional Asset
District maintained a strong presence from period 6 through period 9.

ACLA became an

especially prevalent actor in periods 7, 8, and 9.

0.450
0.400

0.391

0.380

0.378
0.329

0.350

Ratios

0.300
0.229

0.250
0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000

0.223

0.196
0.163

0.159
0.127
0.089

0.099
0.072
0.000

0.054
0.018
0.000

1

2

0.044
0.015
0.000

3

0.072

0.051
0.045
0.000

0.021
0.010
0.000
4

5

0.165
0.120
0.063 0.067
0.056
0.035
0.000 0.021
6

0.119
0.105

0.122

0.020
0.015
0.000 0.002
7

0.037
0.021
0.000

0.005

8

Period
Civic Club of Allegheny County

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Board of County Commissioners

Mass media outlets

Pennsylvania state library

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Commission on the Future of Libraries

CLASP

ACLA

Regional Asset District

Figure 4.19. Top 10 actors over time.

137

0.100

0.086
0.047
0.029
0.012
0.000
9

4.3.1.3 Actor positions. Figure 4.20 shows the proportions of actor positions in each period.
Activity from the core, inner periphery, and outer periphery all rise and fall across the case. Core
activity seems to mirror inner periphery activity inversely: in periods where activity from core is
low or falls, activity from the inner periphery is high or rises. From period 1 to period 6,
increased activity from the outer periphery activity presages increased activity from core
positions. This pattern ceases in period 7 when activity from the outer periphery remains low as
core activity remains high.

0.700

Position ratio

0.600

0.529

0.584

0.500
0.400

0.444
0.339
0.289

0.300
0.200

0.548
0.423

0.132

0.127

1

2

0.371 0.344

0.333
0.222

0.446

0.206

0.210

0.387
0.363
0.250

0.431
0.418

0.000

0.378
0.294

0.152
0.074

0.100
3

4

5

6

7

0.576

8

0.129

9

Period
Core

Inner periphery

Outer periphery

Figure 4.20. Actor positions over time.

4.3.1.4 Audiences. Figure 4.21 shows the top 10 audiences of the case across the 9 periods. As
with the most prevalent actors across the case, no single audience is consistently strong in all

138

periods. The Civic Club of Allegheny County is the most frequent audience in period 1, but it
does not remain an audience beyond period 2. A number of audiences remain moderately stable
across all periods, including the Pennsylvania General Assembly, mass media outlets, and the
Board of County Commissioners. Local libraries in Allegheny County appear as an audience in
period 3 and maintain an audience presence throughout the following periods. The Pennsylvania
State Library appears as an audience in period 3, it peaks as an audience in period 4, and then it
remains a minimally-frequent audience in the remaining periods. As was the case of actors,
CLASP and the Commission on the Future of Libraries appear as strong actors in periods 5 and
6. The Regional Asset District, and especially ACLA, then become prevalent audiences from
period 6 onward.

0.500
0.447

0.450

0.459

0.413

0.400
0.350

Ratios

0.300
0.259
0.250
0.200

0.216
0.190
0.169

0.150

0.174
0.102

0.100

0.078

0.050
0.008
0.000

0.234

0.000

1

0.030
0.006
0.000
2

0.173
0.148
0.113

0.111
0.103

0.089
0.059
0.044
0.000
3

0.093

0.072
0.041
0.010
0.000

0.127
0.096

0.089
0.038
0.000

4

5

0.136

0.127

0.121

0.108

0.120

0.033
0.009 0.007
0.004
7

0.000

0.043
0.021 0.027
0.016
0.011
0.000
8

Period
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Board of County Commissioners

Local libraries in Allegheny County

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

Broadcast to County libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Regional Asset District

ACLA

21st century library study

Figure 4.21. Top 10 audiences over time.

139

0.071

0.059

0.028
0.018
0.007
0.000
6

0.094

0.105

0.067

9

0.041
0.018
0.006
0.000

4.3.1.5 Audience positions. Figure 4.22 shows audience positions across the periods of the case.
Proportions of inner periphery and diffuse public exhibit a near-inverse relationship: when inner
periphery ratios increase, diffuse public ratios decrease. The exception to this rule is the change
from period 4 to 5 when both ratios increase. Core and diffuse public ratios follow a nearparallel pattern until period 7 when the ratios begin to exhibit an inverse relationship. Outer
periphery ratios show a trend downward from period 2 onward. In periods 7, 8, and 9, audiences
in the outer periphery were audiences in less than 1 percent of coded segments.

0.700

Position ratios

0.600

0.603

0.578

0.535

0.500
0.400
0.300

0.223

0.200
0.100
0.000

0.392

0.392
0.235

0.252

0.091

0.211
0.163 0.089

0.083

0.081

1

2

3

0.401

0.320
0.227
0.062
4

0.318
0.229
0.051
5

0.394
0.313
0.282

0.440
0.372

0.407

0.365

0.340
0.287

0.147

0.100
0.011

0.007

0.000

0.000

6

7

8

9

Period
Core

Inner periphery

Outer periphery

Diffuse public

Figure 4.22. Audience positions over time.

140

4.3.1.6 Circuits. Figure 4.23 shows the proportions of circuit activity in each period. Like actors
and audiences, the proportions of circuit activity change across the periods without any single
circuit remaining dominant. The civil society circuit is highly active in periods 1 and 2, its
activity drops in period 3, then it surges in periods 4, 5, and 6. The circuit is highly active again
in period 9 after a fall in activity during periods 7 and 8. The county circuit is highly active
during the beginning and middle periods of the case, but its activity dwindles for the last three
periods. The Pittsburgh city circuit is prevalent in periods 1, 2, and 3, then again in period 5, but
otherwise it is not very active. The state circuit is especially prevalent in periods 3 and 4, but
this activity dwindles for the remainder of the case. The economic circuit is active during
periods 1 and 2, then lags in period 3, but it increases in activity until it peaks in period 8. The
intra-library circuit increases in activity from period 1 to period 5, then falls in activity and
remains relatively low for periods 6 through 9. The local municipal circuit and local school
district circuit are relatively inactive throughout the case. In period 6, the ACLA circuit and the
Regional Asset District circuit increase in activity as the activity in other circuits, such as the
county, intra-library, and Pittsburgh city, begins to fall. ACLA becomes the dominant circuit in
periods 7, 8, and 9. The EIN circuit displays some activity in periods 7 and 8.

141

0.500
0.437

0.450

0.435
0.389

0.400

0.365

0.355

0.351

0.350

0.340

0.340

0.300

Ratio

0.300

0.271

0.264
0.250
0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000

0.235

0.223
0.190

0.114
0.096
0.054

0.033
0.000
1

0.172

0.139

0.091

0.008

0.178

0.165

0.174

0.006
0.000
2

0.104
0.089

0.134

0.103

3

0.165

0.000
0.000

4

5

0.118
0.095

0.102

0.057

0.021

0.181
0.137

0.085

0.070

0.074

0.052
0.015
0.000

0.234

0.224

0.215

0.039
0.025
0.007
0.004
0.000
6

0.062
0.057
0.033 0.035
0.029
0.026
0.004
0.000
7

0.069
0.048
0.037
0.027 0.021
0.011
0.000
8

0.065
0.059

9

0.035
0.012
0.006
0.000

Period
National circuit

State circuit

County circuit

Local municipal circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

Local school district circuit

Intra-library circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

Civil society circuit

Economic circuit

ACLA circuit

EIN circuit

Unknown circuit

Figure 4.23. Circuits over time.

4.3.1.7 Issues. Figure 4.24 shows the 10 most prevalent issues in the case and their ratios in each
period. No single issue remains the dominant one throughout the case. Countywide system
formation and unification was a major issue in periods 1, 2, and 4, and in period 9 it was also a
moderate issue. The merger between Pittsburgh city and Allegheny city libraries was a moderate
issue in periods 1 and 2, but afterward it was a non-issue. The city library budget was a minor
issue in periods 1, 2, 3, and 5. County funding was a moderate issue from period 2 to period 6.
The Pennsylvania state library code was a leading issue in period 3. Library studies were
significant issues in periods 3 and 4, then again in period 9. RAD funding became a major issue
142

in period 6, and it remained a moderate issue during periods 7, 8, and 9. EIN was a moderate
issue in periods 6, 7, and 8. The federated system was a leading issue in period 7, and in period
8 the leading issue was the distribution formula.

0.800

0.681

0.700

0.600

0.500

Ratios

0.430

0.405

0.400
0.309

0.318

0.299

0.300

0.250

0.237
0.258
0.200

0.157

0.166

0.163
0.120

0.100

0.000

0.132

0.103

0.089

0.050

0.042

0.000

0.000

1

0.036
0.024

2

0.121

0.089
0.052

0.082

0.000

0.000

3

4

0.149
0.109

0.083
0.038
0.032
0.013
0.000
5

0.011
6

0.000

0.154

0.145
0.121
0.013
0.011 0.002
0.000
7

0.096

0.011

0.112

0.027
0.016
8

0.000

9

0.088
0.047
0.035
0.006
0.000

Period
Countywide system formation and unification

Pittsburgh city-Allegheny City library merger

City library budget

PA state code and state plan

County funding

Library study

EIN

RAD funding

Federated system

Distribution formula

Figure 4.24. Top 10 issues over time.

4.3.1.8 Legitimation. Figure 4.25 shows the changes in types of legitimation throughout the
case. Successful legitimation through discussion and periphery support was the dominant form
of legitimation in all periods except period 3, where legitimation was mostly unknown.
Unknown legitimation and successful legitimation through discussion and periphery support
143

mirrored one another inversely throughout the case. Successful legitimation through consensus
was seen only rarely, in periods 1 and 2. Legitimation failures through objections were present
in all periods, especially periods 4, 7, 8, and 9 where it represented more than 10 percent of
legitimation types. Legitimation failures through bypassing representative publics were seen
very rarely in all periods except period 9 where there was a minor increase.

0.900
0.800

0.727

0.831

0.777

0.700

0.633

0.629

0.600

Ratio

0.741

0.732

0.653

0.526

0.500
0.444

0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100

0.227
0.124

0.017
0.000 0.008
1

0.133

0.204

0.124

0.054
0.006 0.030

0.015

2

3

0.007

0.057

0.010

0.006
0.000
5

4

0.207

0.198
0.077

0.165

0.160
0.048

0.056
0.021
0.004 0.009
0.014
6
7

0.147

0.000
8

9

0.035
0.000

Period
Success-discussion and periphery support

Success-consensus

Failure-objections

Failure-bypass representative public

Unknown

Figure 4.25. Legitimation over time.

4.3.1.9 Implementation. Figure 4.26 shows the changes in implementation types throughout the
periods of the case. Implementation success was exhibited more than other types in all periods

144

except for period 1. Periods 1, 4, and 8 exhibited comparably low proportions of implementation
success and relatively high proportions of implementation failures. Unknown implementation
exhibited a moderate but stable presence throughout all periods of the case.

1.000

0.933

0.900

0.735

0.800

0.787

0.783

0.704

0.735

Ratio

0.700
0.600
0.500

0.471

0.400

0.364

0.300
0.200

0.165

0.100
0.000

1

0.537

0.443

0.205

0.267

0.335

0.309
0.217

0.247

0.060

0.030

2

3

0.000
4

5

0.049
0.018
6

0.108

0.128

0.105
7

8

0.200
0.065
9

Period
Success

Failure

Unknown

Figure 4.26. Implementation over time.

4.3.2

Explanation of changes

The comparisons above describe how the periods changed across the case with respect to the
categories analyzed in stage 2. Building on these descriptions, the second task of stage 3 is to
explain why the case changed over time as it did. To do this, this task uses a specific method,
crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis. Crisp-set qualitative comparative analysis (csQCA) is
a configurational comparative method that is used to develop a causal account of the case. To
145

construct a causal account, csQCA uses the narratives and chronologies generated in stage 1
(section 4.0 ) and the data generated in the main coding of stage 2 (section 4.2.3 and Appendix
K) to identify outcomes and conditions. The objective of csQCA is to interpret the data in order
to understand why the case evolved as it did. The presence or absence of certain conditions can
explain why some outcomes obtained in some periods and other outcomes obtained in others.
The configurations of conditions for each period are used to explain why a certain outcome
obtained. CsQCA is an appropriate method to use at this stage because it addresses SQ3: How
does the public sphere affect public library development? The presence or absence of certain
conditions related to the public sphere can explain how the public sphere influences public
library development.

4.3.2.1 Outcomes

Outcomes defined. For the purposes of this analysis, a positive outcome is defined as a
substantive change in the system as a result of a formal decision. Substantive changes include
the following:
•

a new actor;

•

a new circuit;

•

a new tessellation structure;

•

an actor inhabits a new position relative to another actor; or

•

a change in power relations.

Conversely, a negative outcome is defined as continuity, or as no substantive change in the
system as a result of a formal decision. In a truth table, positive outcomes are coded with a [1],
negative outcomes are coded with a [0].
146

An explanation of the difference between a substantive change ([1] outcome) and a nonsubstantive change ([0] outcome) first requires a clearer distinction between period and
substantive change. Periods are distinguished not by outcomes, but by new decision cycles
characterized by re-imaginings, new orientations, or new attempts to implement substantive
changes. The concept of a decision cycle was introduced in stage 1. Because attempts to change
the system vary in their results and outcomes, a substantive change is not the defining
characteristic of a period. In other words, a new, distinct period is a necessary condition for a
substantive change but not a sufficient one. Any period n can consist of either positive or
negative outcomes (see Figure 4.27).

Period n

Continuity

Substantive
Change

[0] outcome

[1] outcome

Figure 4.27. Possible outcomes for a decision cycle in some period n.

Qualitative descriptions of outcomes. The outcomes for each period can be described
qualitatively using the narratives and chronologies developed in stage 1. These descriptions

147

outline the basic decision cycle of each period and establish whether the period exhibited a
positive or negative outcome.
In period 1, several civil society groups petitioned city and county decision-making
bodies for an extension in library services and for a merger of libraries. Despite this activity, all
efforts failed. Because there was no substantive change in the library system, period 1 represents
a negative outcome.
In period 2, civil society and library actors again petitioned for changes in library
services. This time, efforts were successful. In 1956, several significant changes occurred in the
system. Period 2 therefore represents a positive outcome.
In period 3, the county libraries became part of the state system with the passage of the
new state code in 1961. For the first time, county libraries occupied the inner periphery of the
state circuit. Therefore, period 3 represents a positive outcome.
In period 4, several library studies were carried out by civil society, state, and library
groups.

Despite a strong concern for library system development, no substantive changes

occurred. Period 4 therefore represents a negative outcome.
In period 5, several library studies led to the emergence of new library groups, a new
county commission, and a county library director. Due to these changes, period 5 represents a
positive outcome.
In period 6, a new circuit—RAD—emerged, and county library groups successfully
petitioned to become part of the inner periphery of that circuit. For the first time, libraries were
audiences of administrative and economic power transmitted by the RAD board. In light of these
substantive changes, period 6 represents a positive outcome.

148

In period 7, ACLA transformed into a federated system, thereby changing its relationship
to the state library and its member libraries. Due to this substantive change, period 7 represents a
positive outcome.
In period 8, changes in ACLA’s distribution formula and member library standards were
debated at length, but no changes were implemented. Period 8 therefore represents a negative
outcome.
In period 9, the ACLA board implemented system standards, and a new circuit seemed to
emerge that combined ACLA and CLP decision-making bodies. Because of these changes,
period 9 represents a positive outcome.

Quantitative measures of outcomes. Outcomes can also be measured quantitatively
using the data gathered in stage 2.
implementation success.

An accurate measure of outcomes in this case is

Periods with low implementation success can be said to exhibit

negative outcomes, while those with high implementation success can be said to exhibit positive
outcomes.

Implementation success is a valid measure of a period’s outcome because

implementation success was coded for transmissions whose issues were not just legitimated
successfully, but were actually taken up and adopted through a formal decision process.
Figure 4.28 shows the implementation success ratios for each period. These ratios are
shown in tabular form in Table 4.8. These data show relatively low implementation success
rates for periods 1, 4, and 8. The other periods show relatively high implementation success,
suggesting that the issues proposed in those periods were adopted relatively frequently. This
quantitative data corroborates the outcomes established through qualitative means in the above
section. In the above section, periods 1, 4, and 8 were said to exhibit negative outcomes, and
periods 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 9 were said to exhibit positive outcomes.
149

Using the implementation success data, Figure 4.29 shows that a threshold of 0.7
accurately distinguishes periods with positive outcomes from those with negative outcomes.
Above this threshold are periods with relatively high implementation success ratios and therefore
positive outcomes.

Periods below the threshold, periods 1, 4, and 8, have relatively low

implementation success and therefore negative outcomes.

The green line in Figure 4.29

represents the threshold of 0.7, and the red line represents the median value, which is 0.735.

1.000

0.933

0.900

0.735

0.800

0.787

0.783

0.704

0.735

Ratio

0.700
0.600
0.400

0.537

0.443

0.500
0.364

0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Period
Success

Figure 4.28. Implementation success ratios by period.

Table 4.8. Ratios of implementation success by period.

Period
1

Implementation success
0.364
150

8

9

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

0.735
0.704
0.443
0.783
0.933
0.787
0.537
0.735

Figure 4.29. Threshold for positive outcomes of implementation success.

Outcome summary. Table 4.9 below summarizes the outcomes from the periods of the
case based on the qualitative and quantitative analyses above. In total, there are N=6 positive
outcomes and N=3 negative outcomes. Figure 4.30 visualizes these outcomes across the case for
each period, together with the decision cycle and decision point for each period.

Table 4.9. Summary of periods and outcomes.

151

Outcomes

Period dates

1924

Outcome

1

0

2

1

3

1

4

0

5

1

6

1

7

1

8

0

9

1

[1]

1945

Decision cycle

1920

[0]

Period

Period 1

1930

[1]

1961

Period 2

1940

[0]

1950

1970

Period 3

1960

Period 5

1980

Figure 4.30. Outcomes by period.

152

[1] [1]

[0]

1994
1993 1998

1980

Period 4

1970

[1]

Period 7
Period 6

1990

2000

[1]

2011

Period 8

2016

Period 9

2010

2020

4.3.2.2 Conditions. The definition of outcomes represents only the first part of csQCA.
Conditions must also be identified and described as a way to explain why the outcomes occurred.
The objective of csQCA in this study is to explain why some periods exhibited substantive
change while others did not. Why did the system evolve in some periods and not others? How
might the public sphere account for this?
There are 4 conditions that can be derived from the data to explain outcomes of the case.
These conditions were developed in light of patterns displayed in 4.3.1.

Civil Activity. The first condition is civil activity. Civil activity is defined as signal
traffic from civil society actors who are proponents of a system change. The hypothesis for this
condition is, the presence of civil activity can account in part for a positive outcome in some
periods because they agitated for system change in those periods. Civil activity is measureable
and it is stated as a ratio. A ratio is used to enable comparisons between different periods with
different numbers of communicative events. The civil activity ratio for a period is derived using
the following formula:

civil activity ratio

=

transmissions by pro-change civil society actors
total number of transmissions

Table 4.10 shows civil society advocates and their transmissions by period. Not all civil
society actors are included in a calculation of civil activity, only those actors from civil society
who advocated for change in the library system. Civil society groups that opposed changes are
excluded.

153

Table 4.10. Transmissions from civil society advocates by period.

Civil society actor

Period
1

2

Pennsylvania Economy League

1

Private civil society actor

1

3

Civil society-other

1

2

Allegheny Federation of
Women’s Clubs

1

Metropolitan Plan Commission

3

Allegheny County Council of
Parent-Teacher Associations

8

Multiple civil society groups

8

2

Civic Club of Allegheny County

46

3

3

4

5

6

7

5

1

4

6

4

4

8

1

4

1

1
4

6

8

9

1

2

2

1

Private corporation or foundation

2

Allegheny Conference on
Community Development

8

Metropolitan Study Commission

21

Library Planning Committee of
Allegheny County

2

1

1

1

League of Women Voters

1

Some combination of city,
county, and civil society groups

4

1
1

1

Buhl Foundation

1

21st century library study
Total

46
69

70

9

15

6

18

16

3

48

Table 4.11 shows the number of transmissions from civil society advocates in each
period, the total of number of transmissions in each period, and the civil activity ratios by period.

154

Table 4.11. Civil activity ratios by period.

Period

Civil society
transmissions

Total
transmissions

Civil
activity
ratio

1

69

121

0.570

2

70

166

0.422

3

9

135

0.067

4

15

97

0.155

5

6

157

0.038

6

18

284

0.063

7

16

455

0.035

8

3

188

0.016

9

48

170

0.282

Figure 4.31 shows the min/max, median, and threshold values for the civil activity ratios
of the periods. The red line represents the median value and the green line represents the
threshold value. The median value is 0.067. The orange boxes represent the locations of the
ratios for each period along the ordinal scale. The value of 0.1 was chosen as the threshold value
to distinguish presence from absence. This is because the four periods above the threshold—
period 1, period 2, period 4, and period 9—were characterized in the initial case description in
section 4.0 by significant civil society movements. This threshold value therefore reflects these
movements and aligns with qualitative descriptions of the case.

155

Figure 4.31. Min/max, median, and threshold values for civil activity.

Given the definition of civil activity, its threshold value, and the data from each period,
Table 4.12 shows the truth table for the condition of civil activity.

Table 4.12. Truth table for civil activity.

156

Period

Civil activity

1

1

2

1

3

0

4

1

5

0

6

0

7

0

8

0

9

1

Responsiveness. The second condition is responsiveness. Responsiveness is a measure
of how well audiences respond to and implement the issues proposed to them through
transmissions that are legitimated successfully. Like civil activity, responsiveness is stated as a
ratio. It is the ratio of successfully-legitimated transmissions to legitimated transmissions that
are also implemented. The responsiveness ratio for each period is calculated using the following
formula:

responsiveness ratio

=

legitimated transmissions that are implemented
total number of legitimated transmissions

The hypothesis underlying this condition is that the presence of responsiveness can account in
part for positive outcomes (system changes) and its absence can account in part for negative
outcomes (continuity).

If a system exhibits responsiveness to successfully-legitimated

transmissions by implementing them, it is hypothesized that the system changes in response.
Systems that exhibit unresponsiveness are closed and do not change.
157

Table 4.13 shows the numbers and types of legitimated transmissions, the numbers and
types of implemented transmissions, and the ratio of legitimated transmissions to those that are
also implemented.

Table 4.13. Ratio of implemented transmissions to legitimated transmissions.

Legitimation success
Discussion
and
periphery
support

Consensus

1

88

2

Implementation

Total

of discussionlegitimated
transmissions

of
consensuslegitimated
transmissions

Total

15

103

27

13

40

0.388

129

5

134

103

5

108

0.806

3

60

1

61

42

1

43

0.705

4

61

1

62

27

1

28

0.452

5

115

0

115

90

0

90

0.783

6

236

4

240

228

4

232

0.967

7

337

4

341

317

4

321

0.941

8

119

0

119

91

0

91

0.765

9

111

0

111

92

0

92

0.829

Period

Ratio

Figure 4.32 shows the min/max, median, and threshold values for the condition of
responsiveness. The median value is 0.783. The value of 0.6 was selected as the threshold value
because it separates the two periods with very low responsiveness—period 1 and period 4—from
the other periods that had high to relatively-high responsiveness. That period 1 and period 4 are
absent responsiveness according to this threshold fits the qualitative descriptions of the periods
158

in section 4.0 Figure 4.32 and similar subsequent images were created using TOSMANA
software (Cronqvist, 2016).

Figure 4.32. Min/max, median, and threshold values for responsiveness.

Given the definition of responsiveness, its threshold value, and the data from each period,
Table 4.14 shows a truth table for each period with respect to the responsiveness condition.

Table 4.14. Truth table for responsiveness.

159

Period

Responsiveness

1

0

2

1

3

1

4

0

5

1

6

1

7

1

8

1

9

1

Legitimacy. The third condition is legitimacy. Legitimacy describes the overall ability
of a system to use discussion and consensus as a means to transmit power in legitimate ways.
Legitimacy is measureable and it is stated as a ratio. The ratio is calculated using the following
formula:

legitimacy ratio

legitimated transmissions

=

total transmissions

The hypothesis underlying this condition is that the presence of legitimacy in a system accounts
in part for changes in that system. A corollary hypothesis is that an absence of legitimacy in a
system inhibits system changes.
Table 4.15 shows the numbers, types, and totals of legitimation, total events, and
legitimacy ratios by period.

160

Table 4.15. Legitimation, total events, and legitimacy ratios by period.

Legitimation
Total

Total
events

Legitimacy
ratio

15

103

121

0.851

129

5

134

166

0.807

3

60

1

61

135

0.452

4

61

1

62

97

0.639

5

115

0

115

157

0.732

6

236

4

240

284

0.845

7

337

4

341

455

0.749

8

119

0

119

188

0.633

9

111

0

111

170

0.653

Period

Discussion and
periphery support

Consensus

1

88

2

Figure 4.33 shows the min/max, median, and threshold values for responsiveness. The
median value is 0.732. The value of 0.7 was selected as the threshold because it is located in an
existing gap between low- and high-legitimacy periods. According to this threshold, periods 3,
4, 8, and 9 are absent legitimacy, and this result makes sense given the descriptions of the period
in 4.0

161

Figure 4.33. Min/max, median, and threshold values for legitimacy.

Given the definition of legitimacy, its threshold value, and the data from each period,
Table 4.16 shows a truth table for each period with respect to the responsiveness condition.

Table 4.16. Truth table for legitimacy.

Period

Legitimacy

1

1

2

1

3

0

4

0

5

1

6

1

7

1

8

0

9

0

162

Resistance. The fourth condition is resistance. Resistance describes the discursive
friction in a system during a period’s decision cycle. Resistance is stated as a ratio. It is
calculated using the following formula:

resistance ratio

=

legitimation failures-objections
total transmissions

This condition is theoretically grounded in the idea that periods with a high ratio of objections
during discussions will block substantive changes from occurring.

Implicit in the idea of

resistance is the idea that a threshold of legitimation failures through objections, if reached, can
stall substantive change. It may be possible to block changes even in a period where the ratio of
successful legitimations is also relatively high.
Table 4.17 shows the failed implementations, total events, and resistance ratios by period.

Table 4.17. Failed legitimations through objections, total events, and resistance ratios by period.

163

Period

Legitimation
failure-objections

Total
events

Resistance
ratio

1

2

121

0.017

2

9

166

0.054

3

2

135

0.015

4

12

97

0.124

5

9

157

0.057

6

16

284

0.056

7

90

455

0.198

8

39

188

0.207

9

25

170

0.147

Figure 4.34 shows the min/max, median, and threshold values for resistance. The median
value is 0.057. The value of 0.1 was chosen as the threshold value because it marks an already
existing gap between relatively low- and high-resistance periods. The condition of resistance is
therefore present in periods 4, 7, 8, and 9. This dichotomization makes sense in light of the
qualitative evidence presented in section 4.0 . All periods with high resistance according to this
threshold were contentious periods.

164

Figure 4.34. Min/max, median, and threshold values for resistance.

Given the definition of legitimacy, its threshold value, and the data from each period,
Table 4.18 shows a truth table for each period with respect to the responsiveness condition.

Table 4.18. Truth table for resistance.

Period

Resistance

1

0

2

0

3

0

4

1

5

0

6

0

7

1

8

1

9

1

165

4.3.2.3 Summary data table. Table 4.19 below shows the condition ratios and outcomes for
each period.

Table 4.19. Summary data table of conditions and outcomes by period.

Period

Civil activity

Responsiveness

Legitimacy

Resistance

Outcome

1

0.570

0.388

0.851

0.017

0

2

0.422

0.806

0.807

0.054

1

3

0.067

0.705

0.452

0.015

1

4

0.155

0.452

0.639

0.124

0

5

0.038

0.783

0.732

0.057

1

6

0.063

0.967

0.845

0.056

1

7

0.035

0.941

0.749

0.198

1

8

0.016

0.765

0.633

0.207

0

9

0.282

0.829

0.653

0.147

1

4.3.2.4 Summary truth table. Table 4.20 below is a summary truth table that shows
configurations of conditions and outcomes. Period 5 and period 6 share the same configuration.

166

Table 4.20. Summary truth table including conditions and outcomes.

Period

Civil activity

Responsiveness

Legitimacy

Resistance

Outcome

1

1

0

1

0

0

2

1

1

1

0

1

3

0

1

0

0

1

4

1

0

0

1

0

5, 6

0

1

1

0

1

7

0

1

1

1

1

8

0

1

0

1

0

9

1

1

0

1

1

Figure 4.35 below shows a Venn diagram of the truth table. Green areas represent
periods with positive outcomes and red areas represent periods with negative outcomes. White
areas represent logical remainders—hypothetical configurations that were not found in this
study. The Venn diagram was created using TOSMANA (Cronqvist, 2016).

167

Figure 4.35. Venn diagram of the truth table configurations.

4.3.2.5 Necessary conditions. For any condition, the consistency of its necessity is computed in
the following way: “the number of cases with a [1] value on the condition AND a [1] outcome
value, divided by the total number of cases with a [1] outcome value” (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009,
p. 47). The computation for each condition is shown in Table 4.21. There was 1 necessary
condition found in this study: responsiveness. This means that for any case with a positive
outcome, responsiveness was also present.

168

Table 4.21. Necessity scores for each condition.

Condition

Number of cases with a [1]
value and a [1] outcome

Total number cases with
a [1] outcome

Necessity score

Civil activity

2

6

.333

Responsiveness

6

6

1

Legitimacy

4

6

.667

Resistance

2

6

.333

4.3.2.6 Minimal formulas. Minimal formulas are configurations of conditions and outcomes
with superfluous conditions removed. Superfluous conditions are irrelevant as causes because
their presence or absence does not affect the outcome. Minimization therefore distills sets of
configurations to the conditions that matter—the ones that, should they change, outcomes would
also change. The conditions shown in the minimal formulas are considered the causes of
positive outcomes.

Minimal formulas were calculated using TOSMANA.

The resulting

minimization formulas are an outcome’s prime implicants, and these formulas can be divided
into terms (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009, pp. 35, 57).
In Appendix M, two sets of minimal formulas are provided for each outcome: those
without logical remainders and those including logical remainders. Logical remainders are the
white, empty spaces shown in the Venn diagram in Figure 4.35. They represent configurations
that were not observed in this study. Logical remainders are useful to consider because their
inclusion results in more parsimonious formulas (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009, p. 59). More

169

parsimonious formulas can be created by making simplifying assumptions about the logical
remainders.
As shown in Appendix M, the attempts to find minimal formulas using TOSMANA were
not successful. This is because the minimal assumptions for [1] and [0] outcomes resulted in
contradictory simplifying assumptions. Minimal formulas therefore had to be constructed in an
alternative way by resolving these contradictory simplifying assumptions.

4.3.2.7 Resolving contradictory simplifying assumptions. A contradictory simplifying
assumption occurs when the same logical remainder is used to explain both [1] and [0] outcomes.
The presence of contradictory simplifying assumptions is logically problematic because the same
sets of conditions cannot be used to explain both [0] and [1] outcomes (Yamasaki & Rihoux,
2009, pp. 136-137).

The procedure to address the problem of contradictory simplifying

assumptions is to add hypothetical, non-observed cases to the truth table in a way that resolves
the contradictions. The addition of the hypothetical configurations should be theoretically welljustified. After the new truth table is minimized, the resulting formula should be one that makes
sense logically, empirically, and theoretically, and one that is parsimonious (Yamasaki &
Rihoux, 2009, p. 137).
Of the 16 (24) possible configurations, 8 were observed in the case and 8 are logical
remainders. In the minimal formulas of both [0] and [1] outcomes above, 6 logical remainders
were used to explain both the [0] outcome and the [1] outcome.

There are therefore 6

contradictory simplifying assumptions that must be resolved.
There are 3 rules that can be applied to the logical remainders that would eliminate the
contradictory simplifying assumptions:
1. Responsiveness is a necessary condition for a [1] outcome;
170

2. The presence of resistance overrides the presence of responsiveness, resulting in a
[0] outcome; but:
3. The presence of legitimacy or civil activity in addition to responsiveness
overrides resistance and results in a [1] outcome.
These three rules make logical, empirical, and theoretical sense. The rule that responsiveness is
a necessary condition for system change is supported by the observed cases. No observed cases
without high responsiveness had positive outcomes, so it is reasonable to assume that in nonobserved cases, the necessity of high responsiveness would hold true. Similarly, high resistance
was present in period 8, a negative-outcome case where both civil activity and legitimacy were
absent. Periods 7 and 9 exhibited legitimacy and civil activity, respectively, and both had
positive outcomes. This suggests that responsiveness alone is an insufficient condition for a
positive outcome, and that resistance can be overcome with the presence of either legitimacy or
civil activity.
These 3 rules can be used to create 8 hypothetical cases to add to the truth table in order
to resolve the contradictory simplifying assumptions. The resulting truth table is shown below in
Table 4.22. The results of the truth table are visualized in a Venn diagram in Figure 4.36.

Table 4.22. Summary truth table with hypothetical cases included.

171

Period

Civil activity

Responsiveness

Legitimacy

Resistance

Outcome

1

1

0

1

1

0

2

1

1

1

0

1

3

0

1

0

0

1

4

1

0

0

1

0

5, 6

0

1

1

0

1

7

0

1

1

1

1

8

0

1

0

1

0

9

1

1

0

0

1

hypo A

0

0

0

0

0

hypo B

0

0

1

0

0

hypo C

0

0

0

1

0

hypo D

0

0

1

1

0

hypo E

1

0

1

1

0

hypo F

1

0

0

0

0

hypo G

1

1

1

1

1

hypo H

1

1

0

0

0

172

Figure 4.36. Venn that includes hypothetical cases to resolve contradictory simplifying assumptions.

Revised minimal formula for [1] outcome. Boolean minimization can be performed
again on the new truth table to produce minimal formulas for both outcomes. The minimal
formula for the [1] outcome is as follows:

CIVIL ACTIVITY * + RESPONSIVENESS
RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY
(period 2, period 9,
hypo G, hypo H)

(period 2, period 5,
period 6, period 7,
hypo G)

173

+

RESPONSIVENESS
* resistance
(period 2, period 3,
period 5, period 6,
hypo H)

 SYSTEM
CHANGE

The three terms of the formula offer concurrent explanations for periods 2, 5, and 6, hypo G, and
hypo H. This minimal formula can be read as follows:
“The [1] outcome (SYSTEM CHANGE) is observed:

•

In periods that combine high civil activity [CIVIL ACTIVITY] AND high
responsiveness [RESPONSIVENESS]

OR
•

In periods that combine high responsiveness [RESPONSIVENESS] AND high
legitimacy [LEGITIMACY]

OR
•

In periods that combine high responsiveness [RESPONSIVENESS] AND low
resistance [resistance].”

Since the three different paths to system change share the condition RESPONSIVENESS, the
minimization formula can be rewritten as follows:

RESPONSIVENESS *

{

CIVIL ACTIVITY
LEGITIMACY
resistance

Coverage for the [1] outcome formula is shown in Table 4.23.

174



SYSTEM CHANGE

Table 4.23. Coverage for revised [1] outcome minimal formula.

Term

Raw coverage

Unique coverage

1

2/6

1/6

2

4/6

1/6

3

4/6

1/6

Revised minimal formula for [0] outcome.

Solution coverage

6/6

Using the revised truth table with

hypothetical cases included, the minimal formula for the [0] outcome is as follows:

responsiveness
(period 1, period 4,
hypo A, hypo B, hypo
C, hypo D, hypo E,
hypo F)

+

civil activity * legitimacy * RESISTANCE

 system change

(period 8, hypo C)

The minimal formula is read as follows:
“The [0] outcome (system change) is observed:

•

In periods with low responsiveness [responsiveness]

OR
•

In periods that combine low civil activity [civil activity] AND low legitimacy
[legitimacy] AND high resistance [RESISTANCE].”

Coverage for the revised [0] minimal formula is shown in Table 4.24.

175

Table 4.24. Coverage for revised [0] minimal formula.

4.3.3

Term

Raw coverage

Unique coverage

1

2/3

2/3

2

1/3

1/3

Solution coverage
3/3

Summary: Stage 3 Results

In stage 3, data interpretation, the data created in stage 2 was used as the basis for describing and
explaining changes in the case over time. This was done by comparing data from each period.
These comparisons addressed SQ2 and SQ3: they provided a description of the case over time,
then an explanation for why the case evolved as it did. The first task of stage 3, compare
periods, summarized the data about the main coding categories for the periods. The summaries
described in a quantitative way the ratios of power, actors, audiences, positions, circuits, issues,
legitimation, and implementation for each period across the case. Generally, it was found that no
actors, audiences, or issues were dominant throughout the entirety of the case. On the contrary,
the prominent actors, audiences, and issues changed according to period. In some periods, civil
society actors were dominant actors, and these actors seemed to initiate important changes in the
system, but this was not always the case. In period 1, for example, the Civic Club was a
dominant actor but no substantial changes occurred. A significant shift in the case occurred in
period 5 when new actors, audiences, and issues arose to replace old ones. The new actors
included CLASP, CFLAC, ACLA, and EIN. It was also found that communicative narrowcasts
were the predominant form of power in every period. Related to the development of a causal
176

account of the case, it was found that not all periods exhibited stable implementation outcomes.
Periods 1, 4, and 8, for instance, had relatively low ratios of implementation, suggesting that in
these periods the issues that were proposed were not instituted. Also related to the development
of a causal account, some periods had relatively high ratios of successful legitimation or
relatively high ratios of objections. Taken together, these observations suggested that some
combination of civil society actor engagement, successful legitimation, objections, and
implementation could explain why the case seemed to evolve in some periods but not others.
Based on the descriptions developed in the first task of stage 3, the second task, explain
changes, identified causal conditions to explain why some periods of the case exhibited
substantive changes but others did not. The method used for this task was crisp-set qualitative
comparative analysis (csQCA). Using this method, each of the 9 periods of the case was
assigned a positive or negative outcome. Outcomes were assigned in part using implementation
ratios: periods with high implementation ratios exhibited change and were given a positive value,
while those with low implementation ratios exhibited continuity and were given a negative value.
There were 6 periods with positive outcomes and 3 with negative outcomes. The four conditions
used to explain the positive or negative outcomes were civil activity, responsiveness, legitimacy,
and resistance.

In each period, positive or negative values for these conditions were also

assigned using quantitative measures. Each period was assigned a positive or negative value for
each condition. At the conclusion of the csQCA process, high responsiveness was found to be a
necessary condition for periods with positive outcomes. High responsiveness, together with
either high civil activity, high legitimacy, or low resistance, was found to be the causal
configuration sufficient to explain the positive outcomes in 6 of the periods. Conversely, it was
found that either low responsiveness or low civil activity, low legitimacy, and high resistance

177

were sufficient causal configurations to explain the negative outcomes in 3 of the periods. These
findings explain why the case evolved and changed at some points in time and not others.
Because civil activity, responsiveness, legitimation, and resistance are conditions that relate to
the public sphere, these findings also demonstrate that the public sphere is essential for
understanding the development of public library infrastructure and for implementing changes to
it. These findings are further elaborated in the discussion section that follows.

178

5.0

DISCUSSION

The following section discusses in depth the design and results of this study.

A further

discussion of the research design used in this study is warranted because it was newly developed
for this project and because this study was the first time it was applied. This discussion section
also synthesizes the research results from the preceding 3 stages of analysis. The section
proceeds by first reviewing the motivation, strategy, and design for the study. The results of the
study are then discussed in depth. The results are situated within a larger body of related
literature. Following a discussion of the research strategy and design, this section discusses the
new and revised Machtkreislauf model that was developed in stage 2. Then, this section reviews
the general explanatory theory of the public sphere and public libraries developed in stage 3.
Following this, a descriptive and explanatory account of the history of the regional library
system in greater Pittsburgh is discussed, drawing from the results of stages 1, 2, and 3.

5.1

5.1.1

RESEARCH STRATEGY AND APPROACH

Problem and solution sequences

The purpose of this project was to develop a fuller historical understanding of the relationship
between the public sphere and public libraries. The project was motivated in part by 3 research
179

problems from the fields of library studies and political science (see Table 5.1). The study began
by considering a research problem from library studies (RP1), namely that the existing public
sphere paradigm in the library studies field was inadequate and a new one was recommended.
One proposed solution to this problem (S1) was to adopt the Machtkreislauf, or circulation of
power, model as a research framework. The Machtkreislauf model is a general political model
of the public sphere that was chosen because it is the most well-developed public sphere model
and it did not face the same difficulties as the existing public sphere paradigm. The solution to
use the Machtkreislauf model, however, carried with it its own difficulties. The second problem
(RP2), therefore, was that the model faced several objections, and if it was to be used in library
studies as a research paradigm, then the model’s flaws had to be addressed lest future studies
inherit them. The objections to the model therefore had to be addressed before adopting it, and
this could be done by refining it by applying it to an empirical case. The solution (S2) to the
second problem was first to revise and refine the existing Machtkreislauf model in order to
address its flaws. To accomplish this, the regional public library system in Pittsburgh was seen
as an appropriate test-case. The case was doubly appropriate because it could not only be used to
create a new and better model, it could also be used to more fully understand the historical
dynamics of the public sphere and public libraries—the central purpose of the study.
Nevertheless, S2 also presented its own difficulties. The third research problem (RP3) was that
the case of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh had not yet been fully unpacked or
explored: it had been overlooked in library histories and in local historical accounts of
Pittsburgh. Because of this, the scope of the case was not yet known. The solution (S3) to this
third problem was therefore to research the case from scratch, to excavate its history before using

180

it as a test-case for the Machtkreislauf model and before using it to study the public sphere and
public libraries.

Table 5.1. Research problems and their corresponding solutions.

Research
problem

Problem statement

Solution

Solution statement

RP1

A new public sphere paradigm is needed
to develop a historical understanding of
public library development.

S1

Use the Machtkreislauf model
as a new research paradigm.

RP2

The Machtkreislauf model requires
revision and testing.

S2

RP3

The history of the regional public library
system in Pittsburgh is not yet known.

S3

Use the case of the regional
public library system in
Pittsburgh to refine the model.
Develop a fuller historical
account of the Pittsburgh case.

Each research problem of this study thus had an identifiable solution, but the first two
solutions to the first two problems also presented their own additional research problems. RP1
could be solved with S1, but S1 presented RP2. RP2 could be solved with S2, but not without
also presenting RP3. Only RP3 could be solved with S3 without presenting an additional
problem. This order, the logic of how research problems and their solutions were identified and
incorporated into this research project, was the study’s problem sequence. Figure 5.1 shows this
sequence in orange. The order of the problem sequence was RP1, followed by S1, RP2, S2,
RP3, and S3. The order in which the problems had to be addressed, however, ran counter to that
of the problem sequence. The problems had to be solved in the reverse order that they were
identified. The order in which this study had to approach and solve the research problems was
this study’s solution sequence. Figure 5.1 shows this sequence in blue. The solution sequence
for this study began with S3, then worked backward to S2 and S1. The problem and solution
181

sequences of this study formed its core layers. The methodological process for this study,
discussed below, was designed with these sequences in the background.

Figure 5.1. Problem sequence and solution sequence of this study.

5.1.2

Question sequence

In addition to its motivating research problems, this research study was also guided by research
questions. This study had one central, overarching research question and three sub-questions
(see Table 5.2).

The central research question (RQ) for this study was: How does the

Machtkreislauf model apply to the regional public library system in Pittsburgh? This question is

182

both a what question and a why question: it is a what question because it calls for a description,
and it is a why question because it calls for an explanation. The descriptions solicited by this
question took the form of narratives, chronologies, empirical models, and graphical illustrations.
The explanation solicited by the question took the form of a causal theory of the public sphere as
it relates to public library development.

Table 5.2. Research questions and their expected knowledge types by field.

Field

Question statement

Type of
knowledge
solicited

RQ

Both
fields

How does the Machtkreislauf model
apply to the regional public library
system in Pittsburgh?

Description
and
explanation

Model, theory,
narrative, graphical
illustration

SQ1

Political
science

What does a tested and refined
Machtkreislauf model look like?

Description

Concepts, model

SQ2

Library
studies

What does the evolution of the library
system in Pittsburgh look like?

Description

Narrative, graphical
illustration

SQ3

Library
studies

How does the public sphere affect
public library development?

Explanation,
prediction

Causal theory

Expected
intellectual product

The 3 sub-questions for this study are shown in Table 5.2. SQ1 asked: What does a
tested and refined Machtkreislauf model look like? This question called for a new model with
new concepts that fit the case and addressed the existing criticisms of the model. This was an
appropriate question to ask at the project’s outset because it was known from the literature
review that a revision of the model that was to serve as the study’s framework had to occur as
part of the study. It was not known from the outset what this framework would look like once it
183

had been revised. SQ2 asked: What does the evolution of the library system in Pittsburgh look
like? This question also called for a description, one developed by applying the Machtkreislauf
model to the case of Pittsburgh. This was an appropriate question to pose at the beginning of the
project because in the literature review, while it was found that the case of Pittsburgh might
serve as a suitable one for the study, it was also found that the case was not well known. And
SQ3 asked: How does the public sphere affect public library development? This question called
for an explanation and prediction that was based on data from the case.
Addressing SQ3 was the ultimate goal for this project. This third and final research
question was posed in light of existing literature as a way to contribute to it and establish a new
research direction. Previous studies such as Schuhböck (1994), Vestheim (1997b), and Emerek
and Ørum (1997) already identified and explained historical relationships between public
libraries and the public sphere over time, but they did so using a previous public sphere
paradigm, one that was problematic. Kann-Christensen and Pors (2004) also claimed that public
sphere legitimation contributed to public library developments, and they used examples from
case studies as illustrations, but they did not track changes over time. Widdersheim and Koizumi
(2017) identified basic elements of a new research framework like one used in this study, and
they used that framework to understand an empirical case, but the study did not explain how the
public sphere contributed to changes over time. SQ3 therefore called for a study that could
overcome these deficiencies of previous literature. An answer to the question required using a
new public sphere framework and longitudinal data from a relevant case in order to better
understand how the public sphere affected public library developments over time.
Like the solution sequence, the research questions in this study had to be addressed in a
specific order: SQ1 had to be answered before addressing SQ2, and SQ2 had to be answered

184

before addressing SQ3. This order was the study’s question sequence. The question sequence
for this study followed the completion of its problem and solution sequences.

Research

questions began to be fully addressed once the research problems were solved. Figure 5.2 shows
this question sequence in green. What was needed next was a research design that would address
the research problems and questions in a logical and systematic way.

Figure 5.2. Problem sequence, solution sequence, and question sequence of this study.

185

5.1.3

Research design

This study adopted a case study approach as a general research design. Among the variety of
case study designs, the specific research strategy adopted in this study was historical case study.
Historical case study is a new type of case study design that was developed specifically for this
project. Historical case study is distinctive because it is not just history, and not just case study,
but a mixture of both. It is a retrospective longitudinal comparison that blends history and case
study in order to examine a case from the distant past into the present (see Figure 5.3). It does
this by collecting and analyzing a diversity of source materials, including archival documents,
interview notes and transcripts, and field notes from direct observations.

The units of

comparison in a historical case study are the case’s periods. The periods serve as embedded
units that are analyzed by comparing and contrasting in a systematic way their common features.

Time

Past

Present
Archival Documents

Sources

Interviews
Observations

Case

Period 1

Period 2

Period 3

...

Common interpretive framework
Figure 5.3. Concept of a historical case study.

186

Period n

Historical case study is a new type of case study design that departed from those
proposed by Yin (2014) and Gerring (2007). It is true that Yin (2014, p. 12) maintained a
distinction between history and case study while also acknowledging overlap between the two.
Yin (2014, pp. 50, 54-55) also helpfully described embedded units of analysis and the types of
case study designs that might incorporate them. However, Yin (2014) did not propose that a
case’s periods might serve as embedded units of analysis, nor did he specify or name historical
case study as a distinctive type of case study design. Similarly, Gerring (2007, p. 28) constructed
a typology of case study designs, but in that typology historical case study was not mentioned as
a distinctive approach. Unlike Yin (2014), Gerring (2007) did not distinguish between case
study and history. The addition of historical case study to his typology, therefore, required first
distinguishing within diachronic studies between histories and case studies, then showing
historical case study as a design type that overlapped both history and case study.
Historical case study as a research process consisted of three stages of analysis (see
Figure 5.4). Each stage had its own method, its own tasks, its own results, and addressed
different research questions. The stages proceeded cumulatively in such a way that earlier stages
informed later ones. Stage 1 produced source materials that were analyzed in stage 2, and stage
2 produced data that were analyzed in stage 3. At the same time, each stage stood alone as a
micro-study because each stage produced its own knowledge.

Stages 1 and 2 produced

descriptions, and stage 3 produced descriptions, explanations, and predictions.

187

Process
Stage 1
Sources

Stage 2
Data

Knowledge
Source analysis
Case definition
Chronology
Narrative
Data analysis
Concepts
Models

Description

Description

Data interpretation Description
Stage 3
Explanation
Models
Prediction
Causal theory
Figure 5.4. Process and knowledge products of historical case study.

The stages, methods, tasks, and results of this study are described in Table 5.3. The first
stage of historical case study was source collection and analysis. The method for stage 1 was
theoretical sampling. The purpose of this stage was to collect source materials about the case in
order to develop a preliminary understanding of the case, including the case’s periods. A
theoretical sampling protocol was developed during this stage to serve as a guide for source
collection. Stage 2 of historical case study was data collection and analysis. In this study, the
method used for stage 2 was qualitative content analysis. In stage 2, the source materials
collected in stage 1 were systematically analyzed. All sources for all periods across the case
were analyzed using a common framework. The purpose of stage 2 was to produce data about
the case’s periods that served as a basis for their comparison. Finally, stage 3 of historical case
study was data interpretation.

In this study, the method used for stage 3 was qualitative
188

comparative analysis. In this stage, descriptions and explanations were constructed using the
data generated in stage 2. The purpose of stage 3 was to interpret how and why the case
developed over time.

Because the periods of the case were analyzed using a common

interpretive framework, historical case study was an effective research strategy not only for
describing changes or continuity in a case over time, but also for explaining why the case
evolved as it did and predicting under what conditions and in what ways the case or one similar
to it can be expected to develop further. Explanations and predictions were constructed by
identifying conditions that caused the case’s periods to exhibit positive or negative outcomes.
Based on the results of this study, historical case study is an effective research design for cases
with long lifespans, for cases where little or nothing is known about them, for cases that have
distinctive periods of development, and in studies whose purpose is to observe phenomena
longitudinally.

189

Table 5.3. Stages, methods, tasks, and results of this study.

Qualitative Content
Analysis

Theoretical Sampling

Method

Qualitative
Comparative
Analysis

3

Data Collection and
Analysis

2

Data
Interpretation

1

Source Collection and Analysis

Stage

Task

Task description

Result

RQ

Define the
case

Establish temporal,
geographical, and
conceptual boundaries for
the case.

Definition of the case

SQ2

Periodize
the case

Using sources, divide the
case into periods according
to actors, events, and cycles.

Chronology and
narrative summary of
each period

SQ2

Collect
sources

Using descriptions of
periods as a guide, collect a
variety of relevant source
materials.

List of relevant
sources to use in
stage 2

SQ2

Develop
the
instrument

Construct a concept- and
data-driven instrument for
analyzing the periods.

-A concept- and datadriven instrument
-New concepts

SQ1

Pilot
coding

Test and modify the
instrument.

A valid and reliable
instrument

SQ1

Main
coding

Apply the instrument to all
source materials.

Coding matrices and
data to use in stage 3

SQ2

Compare
periods

Use tables, graphs, and other
tools to describe summary
data.

Summaries,
comparisons, and
patterns in data

SQ2

Explain
changes

Use comparative techniques
to explain changes in the
case’s periods.

Outcomes,
conditions,
configurations

SQ3

The stages of this study followed the course of its underlying problem, solution, and
question sequences (see Figure 5.5). Stage 1 began as S3 was addressed, Stage 2 began as S1
was addressed, and stage 3 began as SQ2 was addressed. For the most part, the research
questions for this study were answered in their sequence once the research problems were
190

solved. A seeming exception to this rule was that some preliminary descriptions of the case of
Pittsburgh were generated during stage 1 of this study before it was known what the revised
Machtkreislauf model would look like. For this reason, SQ2 was addressed to a degree before
SQ1, as shown in Table 5.3. That being said, it was not until after SQ1 was answered and the
revised model was applied to the source materials in stage 2 that a fuller account of the case was
developed. SQ2 was therefore not fully answered until SQ1 was answered.

Figure 5.5. Stages and sequences of this study.

191

5.2

A REVISED MACHTKREISLAUF MODEL

One objective for this project was to revise the Machtkreislauf model, a general model of the
public sphere. Among the various conceptions of the public sphere, the Machtkreislauf model
describes politics from a deliberative democratic perspective (Ferree et al., 2002, pp. 300-306).
It was proposed that this model could serve as a new research framework for the study of the
public sphere and public libraries, but before this could happen, existing objections to the model
had to be addressed. Also, it had to be ensured that the model could accurately describe the case.
It was determined that an appropriate way to address the model’s outstanding criticisms was to
apply the model to an empirical case. Using detailed empirical data, it could be shown what
precisely was problematic about the model and in what ways it could be revised. Analysis of
empirical data was preferred over speculation. The regional public library system in greater
Pittsburgh was selected as the case to use to revise the model. This case was selected for several
reasons. First, it was chosen because it is extreme: the Pittsburgh area is well known for its
many competing and overlapping governmental units. If the model could be shown to work well
when applied to this complex environment, it could potentially work well anywhere. The case
was also chosen because it is crucial: if the Machtkreislauf model is to be considered a general
model of the public sphere, then it must apply anywhere, including a regional context in the US.
The model had not yet been applied to a case on a non-national scale or in a non-European
context. Finally, the case was chosen because it is a case of a public library system, and another
objective of this study was to understand the historical dynamics of the public sphere and public
libraries. This case could be used to accomplish both objectives.
The original Machtkreislauf model described the political system as a set of concentric
rings with two forms of power flowing between them (see Figure 5.6). The innermost ring, or
192

core, consisted of decision-making bodies such as those in the legislative, executive, and judicial
branches of government. The next ring, the inner periphery, consisted of quasi-autonomous
agencies that acted as both service providers to the outer periphery and as relays from the outer
periphery to the core. The next outer ring, the outer periphery, was the political public sphere,
and the outermost ring, the real periphery, consisted of the civil society, media, and economic
groups that contributed to the political public sphere. Communicative power originating in the
peripheral rings travelled inward through the inner periphery and to the core where it affected
formal decisions there. Administrative power traveled outward from the core to periphery. This
model is also called the two-track or sluice-gate model. It was developed first by Peters (1993,
pp. 327-344; 2008) then elaborated by Habermas (1996, pp. 355-356).

Core

Figure 5.6. The original Machtkreislauf model.

193

The first criticism of this model was by Forbath (1998) who observed that the model
failed to incorporate economic power and for that reason could not fully account for political
decision making. Examination of the source materials for the case in this study confirmed that
economic power was necessary as a type of power in order to account for political decisions. In
order to address this flaw, this study added a new form of power—social power—to the revised
Machtkreislauf model. Social power was therefore added as a third power type in addition to
communicative and administrative power. Social power was divided into two sub-types, and one
sub-type was economic power. This addition was made in part to address the objection and also
upon examination of source material from the case of Pittsburgh, which showed that economic
power was indeed a necessary revision.
The notion that social power and economic power play a role in the public sphere was not
new to this study. For example, these forms of power were discussed in the context of the public
sphere in Habermas (2006). However, this study was the first to construct a new Machtkreislauf
model using social and economic power.
The other sub-type of social power that was added to the revised model in this study was
backroom deals. This form of power was not added in response to any previous objection, but
because backroom deals was a form of power observed in the source materials of the case. The
existing power types of the model could not account for these observations, so backroom deals
was added as a second sub-type of social power.
The second objection to the original Machtkreislauf model by Flynn (2004) identified an
ambiguity in the concept of communicative power. It was observed that the model did not
clearly distinguish between informal and formal types of communicative power. For that reason,

194

a further distinction was needed. It was also found after examining the source materials from the
case of Pittsburgh that a new type of power was necessary in addition to communicative power.
A fourth type of power was therefore added: formal decision. Formal decisions refer to votes or
legislation that results in a new law or policy. These decisions are made by formal bodies, as in
committees, boards, or assemblies. They can also be made by an electorate, as in the case of
referenda. Communicative power, by contrast, refers to discursive power generated through
discussion that may lead up to and influence decisions. It does not refer to the decision itself.
The revised Machtkreislauf model developed in this study therefore incorporated 4 types of
power: communicative, administrative, social, and formal decision.
During the development of the coding frame at the beginning of stage 2 of this study, it
was found that a more nuanced understanding of these forms of power was necessary. The
problem was that some transmissions of power had specific, discernible audiences while the
audiences of other transmissions were not altogether clear. In many instances in the source
materials, transmissions had a wide class of potential receivers but no specific one.

The

actor/audience, sender/receiver concepts adopted from Lasswell (1948) and Shannon (1948) that
were incorporated into the coding frame as categories could not be effectively applied to the
source materials if for each coding segment the audience had to be singular. In order to resolve
this dilemma, transmissions were classed into 2 types: narrowcasts and broadcasts. Narrowcasts
were transmissions of power whose audiences were single, specific, and identifiable. Broadcasts
were transmissions of power whose audiences were identifiable but plural.

In cases of

broadcasts, the transmissions were cast without full knowledge on the source’s part who would
receive them.

The narrowcast/broadcast distinction was used when coding instances of

communicative power and administrative power.

195

The distinction did not apply to formal

decisions because in such instances the details of the decision stated the intended audience. The
distinction also did not apply to instances of social power, which included economic power and
backroom deals, because no instances were found of social power broadcasts. All instances of
social power were therefore narrowcasts.
During the development of coding frame in stage 2, when concept-driven coding
categories were developed using the original Machtkreislauf model, another problem was found
in addition to those previously identified in existing literature. The problem was that the case did
not exhibit a single set of concentric rings with a single core/periphery axis. Instead, the case
exhibited multiple cores, multiple inner peripheries, and multiple outer peripheries where actors
occupied more than one position. In light of this finding, the single-axis structure of the original
model was abandoned, and a new concept was developed to account for the more fluid and
complex structure. The new concept that was introduced was a circuit. The circuit concept is
similar to the original model because it retains three of the original positions: core, inner
periphery, and outer periphery. Like the original model, power flows between these positions,
and each of the positions serve the same purposes as in the original. Core actors are the main
decision-makers who delegate administrative duties to inner periphery actors and who receive
communicative inputs from them. Similarly, outer periphery actors are service receivers who
transmit communicative power to the inner periphery and core in order to influence decisions.
But the circuit concept also differs from the original model in significant ways. Instead of a real
periphery, a circuit has a diffuse public. Diffuse public represents the audience for broadcast
transmissions when the receiver is not clearly known. A diffuse public does not send signals,
only receive them. Diffuse public contrasts with coalesced public, the type of public that can

196

inhabit the outer periphery position and can send and receive signals. This 4-position structure is
shown in Figure 5.7.

Actor 2

Core

Diffuse
Public
Circuit 1
Actor 1

Inner
Periphery

Actor 3
Outer
Periphery

Figure 5.7. Circuit concept.

Besides the new fourth position, the central difference between the original
Machtkreislauf model and the circuit concept is that circuits can combine to form larger
structures. These larger structures are called tessellations due to the polygonal shapes that are
created in the white spaces between them (see Figure 5.8). In a tessellation, actors can occupy
multiple positions in different circuits where they may play different roles. For instance, an actor
who occupies the core position in one circuit and receives communicative power there may also
occupy the outer periphery position in another circuit where it transmits communicative power.
The concepts of circuits and tessellations were developed because it was observed in the case of

197

Pittsburgh that more than one set of core/periphery axes existed and that actors occupied
different positions and played different roles in these different contexts.

Actor
Core
Circuit

Inner periphery
Outer periphery
Diffuse public

Figure 5.8. Tessellation concept.

Using data gathered from the source materials in stage 2, it was possible to construct the
tessellations from each period of the case using network visualization tools. The transformation
from a single generic circuit structure, to a set of circuits that form a generic tessellation
structure, to model of an actual tessellation using data from the case, is shown in Figure 5.9. In
these figures, the black nodes represent actors, the red nodes represent circuits, and the edges
between actor and circuit nodes represent the positions of a particular circuit. In the data-based

198

model, the curvature of the edges shows directionality, where power flows between nodes in a
clockwise direction.

Figure 5.9. Transformation from circuit, to tessellation, to model.

In a further objection to the original Machtkreislauf model, Baxter (2011, pp. 177-191)
observed that the distinctions between center and periphery, system and environment were
unclear because the terms we not well defined. This objection is accommodated by jettisoning a
single center/periphery axis and by adopting the circuit and tessellation concepts. By adopting
the 4-position circuit concept in the coding frame of this study, and by imagining that circuits
combine to form tessellations, it follows that actors can serve as both system and environment
when viewed from different perspectives. According to the revised model, senders and receivers
of transmissions occupy positions within a given circuit based on the roles they play and the
types of power they transmit. Whether an actor is considered in or out of a system—in or out of
a circuit—at a particular moment is determined by that actor’s relationship to its audience. The
new model was developed in such a way that individual actors can be both system and
environment simultaneously. While inhabiting the core position of one circuit, for example, an
199

actor is part of that circuit’s system. While inhabiting the outer periphery of another circuit, the
same actor is part of that circuit’s environment. According to the new model, whether an actor is
inside a system or not is less important than the relationship that actor shares with its audience.

5.3

A THEORY OF THE PUBLIC SPHERE AND PUBLIC LIBRARY
DEVELOPMENT

5.3.1

Theory overview

Stage 3 of this study constructed a theory of how the public sphere affected the development of
the regional public library system in greater Pittsburgh. The theory offered an explanation for
why the case evolved as it did, from its beginnings in the 1920s to the current moment in 2016.
The theory was developed to explain the case particular to this study, but it may also apply to
other cases beyond that of Pittsburgh. To determine whether the theory applies beyond the case
of Pittsburgh, the theory must be tested in other contexts using data from other cases.
The result of stage 3 is considered a theory both because of how it was developed—its
process—and because of how it works epistemologically. The explanatory theory is a kind of
knowledge that takes the form of a rule. The rule is designed to account for an observed set of
facts. Substituting the term hypothesis for theory, Peirce (1934, 189) explains what a theory is,
how it is formed, and the kind of epistemological work it does:
Long before I first classed abduction as an inference it was recognized by logicians that
the operation of adopting an explanatory hypothesis — which is just what abduction is —
was subject to certain conditions. Namely, the hypothesis cannot be admitted, even as a
200

hypothesis, unless it be supposed that it would account for the facts or some of them. The
form of inference, therefore, is this:
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
Thus, A cannot be abductively inferred, or if you prefer the expression, cannot be
abductively conjectured until its entire content is already present in the premiss [sic], "If
A were true, C would be a matter of course."
Following Peirce’s definition of a theory, a theory is conjectured through an abductive
inference—an inferential leap—from an observed set of facts to a rule that might explain them.
If the rule stated by a theory is true, then the facts follow as a matter of course. Just as Peirce
notes, the theory in stage 3 was developed just this way, that is, abductively, by imagining what
rule might account for the facts of the case of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh.
Epistemologically, the theory was designed to explain why the case evolved as it did.
To construct the theory, the method of qualitative comparative analysis was used first to
establish either positive or negative outcomes for each period in the case, then to identify the
necessary and sufficient conditions in each period that may have caused each outcome. Positive
outcomes were established for periods where significant change occurred. Significant change
was measured both qualitatively and quantitatively. Quantitatively, change was a function of
high implementation ratios. Negative outcomes were established for periods that exhibited
continuity and low implementation ratios. The rationale for the threshold to distinguish high
from low ratios was explained in stage 3. For the 9 total periods in the case, 6 were found to
exhibit positive outcomes, and 3 were found to exhibit negative outcomes.

201

The case of

Pittsburgh was an ideal one for the qualitative comparative method because positive- and
negative-outcome periods could be compared. In other words, it was possible to see not only
what caused changes but also what did not.
Configurations of 4 conditions were found to explain the outcomes for each period.
These conditions were civil activity, responsiveness, legitimacy, and resistance.

These

conditions were tried and tested based on reasonable assumptions and in light of the case data.
The conditions were said to be either present or absent in each period. The presence or absence
of each condition was measured qualitatively through case knowledge and quantitatively using
data and by establishing reasonable thresholds. Civil activity was selected as a possible causal
condition because of the strong presence of pro-change civil society actors in some periods with
positive outcomes.

Responsiveness was selected as a possible causal condition because it

seemed reasonable to conclude that positive outcomes would obtain in periods where
successfully legitimated communications were also implemented. Legitimacy was chosen as a
possible causal condition because it seemed reasonable that changes would occur during periods
where many communications were successfully legitimated.

Resistance was selected as a

possible causal condition because it was observed that some periods that exhibited no change
also exhibited a high rate of objections. Configurations of these conditions, together, were found
to adequately explain in a non-contradictory way why some periods exhibited positive outcomes
and other negative outcomes.
The resulting theory from stage 3 is as follows: high responsiveness, together with either
high civil activity, high legitimacy, or low resistance, was found to be the causal configuration
sufficient to explain the positive outcomes in 6 of the periods. High responsiveness was found to
be a necessary condition for positive outcomes.

202

Conversely, it was found that either low

responsiveness or low civil activity, low legitimacy, and high resistance were sufficient causal
configurations to explain the negative outcomes in 3 of the periods. These two causal laws that
constitute the theory of the public sphere and public libraries are written in formal notation in the
following way:

RESPONSIVENESS *

responsiveness

{

CIVIL ACTIVITY
LEGITIMACY



SYSTEM CHANGE

resistance

+ civil activity * legitimacy * RESISTANCE



system change

The various causal configurations and their outcomes can also be visualized using a Venn
diagram, as in Figure 5.10. The 9 observed periods in the case are labeled period 1, period 2, etc.
Green areas represent positive outcomes, and red areas represent negative outcomes. The areas
labeled hypo A, hypo B, etc. represent logical remainders whose causal configurations were not
observed in this study. The theory developed in this study therefore makes predictions about the
outcomes and causal configurations of these hypothetical scenarios. The theory can be tested by
observing whether these hypothetical scenarios actually obtain as predicted.

203

Figure 5.10. Venn visualization of the theory of public sphere and public library development.

5.3.2

Situating the theory within relevant literature

The theory of the public sphere and public library development presented in this study relates to
existing areas of research within the library studies field. The purpose of this section is to situate
the theory presented in this study to this existing literature. The theory is situated within two
areas of research: 1) literature related to the public sphere and public libraries, and 2) classical
library development theories.
204

5.3.2.1 The public sphere and public libraries. Literature about the public sphere and public
libraries is literature that uses the public sphere concept, implicitly or explicitly, to understand
public libraries. A partial list of works in this area is found in Appendix A. Widdersheim and
Koizumi (2016a) and Widdersheim (2015a) distinguished 3 facets of this literature, each
corresponding to an arena of public sphere discourse: governance, where the public library is the
receiver of communication about library services; legitimation, where support for the library is
the topic of communication among politicians and citizens; and commons, where the library is
the medium of communication for its users. The public sphere theory about public library
development that was presented in this study relates to the first two arenas, governance and
legitimation. Governance and legitimation arenas are interrelated and in some cases overlapping.
This is because the reasons stakeholders give for legitimating libraries may be received by
libraries, thereby affecting their governance decisions. Studies of legitimation therefore include
studies of why and through what processes people support libraries, while studies of governance
include studies of how library organizations respond to, or align with, outside signals, including
legitimation claims.
Several works have studied the governance arena of public libraries, especially regarding
processes of innovation, change, and continuity in library organizations. Core works in this area
include Boyd (1979), Pungitore (1995), Sturges (1996), Audunson (1996, 1997, 1999), Newman
(2007), and Audunson and Evjen (2017). These studies examined management in libraries that
faced external public sphere pressures.

This area of research is largely case-specific and

idiographic. There is no comparable explanatory and predictive theory like the one presented in
this study. The nomothetic, explanatory theory presented here therefore offers future studies
related to the governance arena of public libraries a framework to further test and explore. The

205

theory operates at a sufficient level of abstraction to apply to contexts that may differ in terms of
culture or organization. The theory could be used to supplement existing approaches. Audunson
(1996, 1999), for example, used cross-case comparison and an institutional perspective to
understand change processes in public libraries in Oslo, Budapest, and Gothenburg. The public
sphere theory presented here that incorporates the conditions of civil activity, responsiveness,
legitimacy, and resistance, as well as outcomes related to implementation, could be used in a
rule-like way to potentially explain similarities and differences in the 3 cases. At the same time,
concepts from institutionalism could be used to identify and describe causal mechanisms in
depth.

The theory presented here therefore offers a supplemental view to the study of

governance arenas.
Works that have studied the legitimation arena of public libraries include Usherwood
(1993, 1994), Smith and Usherwood (2003), Kann-Christensen and Pors (2004), Audunson
(2005a), Evjen and Audunson (2009), Evjen (2015), and Ingraham (2015). Like the literature
related to the governance arena, this literature also has no comparable nomothetic knowledge.
The general explanatory theory presented here can therefore be applied to and tested in studies
related to legitimation processes of public libraries. In studies of politicians’ perceptions of
public library building projects and public library closings, such as those by Ingraham (2015)
and Evjen (2015), the theory of the public sphere presented here could be used in conjunction
with an institutional perspective to explain why some libraries were built and others were closed.

5.3.2.2 Classical theories of library development. The attempt to construct an explanatory
theory of public library development is not new to library studies or library history. Williams
(1981, 1984), for example, identifies 4 categories of explanatory theories for public library
development, where development for him means libraries’ establishment or growth. The 4 types
206

of theories are: social conditions, democratic tradition, social control, and influence of libraries
and librarians. For the purposes of this study, these 4 types of theories constitute the classical
theories of library development because they are found in the classic, central works of library
history.
Williams (1981, 1984) associates social conditions theory with Garrison (1979), Shera
(1965), Ditzion (1947), Lee (1966), Murison (1971), Hassenforder (1968), Jackson (1974) and E.
D. Johnson and Harris (1976). The social conditions theory maintains that public libraries were
established and grew as the result of multiple social factors, including economics, literacy,
urbanization, education, and industrialization. Williams (1986) tests the social conditions theory
using multiple regression, and he finds some correlations between library development,
education, and economic ability, as well as between library development, urbanization,
industrialization, and literacy.

Accounts of the social conditions theory are criticized by

Williams (1981) who says they fail to offer a full explanation for why the variables cause library
development, the conditions are not distinguished according to importance or order, and
empirical evidence in support of social conditions theory is weak.
The next category of classical theories is democratic tradition. Williams (1981, 1984)
attributes this theory to Ditzion (1947), Lee (1966), and Garceau (1949). Democratic tradition
theory maintains that public libraries were established and grew due to the growth in democracy.
Generally, this category of theory supposes that citizens required information resources in order
to fully participate in democratic culture, and to fulfill this need, public libraries were formed to
provide the resources. Again, Williams (1981) criticizes proponents of democratic tradition
theory for failing to offer an adequate definition of what democracy is, and also for confusing the
real with an ideal. In other words, it is said that democratic tradition is a creation myth. Some

207

public sphere literature that was not published at the time of Williams (1981) but that might be
said to fall under the category of democratic tradition is Emerek and Ørum (1997), who track the
rise of public libraries and the public sphere in Denmark, Schuhböck (1983, 1994), who charts
the growth of public libraries and the public sphere in Germany, and perhaps Vestheim (1997b),
who notes a relationship between public library development and Enlightenment ideals in
Norway.
The third classical theory category is social control. Williams (1981, 1984) associates
this theory with Wellard (1940), Harris (1973, 1976), Harris and Spiegler (1974), and Garrison
(1979). According to this theory, public libraries were established by wealthy capitalists in order
to control the masses, reform them, and maintain class distinctions. As Williams (1981) notes,
social control theory has been criticized by Dain (1975) and McLeod (1968) because it is too
simple, it is an overgeneralization, and it faces many counterexamples.
The final classical category, the influence of libraries and librarians, is attributed by
Williams (1981, 1984) to McMullen (1976), Downs (1976), and W. L. Williamson (1963). This
theory is largely conjectural but has some empirical evidence.
Among the 4 classical categories of theories, the theory of the public sphere and public
library development that is presented in this study most closely resembles social conditions
theory. Like social conditions theory, the theory of the public sphere presented here uses 4
conditions—civil activity, responsiveness, legitimacy, and resistance—to explain why libraries
do or do not exhibit changes over time. The theory presented here sidesteps the objections
leveled against social conditions theory because the theory in this study was developed using a
rigorous, intra-comparative, and empirically-based method where a general causal formula was
presented and causal mechanisms were identified and described. In terms of the importance or

208

order of the 4 conditions, it was found that responsiveness is a necessary condition for system
change.
There are also important differences between the social conditions theory presented
above and the theory of the public sphere presented in this study. First, the public sphere is a
feature of social life that was overlooked in the traditional social condition theories mentioned
above. It is therefore a new perspective. It might also be said that a public sphere perspective
represents an innovation within the genre of social conditions theory. This is because a public
sphere perspective offers expanded explanatory potential. It can be used to understand public
library developments beyond just establishment and growth. The public sphere theory presented
here is used to understand not just establishment and growth, but also any kind of change in a
public library system, including system continuity and system failure. The theory presented here
therefore potentially explains more about public library developments than previous social
conditions theories. In the case used in this study, for example, existing social conditions
theories could not have explained why a new system was established in period 2 but not period 1.
This is because conditions like education, industrialization, and urbanization did not significantly
change in those periods. Previous social conditions theories also could not have explained why
period 3 in the case exhibited a substantive system change but period 4 did not, or why the
system witnessed the passage of standards in period 9 when in period 8 the formula revisions
failed.

This is because these changes were the result of political processes that were not

accounted for in previous theories. The public sphere theory presented here therefore offers a
more robust explanatory account of public library development because it focuses on a new
aspect of libraries—the public sphere—and because it dilates the meaning of development to
include any type of substantive change, including but not limited to establishment and growth.

209

How successful is the theory presented here compared to classical theories? Williams
(1984, p. 1) states that “any viable theory of library development should have the potential to
explain both the level of library development in a given social system at a particular time and the
determinants of change in library development from one period to the next.” Previous theories
did not fully meet this standard, for reasons already mentioned. But by this standard, the theory
of the public sphere and public library development presented here has been proven successful: it
explains what caused changes in library development from one period to the next. It did this by
focusing on the public sphere aspects of a given social system.

The theory also predicts

outcomes and conditions for hypothetical scenarios that were not observed. The theory can
therefore be tested and revised. It seems that the level of library development must be defined
within the context of a specific case or set of cases, but this does not preclude the theory
presented in this study from explaining what causes or prevents a library to reach a new level.
The theory is itself not tied to a particular context.

5.4

A HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE REGIONAL PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM
IN GREATER PITTSBURGH

The conceptual definition of the case for this study was discourse related to the regional public
library system in the greater Pittsburgh area. At the beginning of this study, little was known
about the case. Though it was known that spatially the case was bounded more or less by
Allegheny County, it was not known when the case began, who the main actors were, what the
case’s structure was, or in what ways the case developed. Answers to these basic questions had
to be clarified during the research process. These preliminary questions about the case were
210

addressed in stage 1 through source collection and analysis. Several types of sources were
gathered from sites in Pittsburgh, including documents and records from local archival
collections, interviews with key informants, and first-hand observations of public sphere contexts
related to the case. More detailed and quantitative data about the case was later gathered in the
second stage of this study when the coding frame was developed using the source materials and
the source materials were then systematically analyzed using the frame.
It was found that the case began on June 16, 1924 when members of the Public Library
Committee of the Civic Club of Allegheny County first proposed an extension of services from
the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh into communities beyond city limits. Together with the Civic
Club, other civil society groups including the Parent-Teachers’ Association and the Federation of
Women’s Clubs pressured the County Commissioners for a county-funded library system to
serve rural areas. While this earliest movement toward a countywide system failed, it was clear
from the case’s beginning that the development of the regional system was intricately connected
to public sphere activity. Civil society groups used several public sphere contexts, including
mass media outlets, community meetings, and meetings with County decision-makers, to
influence the formal decision process. Eventually, in 1956, a county system was established, and
it gradually grew and changed during the course of the 92-year span from 1924 to 2016. The
case continued nearly throughout the second half of the 20th century and into the 21st century.
Existing literature about Pittsburgh history, regional infrastructure in Pittsburgh, and
library history overlooked the case of a regional library system in greater Pittsburgh. Lubove
(1995, 1996), for example, provided an in-depth account of Pittsburgh in the 20th century, one
that revealed the underlying political themes in Pittsburgh and explained the larger context of the
case of the regional public library system, including its impetus and its key actors. That said, the

211

account did not discuss libraries. Similarly, in his account of infrastructural development in the
Pittsburgh area in the 19th and 20th centuries, Tarr (1989, p. 219) narrowly confined his analysis
to “streets, water, and sewers”—the physical and material infrastructures of the city. For this
reason, he overlooked symbolic and cultural infrastructures of city-building such as the regional
public library system. Another history of Pittsburgh by Lorant (1964, pp. 410-411) briefly
mentioned only the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, not the regional system.
There are a number of individual public libraries in the greater Pittsburgh area, and there
are of course records at each of these libraries that recount how the individual libraries came to
be. In the case of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, for example, Ralph Munn (1970), the
library director there from 1928 to 1964, authored an unpublished history of the city libraries.
The account offered some details about CLP’s role in the larger county system, but the focus of
the history was the city library system. Numerous reports about a federated, regional library
system were also published since 1950, but no account offered a coherent history of the system’s
development, especially not one from a public sphere perspective. One objective of this study,
therefore, was to find and piece together these disparate fragments of the regional public library
system in order to create coherent picture of the case.

5.4.1

Decision cycles

This study found that the case of the regional public library system in Pittsburgh exhibited 9
distinctive periods of activity. These periods were identified and distinguished using the concept
of a decision cycle: a gradual build-up of public sphere activity leading to a peak or threshold
where a key decision was made, and with that key decision a policy or structure was
implemented. Sometimes these key decisions resulted in changes to the case; other times the
212

decision resulted in no significant change. Using the concept of a decision cycle, each iteration
of the decision cycle marked a distinctive period. Over time, these cycles combined to form a
wavelike pattern. The decision cycles and their corresponding periods and critical decision
points are visualized in Figure 5.11. Each period in the case includes a single cycle and its
critical decision. In Figure 5.12 it can be seen that critical decisions in each period roughly
correspond to peaks of communicative activity.

Formal decision dates
(peaks)

Period dates

1924

1956

1945

Decision cycle

1920

1941

Period 1

1930

1961

1961

Period 2

1940

1979

1950

1970

Period 3

1960

2009

1994
1993 1998

1980

Period 4

1970

1991 1994 1997

Period 5

1980

Period 7
Period 6

1990

2011

Period 8

2000

2015

2016

Period 9

2010

2020

Figure 5.11. Decision cycles of the case.

1994
300

1997

200

1956

150

100

1941

1991

1961

2009

2015

1979

50

0

1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

Communicative events

250

Year

Figure 5.12. Critical decisions and communicative activity over time.

213

5.4.2

Periods 1 and 2

Period 1 began in 1924 when members of the Civic Club’s Public Library Committee first
proposed that the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh supply library services to teachers, students,
and communities in rural areas outside the city. The Civic Club together with other civil society
groups formed a coalition that petitioned the County Commissioners to fund the library system.
Though it was not without its detractors, the movement gathered strength throughout the 1920s
and 1930s. During this same time, the Civic Club and the director of the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Ralph Munn, petitioned Pittsburgh City Council to merge the then-separate Carnegie
Free Library of Allegheny on North Side with the city’s Carnegie library system. The Civic Club
sponsored community meetings related to the formation of a unified county system, and it also
wrote letters and attended County Commissioner meetings to lobby their views.
In the background during this time were discussions at the state and county levels to
merge city and county governmental units to form a single metropolitan unit. Proponents of
metropolitanism saw the many small and autonomous units of government in the greater
Pittsburgh area and sought to combine them to make governance more manageable and more
efficient. The Civic Club led this effort just as it did the movement for the regional public
library system. In 1929, the local autonomists succeeded and metropolitanism was defeated in a
county referendum. Had city and county merged, a regional public library system would have
likely been created. Instead, local libraries continued to operate autonomously within their own
municipalities. This failure of metropolitanism in period 1 greatly affected government and
politics in the region for the rest of the 20th century.
214

With respect to the case of the regional public library system, the critical, formal decision
point of period 1 happened in 1941 when the County Commissioners rejected calls to fund a
county system. This critical decision for the period occurred in a denouement following a spike
in communicative activity. The overwhelming issue in period 1 was countywide system
formation and unification, which was the issue in 52 out of 121 communicative events in this
period’s sample of documents (see Figure 5.13). The predominant actor in period 1 was the
Civic Club, and the most frequent audiences were broadcasts to Allegheny County residents and
narrowcasts to the Board of County Commissioners. The most active circuits during this period
were the Civil Society, County, state, and Pittsburgh city. The end of period 1 coincided with
the end of the Second World War in 1945 because war spending and the focus on domestic war
efforts formed an interlude in political actions related to the development of a regional library
system.

215

45
40

4
1

35

Issue count

30
25
20

32

15

1944

1941

1943

4

1942

2
1

1940

1
3

1939

1927

3

1938

1926

1

2
2
1

1937

1925

2

1
2

1936

1924

1

5

1935

1
1

4

10

1
3
1
2

1934

2

1
1
1

1933

2

3

1932

1
1

5

1
2

1931

2

1923

0

5

1928

5

2

1930

1

1929

10

Year
City library budget

City-county consolidation

County department funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Librarian wages

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Miscellaneous

New Deal funding

North Side Allegheny library governance

PA state code and state plan

Pittsburgh city-Allegeny city library merger

Tax increase

Figure 5.13. Issues counts for period 1.

Following the close of World War II, period 2 began in 1945 when local civil society
groups and Ralph Munn of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh revisited efforts to form a more
unified regional public library system. Many of the same actors from period 1 reappeared in
period 2. In 1950, the Civic Club worked with Ralph Munn and the Allegheny Conference on
216

Community Development to carry out a survey of public library services in the county. In 1955,
Munn authored another library survey under the auspices of the Metropolitan Study
Commission, the second of its kind since the failed efforts in 1929. A new civil society group
formed out of the Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teachers’ Associations: the Library
Planning Committee of Allegheny County. This separate group was dedicated solely to agitating
for a county-funded system. In 1956, the Library Planning Committee, together with Munn, met
with the County Commissioners to again to propose a county-funded system. This time, the
commissioners agreed. In 1956, free lending privileges at the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
were granted to all county residents, a bookmobile service was initiated for areas outside the city,
the Carnegie system began inter-library loan services with other county libraries, and the
Carnegie system began to offer centralized cataloging and purchasing services for county
libraries.

The same year, the Mayor and City Council of Pittsburgh approved the merger

between the old Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny on the North Side with the city’s Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh system. Period 2 therefore exhibited a positive outcome in terms of system
change. The period lasted until 1961 when the new state library code was implemented.
Like period 1, the overwhelming issue in period 2 was countywide system formation and
unification (see Figure 5.14). The Library Planning Committee replaced the Civic Club as the
most prevalent actor. The most frequent audiences in period 2 were broadcasts to Allegheny
County residents, and narrowcasts to the Metropolitan Study Commission and the Board of
County Commissioners. Most activity in period 2 took place within civil society and county
circuits.

217

60
50
40

3
2
2
1

30
39

20

25

3
2

2
4

3

1961

6
1
1

1960

4
3

1959

1
2

1958

1953

11

1957

6

2
1

1956

3

1952

1950

1949

1948

1946

1945

1947

1

0

1
5

1951

11

1955

3

10

1954

Issue counts

14

1
2
1

Year
City library budget

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Library study

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Miscellaneous

North Side Allegheny library governance

PA state code and state plan

Pittsburgh city-Allegheny City library merger

Figure 5.14. Issue counts in period 2.

Period 1 and period 2 shared many of the same conditions but exhibited different
outcomes (see Figure 5.15). The similar conditions were, first, an active pro-change civil society
movement. In period 1, this movement was led by the Civic Club, and in period 2 it was led by
the Library Planning Committee. Both groups worked closely with Ralph Munn, and both
groups targeted the same core bodies, which were the County Commissioners, City Council, and
the Mayor. The next shared characteristic was legitimacy. In both periods, a high percentage of
communicative events were legitimated either through discussions or consensus. And finally,

218

both periods were absent high ratios of resistance, meaning that few of the events overall faced
objections. Nevertheless, period 1 exhibited low implementation success and period 2 exhibited
high implementation success. This meant that many more of the communicative events in period
2 proposed issues that were also implemented. This meant that period 2 had a positive outcome
whereas period 1 had a negative outcome.

Figure 5.15. Comparison of periods 1 and 2.

219

Given the abundance of shared conditions of periods 1 and 2, what was the key difference
that caused the different outcomes? The central, salient difference between the two periods was
responsiveness. Period 2 evidence high responsiveness whereas period 1 did not. The high
responsiveness in period 2 meant that during the period more issues that were legitimated either
through discussion or consensus were also implemented.
This explanation of the different outcomes of the two periods is based on the rule
developed in stage 3 of this study, namely that high responsiveness is a necessary condition for a
positive outcome. High responsiveness, together with either high civil activity, high legitimacy,
or low resistance, create a configuration of conditions that is sufficient for system change. This
general law, however, still needs interpretation. The general causal law that responsiveness is
necessary for system change does not elucidate a causal mechanism. A further description of the
causal mechanism in periods 1 and 2 that is responsible for their respective outcomes is therefore
required in order to develop a more satisfying explanation for why period 1 failed to produce a
positive outcome while period 2 succeeded. What was the nature of high and low responsiveness
in these two very similar contexts?
In light of the similar actors, issues, and audiences for periods 1 and 2, and absent other
discernible differences in the case, it seems that different qualities of either the actors, audiences,
or messages may explain the different outcomes. Though this analysis of causal mechanisms can
only remain speculative, there were some different qualities in the audiences in period 2
compared to period 1 that may explain the different levels of responsiveness and therefore the
different outcomes. Period 2, for example, saw a new mayor, David L. Lawrence, as well as the
first woman city council member in Pittsburgh, Irma D’Ascenzo, who proposed to council that
the old Allegheny library merge with the Carnegie system. Though the constitution of the

220

County Commissioners did not change dramatically—periods 1 and 2 both had 2-Democrat 1Republican makeup, led by the same chairman, John J. Kane—in period 2, commissioners saw a
post-war increase in population in the suburbs of Pittsburgh. Perhaps the message of a regional
library system more clearly resonated with them in 1956 compared to a Depression-era and prewar environment in period 1. The precise causal mechanism that led to higher responsiveness in
period 2 compared to period 1, and subsequently led to a positive outcome in period 2, is likely
to be found in the complex circumstances related to the core decision-makers of the city and
county circuits. Further speculation on the mechanisms of high and low responsiveness in
periods 1 and 2 are beyond the scope of this case study.

5.4.3

Periods 3 and 4

Periods 3 and 4 of the case marked a significant change in the case compared to periods 1 and 2
because in periods 3 and 4 local grassroots civil society groups were no longer the driving force
of substantive changes. Period 3 was marked by, instead, a shift to implementations from within
the state circuit. The movements for these changes began late in period 2 with the Martin study
and plans for a new state library code. Period 3 began in 1961 at the point of its critical decision
when the new state library code was passed by the Pennsylvania General Assembly and signed
by the governor. The code implemented a new library system across the state that included units
called library districts. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh became a district library, and in this new
state-funded role, it was responsible for offering consultation and reference services to other
local libraries. The district library roles were therefore added to its already existing city and
county responsibilities.

221

The most prevalent issue in period 3 was the new state code and state plan (see Figure
5.16). The three predominant actors in period 3 were the Pennsylvania state library, the Board of
County Commissioners, and district services of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. The mosttargeted audience during period 3 was the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, including its district
services, county services, and city library services. Communicative activity overwhelmingly
occurred within the state circuit as the new district library system materialized.

25

Issue counts

20

15

10

5

7
11

3
4

1
1
1

3

2

4

4

7

2
1

1
9

3

2

2
1
2

3

1961

1962

1963

2
0

2

7

3

2
1
1
1

3

1964

1965

7

4

2

1

1

1966

1967

3
3
1968

1
1
1
3
1969

1970

City library system miscellaneous issues

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Librarian wages

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library formation

LSCA

PA state code and state plan

222

2
2

City library budget

Figure 5.16. Issue counts for period 3.

3

1

Year

State budget

1
1
2

By the start of period 4 in 1970, the state library system that had been established in
period 3 had already taken hold. Some state-driven initiatives, such as the Blasingame study of
1970 and Library Services and Construction Act funding, continued to impact the regional
Pittsburgh libraries. Period 4, however, was marked by a return to a concern with restructuring
the library system in the Pittsburgh region. A citizen’s study on the libraries was carried out
from 1976 to 1978 by several actors, including the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the County
Commissioners, the state library, and civil society actors related to groups active in period 2.
The citizen’s study failed to resolve the perceived deficiencies in the existing library system, and
instead exacerbated existing tensions that had arisen between the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
and district libraries since the state plan had been implemented. The multilateral study met with
internal divisions and strife. The key decision point for period 4 came in 1979 when the County
Commissioners did not act on the findings of the study.
The predominant issue in period 4 was countywide system formation and unification, the
same issue that characterized periods 1 and 2 (see Figure 5.17). The most frequent actors in
period 4 were the state library, the Board of County Commissioners, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh county services, and the senior associate director at Carnegie, Donald C. Potter. The
most prevalent audience in period 4 was the Board of County Commissioners. Most activity
occurred within the county and state circuits.

223

25

9

15

2
1

7

6

6

2
1

1

1979

1
1

1
1

1978

3

6

5

1977

3

1974

1970

2

1
2

1976

2

7

0

6

10

1973

5

4

2

1972

10

2

1975

3

1971

Issue counts

20

Year
County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Home rule

Library study

Local funding from state

LSCA

PA state code and state plan

Figure 5.17. Issues counts for period 4.

Despite the differing levels of civil society activity in period 3 and period 4, in neither
period did grassroots civil activity lead to substantive system change (see Figure 5.18). Neither
period 3 nor period 4 had high legitimacy, meaning that in both periods there was a low ratio of
communicative transmissions that were legitimated through discussions and consensus. Period 3
proves that high legitimacy is not a necessary condition for system changes so long as what
legitimate transmissions are there are also implemented. In period 3, state actors carried out
substantive changes instead of civil society actors, which is a departure from period 2.

224

Figure 5.18. Comparison of periods 3 and 4.

Why did period 3 have a positive outcome and period 4 did not?

The significant

difference between period 3 and period 4 was not the difference in civil activity, but period 4’s
low responsiveness and high resistance. Period 3 had a positive outcome because it exhibited
high responsiveness and low resistance. This low responsiveness alone was sufficient to cause a
negative outcome in period 4. Moreover, period 4 also exhibited high resistance, meaning that
there were significant objections raised to communicative events during this period.

The

infighting among the state, county, library, and civil society groups during the citizen’s study of
period 4 account for the low responsiveness and high resistance seen during this period.

225

5.4.4

Periods 5, 6, and 7

The city of Pittsburgh is said to have experienced two phases of cultural renewal, or two
Renaissances (Lubove, 1995, 1996).

The first began following the Second World War in

response to the effects of industrialization and fractured governance. During this time, publicprivate partnerships engaged problems such as smog, water pollution, traffic congestion, and
housing. The second Renaissance is said to have begun in the 1980s in response to the collapse
of the steel industry. During this time, civic leaders focused on the arts and revitalization as part
of a larger strategy for economic development.

These two Renaissance phases in greater

Pittsburgh, one following the Second World War and the other following the collapse of the steel
industry, correspond to substantive changes that occurred in the case of the regional public
library system in Pittsburgh. In period 3 of the case, a county library was first established, and
two separate city library systems merged. Then, in 1961 of period 4, the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh took on increasing duties as part of a state-implemented district library. Following a
lull during periods 4, periods 5, 6, and 7 represent a second Renaissance phase in the case.
During these periods, the case saw significant changes in its technology, structure, governance,
and funding.
Period 5 began in 1980 during an economic recession. During the 1980s, the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh struggled to formulate a funding strategy.

In 1990, the President’s

Advisory Committee on the Library proposed a countywide system as a way to stave off branch
library closings. Also in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
developed an online public access catalog, CAROLINE (a portmanteau of Carnegie Online).
Bob Croneberger, director of the library from 1986 to 1998, envisioned that the catalog might

226

someday connect all branch libraries in the city’s Carnegie system and perhaps all county
libraries.
Period 5 was also the time when a remarkable new actor entered the case: Frank
Lucchino. Lucchino, who served as County Controller during this time, had a liberal and
progressive vision for greater Pittsburgh that he believed could be accomplished by restructuring
smaller, independent governmental units into larger, regional ones.

Lucchino saw that

independent public libraries throughout the region had incentive to cooperate and coordinate
efforts in a regional way; moreover, if independent libraries could better cooperate, then they
might serve as a model for other service sectors.

In 1991, with Lucchino’s leadership,

enthusiasm, and political prowess, libraries in greater Pittsburgh formed the first county library
organization, County Library Association Serving the People (CLASP). Also in 1991, Lucchino
formed a grant-funded special agency within county government, the Commission on the Future
of Libraries in Allegheny County (CFLAC). CFLAC hired the first county library director in
1992. The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, CLASP, and CFLAC began to coordinate countywide
initiatives, starting with the development of a shared online catalog. The critical decision point
for period 5 came in 1991 with the decision by libraries to join together to form a countywide
library organization.
The predominant issue in period 5 was countywide system formation and unification,
followed by computerization (see Figure 5.19). The three most prevalent actors in period 5 were
CFLAC, CLASP, and the Board of County Commissioners. The CLP city libraries, broadcasts
to Allegheny County residents, and CFLAC were the most prevalent audiences.
communicative activity in period 5 occurred within the county circuit.

227

Most

60

40

1
4
2

30

12

1
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
7

20

4
2

5

5
1
1

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
2

Year
(blank)

Union Catalog

Three Rivers Free-Net

State budget

Reading centers in the housing projects-Knowledge Connections

RAD legislation

PA state code and state plan

National planning

Miscellaneous

LSCA

Local library coordination

Local library administration

Local funding from state

local allocations for libraries

Library telecommunications rates

Library study

Grants

Formation of county library organizations

Fax machines

EIN

Countywide system formation and unification

County library director

County funding

Computerization

Commission on the Future of Libraries

City library budget

AccessPA

Figure 5.19. Issue counts in period 5.

228

18

1993

5

4

1992

4
1
2

7

8

1991

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

1
1
1
1
3
1

1
2
1
1

1989

1
2
2

1
1
3
3
1
3

1988

10

1987

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
2
3
1

1990

Issue counts

50

By the beginning of period 6, the energy from the formation of CLASP and CFLAC had
worn off. In mid-1993, the groups were re-energized by news of the creation of a new tax
district, the Regional Asset District, which might fund local libraries. Period 6 was therefore
characterized by a yearlong effort by library groups to obtain funding from the district. During
this time, CLASP restructured to form the Allegheny County Library Association (ACLA), a
non-profit association dedicated solely to obtaining and then administering the tax money to the
libraries. The creation of the asset district was approved by the county in early 1994; ACLA
made its proposal to the district board in September of that year. In the end, the ACLA proposal
was successful and the group received 5 million dollars. The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
made a separate proposal and received on its own 11 million dollars. Also during this time, the
plans to connect the county libraries to a shared online catalog continued. The online resource
sharing would be known as the Electronic Information Network (EIN). The critical decision
point for period 6 came in 1994 when ACLA and CLP became funded assets of the tax district.
The two top issues in period 6 were RAD funding and RAD legislation (see Figure 5.20).
The predominant actors in period 6 were CLASP, then ACLA, then CFLAC. The dominant
audiences in period 6 were broadcasts to Allegheny County residents and narrowcasts to CLASP.
Most communicative activity in period 6 occurred within the civil society circuit, Regional Asset
District circuit, and county circuit.

229

250

1
2
1

Union Catalog
Three Rivers Free-Net

28
200

Redrawing district lines
Reading centers in the housing projectsKnowledge Connections
RAD legislation
RAD funding
RAD board
PA state code and state plan
Local library formation
Local funding from state

150

Local allocations for libraries

113

Library telecommunications rates

Issue

Internet
Formation of county library organizations
EIN
Countywide system formation and
unification
100

County library director
County funding
County department funding

5
1
1
2
4
1
2
1

9

Computerization
Commission on the Future of Libraries
City library budget

2
50
17

30

0

2
2
2
1
2

25

6
1
3
2
4
2
1
1993

2
2
1
1
3
2
1994

Year

Figure 5.20. Issue counts in period 6.

230

Following the success in period 6 by library organizations in their bids to receive
additional tax funding from the new district, period 7 witnessed a continued restructuring of the
regional library system. Lucchino’s leadership in 1991, Croneberger’s plans for the Electronic
Information Network, and the movement to receive RAD funding in 1994 all brought county
libraries together. The new arrangements that were formed, however, were not yet recognized
under the state code in a way that would provide additional state funding to the county libraries.
Leaders of ACLA therefore sought to become recognized by the state library as a federated
library system. Debates about whether ACLA should become a federated system began in 1995
and continued through 1997. To some libraries who were members of ACLA, it was not clear
how federated status would affect governance and funding from RAD. A number of individuals
from multiple libraries raised objections to federation because such a move threatened the
autonomy of individual libraries. In 1997, however, the member libraries of ACLA voted to
become a federated system, and the application to the state was approved. The critical decision
point for period 7 occurred in 1997 with the association’s final vote.
The overwhelming issue in period 7 was the federated system (see Figure 5.21). The
prominent actor and audience in period 7 was ACLA. Most communicative activity in period 7
occurred within the ACLA and Regional Asset District circuits.

231

200
1

180

19
5
1
4

160

Issue counts

140

14
1
2
1

120
90

45

100
2
1
80

23

20

1
1
2
1

60

19
40
20
0

1
12
1
6
10

16
1
13
1
2
6

1994

1995

19

21

4
2
1
17

10
4
5
4
2
1

5
4
1
10
1996

18
1997

Year
ACLA formation and governance

ACLA grant

City library budget

City library system miscellaneous issues

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Compliance with ACLA

Compliance with RAD

County funding

County library director

Countywide system formation and unification

Distribution formula

EIN

Federated system

Grants

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library formation

PA state code and state plan

Quality of formal debate

RAD funding

RAD legislation

Redrawing district lines

State budget

Three Rivers Free-Net

Figure 5.21. Issue counts in period 7.

232

The conditions of period 5 and 6 were identical (see Figure 5.22). They had high
legitimacy, low civil activity, and low resistance. The actors that brought about changes in the
system in periods 5 and 6 were library and county actors, not civil society actors. Period 7 was
similar to periods 5 and 6 because like them it had high legitimacy and low civil activity, but it
differed from periods 5 and 6 because it exhibited high resistance, meaning that it had a high
ratio of transmissions that faced objections. Periods 5, 6, and 7 all had positive outcomes.
Period 7 overcame high resistance by high responsiveness and high legitimacy. This suggests
that despite a large number of objections to becoming a federated system, the process of
becoming one was legitimate, and these legitimate proposals were in fact carried out and
implemented.

233

Figure 5.22. Comparison of periods 5, 6, and 7.

5.4.5

Periods 8 and 9

At the beginning of period 8, ACLA and the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh shared
responsibilities for the regional public library system. CLP was still the district library, and as
such it received state funding for that role. It was a member of ACLA, but it received its own
share of tax money from the RAD board, and those funds did not pass through ACLA the way
funding for other county libraries did. By the beginning of period 8 in 1998, Croneberger’s
dream of a shared online catalog had been realized, and many county libraries were part of the
234

Electronic Information Network.

As libraries in the county came to depend more on the

resources that EIN offered, ACLA and CLP began to compete for power and control over EIN.
EIN became a separate non-profit organization who served two clients: ACLA libraries and CLP.
At the turn of the century, CFLAC was phased out during a restructuring of county government
and the retirement of Lucchino. Its mission and duties were inherited by ACLA leaders.
Since its successful bid in 1994 to become a recognized cultural asset in the eyes of
RAD, an issue that the ACLA member libraries had not fully resolved was the funding formula.
ACLA member libraries received over 5 million dollars a year in RAD funding, but how was this
money to be distributed? Which libraries should receive more, and which libraries should
receive less? During period 8, there was a push by some member libraries to revise the funding
formula to make it partly performance-based. Attempts to revise the formula resulted in intense,
multi-year discussions. The formula proposals by ACLA were ultimately rejected by the RAD
board, who held final decision-making authority for funding distribution changes. The rejection
of the proposed formula by the RAD board in 2009 represented the critical decision point in
period 8. Attempts to revise the formula were abandoned, and the period ended in 2011.
The dominant issues in period 8 were the distribution formula and RAD funding (see
Figure 5.23). ACLA was the most prevalent actor and audience. Most activity took place within
the ACLA circuit.

235

40
4

35

4
30

3

3

20
8

4

1
2
1

2
1

8

2
1
1
1
2

1

1
1
1
1

1

1

2

2011

2

2
1
1

10

2010

2

1
1
1
1
1
1

2009

1

5

1
2

2008

1

2000

6

2

2
1

2007

6

26

8

2006

4

2
1

1998

0

2

1999

5

1

1
2

2005

6

6

1
1
2
1
2
1

2004

3

1
1

2003

10

3

2002

15

2

2001

Issue count

25

3

Year
ACLA formation and governance

City library budget

Compliance with ACLA

Compliance with ACLA-standards

Compliance with RAD

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Distribution formula

EIN

Home rule

Internet

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Local millage for libraries

LSTA

PA state code and state plan

RAD funding

Reading centers in the housing projects-Knowledge Connections

State budget

Figure 5.23. Issue counts in period 8.

Following the failure of the formula revisions, period 9 began in 2011 with ACLA and
CLP agreeing to study options in order to reduce service overlaps and address communication
problems. These overlaps were identified by an outside audit, and the RAD board called on
ACLA and CLP to address the problems. The two organizations initiated a study that used
community meetings to generate ideas for a new vision of the regional public library system.
Meanwhile, as part of the same study, a panel of community leaders generated their own
236

alternative vision for what the regional system might look like. In the end, the organizations did
not adopt the panel’s recommendation, and the community meetings lost a sense of direction,
resulting in a final report whose findings were not clear. Nevertheless, ACLA leadership used
the findings as the basis for implementing service standards, an idea that was rejected in period
8. As in period 8, the proposal faced significant objections from member libraries, but this time
the ACLA board unilaterally implemented standards without member library support. The
critical decision for the period occurred in 2015 when the ACLA board voted to implement the
standards.
The predominant issue in period 9 was the library study (see Figure 5.24). ACLA and the
21st century library study group were the key actors during this period. ACLA was the most
prevalent audience. Most communicative activity took place in the ACLA circuit and the civil
society circuit. The library study group was considered a civil society actor.

237

80
1
70

9
4

60

Issue count

50
40

44

30
20

3

3
1
3
3
1
2

3
3
1
1
7
1
4

2011

2012

2013

10
0

2

5
3
2
1
3
1
1
1
2
2
16

10
1
2
2

8

2014

2015

2
1
2
2
4
3
2016

Year
ACLA formation and governance

Compliance with ACLA-standards

Compliance with RAD

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Delivery services

Distribution formula

EIN

Library study

Local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Local millage for libraries

PA state code and state plan

RAD funding

State budget

Figure 5.24. Issue counts in period 9.

Periods 8 and 9 exhibited similar conditions but different outcomes (see Figure 5.25).
The efforts to revise the formula in period 8 resulted in failure, but despite a similar magnitude of
resistance in period 9, the effort to implement standards succeeded. Both periods exhibited high
resistance. They also both exhibited low legitimacy. Both periods had high responsiveness. The

238

key difference between period 8 and period 9, the difference that made a difference in terms of
outcome, was that period 9 had high civil activity but period 8 did not. It is important to note
that the 21st century library study that was sponsored by ACLA and CLP was construed as its
own civil society group: it used community meetings, it had its own independent panel of nonlibrary members, and it was said to be an open-ended exploration of potential options for
restructuring. This portrayal of the library study as civil-society-based was what caused a
positive outcome in period 9.

Figure 5.25. Comparison of periods 8 and 9.

239

Though period 9 had high civil activity, it is important to point out that it did not have
high civil activity in the same way that period 1, period 2, or even period 4 had high civil
activity. In periods 1, 2, and to some degree period 4, the civil society actors were grassroots—
they were outside individuals who desired changes in the library system and agitated for those
changes. In period 2, these movements were effective; in periods 1 and 4, they failed. In period
9, by contrast, the civil society actor—the library study—was a manufactured actor, a faux civil
society force designed to serve the interests of ACLA and CLP. ACLA leadership used the
community meetings as a basis for implementing an action already on the agenda. Period 9
proves that system changes can result despite low legitimacy and high resistance if there is the
perception of approval from civil society. Another possible explanation for the success in period
9 compared to period 8 is a larger ratio of backroom deals.

5.5

DISCUSSION SUMMARY

The above sections discussed in depth the design and results for this study. First, the research
strategy and approach were discussed, including this study’s problem, solution, and question
sequences. These sequences formed the basis of the historical case study design, a new research
strategy consisting of 3 analysis stages. Following the discussion of the research design, the
revised Machtkreislauf model that was developed in stage 2 was discussed. The discussion
addressed how the new model accounted for criticisms and problems that faced the old model.
Then, the theory of the public sphere and public libraries that was developed in stage 3 was
discussed. The theory was related to 2 areas of literature: public sphere literature and classical
240

theories of public library development. Finally, the section discussed the case of Pittsburgh in
depth by synthesizing the descriptive and explanatory knowledge developed in stages 1, 2, and 3.
Using the theory of the public sphere and public libraries developed in stage 3, it was shown why
the case developed over time as it did.

241

6.0

CONCLUSION

This concluding section provides a summary of the research project and a reflection on its
methodological approach. It reviews the study’s key findings and answers the research questions
posed at the study’s outset. Contributions to the fields of library studies and political science are
noted. The section lists some limitations of the study, considers potential social implications of
the study, and suggests avenues for future research.

6.1

PROJECT SUMMARY

The purpose of this project was to more fully understand how the public sphere affects public
library development. The project was carried out first by developing a new research paradigm
based on the Machtkreislauf model, then by applying this paradigm to a single case, the case of
the regional public library system in greater Pittsburgh, United States, from 1924 to 2016.
Several different data sources were used, including archival materials, interviews, and fieldwork.
The research proceeded in a 3-stage process, and each stage produced its own descriptive or
explanatory knowledge. The project resulted in a new research strategy called historical case
study, a new research framework for the study of the public sphere, the first historical account of
the regional public library system in greater Pittsburgh, and a general explanatory theory of how
the public sphere affects public library development.
242

6.2

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

This project was guided by one central research question (RQ) and 3 sub-questions (SQs). The
central research question for this study was: How does the Machtkreislauf model apply to the
regional public library system in Pittsburgh?

This question called for descriptive and

explanatory knowledge in the form of a model, theory, narrative, and graphical illustrations. The
first sub-question of this study, SQ1, was: What does a tested and refined Machtkreislauf model
look like? This question called for a description using new concepts and a new model. SQ2
asked: What does the evolution of the library system in Pittsburgh look like? This question
asked for descriptive knowledge in the form of a narrative and graphical illustrations. SQ3
asked: How does the public sphere affect public library development? This question called for a
causal theory that could explain and predict.

6.3

METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH

This study adopted case study design as a methodological approach. A new type of case study
design was created for this project: historical case study. Historical case study refers both to a
concept and to a process. As a concept, historical case study is defined as a retrospective
longitudinal comparison of a single case that blends history and case study by examining a case
from the distant past into the current moment. It does this by using a variety of source materials,
including archival documents, interviews, and fieldwork, to compare a case’s periods over time.
The periods of the case serve as embedded units of analysis.
compared using a common interpretive lens.
243

These embedded units are

As a process, historical case study consists of 3 stages of analysis: source collection and
analysis, data collection and analysis, and data interpretation. Each stage uses its own method
and produces its own knowledge. Each stage can stand alone as its own micro-study, but the
stages are also part of a greater structure. The stages proceed cumulatively in the sense that
earlier stages inform later ones. In this study, the method used in stage 1 was theoretical
sampling, in stage 2 it was qualitative content analysis, and in stage 3 it was qualitative
comparative analysis.

6.4

KEY FINDINGS

This study made several findings related to the Machtkreislauf model, the history of the regional
public library system in greater Pittsburgh, and the effects of the public sphere on public library
development. These findings are based on a collection of 988 source items and 7,553 pages of
source material that were gathered during stage 1. Archival documents were collected from
several sites in the Pittsburgh area, including the William R. Oliver Special Collections room at
the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, the University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, the
Heinz History Center Detre Library and Archives, historical files at the Allegheny County
Library Association office, and other Web- and print-based sites. Twenty-five interviews were
conducted with 15 individuals related to the case for a total of over 34 interview hours. Nine
public meetings were attended in order to create fieldnotes based on direct observations. During
the coding and analysis process in stage 2, a total of 1,773 segments of coding were analyzed
from the source materials, creating data matrices with a total of 19,503 data points.

244

In stage 2 of the study, a new Machtkreislauf model was developed using new concepts,
including formal decision, narrowcast/broadcast, circuits, diffuse public, and tessellations. These
concepts and the resulting new model address previous criticisms of the original model and fit
the case of Pittsburgh, United States.
Stages 1 and 3 resulted in a new historical account of the regional public library system in
greater Pittsburgh. The case was found to have 9 periods. These periods were distinguished
using the concept of a decision cycle. The case began in 1924 due to civil society movements.
In 1956, the first county system was formed, then in 1961 the case was affected by a new state
library code. Starting in 1991, the system significantly changed due to the emergence of new
actors, new technologies, and economic pressure.

The first countywide organization was

formed. The years 1994 and 1997 were significant milestones in the case’s development: in
1994, the regional system became a funded cultural asset, and in 1997 member libraries voted to
become a federated library system. The system continued to struggle with the development of
internal policies during its latest two periods, from 1998 to 2016.
In stage 3 of this study, a theory was developed to explain why some periods of the case
exhibited changes and others did not. The theory identified 4 conditions of the public sphere
whose configurations explained change and continuity in the case. These conditions are civil
activity, responsiveness, legitimacy, and resistance. The theory states that high responsiveness,
together with either high civil activity, high legitimacy, or low resistance, causes changes in the
library system. Conversely, the theory states that either low responsiveness or low civil activity,
low legitimacy, and high resistance cause continuity. This theory of the public sphere and public
library development can also be used to predict unobserved scenarios, and it may also apply to
cases in other contexts.

245

6.5

CONTRIBUTIONS

This study contributes to the fields of library studies, political science, and research
methodology. To library studies, it presents a new framework for the study of the public sphere
and public libraries. The framework is a revised Machtkreislauf model that incorporates new
concepts, including circuits, tessellations, and narrowcasts/broadcasts. An application of the
model to this area of research was modelled by this study.
This study also introduces a new concept, decision cycle, to library studies. This concept
can be used in the future to study library organizations over time. The concept works well when
combined with a historical case study approach because the concept can be used to identify and
distinguish the periods of a case.
To the area of library history, this study offers the first historical account of the regional
public library system in greater Pittsburgh.

Historical accounts of Pittsburgh have either

overlooked public libraries altogether, or they have focused exclusively on Carnegie libraries and
Carnegie’s philanthropic legacy. This study views the public libraries in greater Pittsburgh as a
regional infrastructure.
The study also presents a new theory of library development, one with a public sphere
perspective. The theory was developed using qualitative comparative analysis, representing the
first application of the method within the field of library studies. This theory represents the first
nomothetic knowledge developed within the area of the public sphere and public libraries. It
also offers more robust explanatory potential than classical theories of library development, like
social conditions theory.
To political science, this study contributes a revised Machtkreislauf model that was
modified in light of several criticisms to the original.
246

The new, revised model was also

developed in light of data from the case of Pittsburgh, United States. This study represents the
first rigorous empirical application of the Machtkreislauf model to a non-European and nonnational-scale case. The new Machtkreislauf model may serve as a general, macrosociological
description of discursive democracy.
To the area of research methodology, this study contributes a new variation of case study
design, historical case study. Historical case study is a 3-stage case study design that examines a
case longitudinally from the distant past to the present. It does this by describing and comparing
the periods of a case over time. Historical case study is an effective research strategy where the
object of study is to understand change processes in a case.

6.6

LIMITATIONS

This study faces two main limitations. The first limitation regards the generalizability of its
findings, particularly the generalizability of the revised circulation of power model and the
theory of the public sphere and public libraries. This study was a single-case study of a public
library system in the United States from 1924 to 2016.

The model and theory that were

developed in this study therefore require further testing in other contexts in order to assess their
generalizability. The second limitation of this study concerns the availability of source materials
and the number and types of source materials that were analyzed. The data and findings of this
study were based on several types of source materials, including archival documents, interviews,
and field observations.

These materials represent or describe only a sample of all the

communicative events in the public sphere of the case. It was not possible to observe and

247

analyze all communicative events relative to the case. Many in-person meetings, telephone calls,
email messages, and personal correspondences were not analyzed.

6.7

IMPLICATIONS

This study was designed to undertake basic research in an effort to more fully understand how
the public sphere affects public library development. The outcomes of this study were therefore
intended to be intellectual contributions to the library studies related to the public sphere. That
being said, the findings of this study may also suggest implications for practice within the field
of professional librarianship. First, the results of this study offer practicing librarians and library
administrators who work in the regional public library system in greater Pittsburgh a fuller
understanding of how the library system developed. A fuller historical understanding of the
system and its evolution may enable library leaders to reflect on how to design the library system
moving forward.
A second implication for practice may apply to the area of library management,
particularly change management. The concept of a decision cycle that was presented in this
study offers managers a new way to consider the process of how organizations evolve and
potentially change. The theory of the public sphere and public libraries presented in this study
proposes 4 causal conditions and 2 formulas that explain change and continuity. Managers can
use this theory as a guide to strategically implement change. For example, given that high
responsiveness is a necessary condition for an outcome of substantive change, it follows that
change proponents should target responsive audiences—those decision-makers who accept and
implement legitimate proposals. Given also that high responsiveness alone is not a sufficient
248

condition for change, and given how high responsiveness must be combined with either high
legitimacy, high civil activity, or low resistance to result in a positive outcome, it follows that
change advocates should ensure both a legitimate process of deliberation during the decision
cycle and incorporate civil society groups into the process. Periods 7 and 9 of this study
demonstrate that high legitimacy or high civil activity can overcome high resistance when high
responsiveness is present.

6.8

FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

This work examined the “metasphere” of the public library (Ingraham, 2015), the sphere of
discourse concerning how the library is governed and legitimated. Future work could apply a
similar approach to the study of how the public library acts as a public sphere platform, an
infrastructure that supports public sphere discourse, thus examining the commons component of
the governance-legitimation-commons framework (Widdersheim, 2015a; Widdersheim &
Koizumi, 2016a). This could be done by utilizing the same framework used in this study, but by
examining a new case, perhaps an issue-driven group that uses the library for the purposes of
public sphere participation. The purpose of the study could be to determine what role the library
plays in this process.
This project can also be continued by trying to falsify or extend the theory in an inductive
way (Popper, 1959, 1962). This can be done by identifying cases whose configurations were not
observed in this study, or by comparing the results from new cases to those from this study.
Such cross-case comparisons could lead to a refined theory and further generalizability. Cases
could be studied using the same or similar methodology, historical case study. Each future study
249

could examine 2 or more periods and decision cycles, then compare their outcomes and
conditions. The cases need not be confined to library systems.

250

APPENDIX A: LITERATURE ABOUT THE PUBLIC SPHERE AND PUBLIC
LIBRARIES

Table A.1. Works that associate the public sphere with public libraries.

#

Author(s) and year

Nation of focus

Type

Methods/Approach

1

Thauer and Vodosek (1978)

Germany

Book

History

2

Schuhböck (1983)

Germany

Article

Multiple case study

3

Greenhalgh, Landry, and Worpole
(1993)

UK

Book

Survey/Interview/
Observation

4

Schuhböck (1994)

Germany

Article

History

5

Greenhalgh, Worpole, and Landry
(1995)

UK

Book

Cultural criticism

6

Webster (1995)

UK

Book

Cultural criticism

7

Vestheim (1997a)

Norway

Thesis

History

8

Vestheim (1997b)

Norway

Article

Cultural criticism

9

Emerek and Ørum (1997)

Denmark

Article

History

10

M. J. Williamson (1998)

UK

Thesis

Interviews

11

M. J. Williamson (2000)

UK

Article

Cultural criticism

12

Ventura (2001)

Portugal

Thesis

Ethnography

13

Ventura (2002)

Portugal

Book

Ethnography

14

Leckie and Hopkins (2002)

Canada

Article

Ethnography

15

McCook (2003)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

16

Wiegand (2003a)

US

Article

Editorial

17

Wiegand and Bertot (2003)

US

Article

Editorial

18

Wiegand (2003b)

US

Article

Editorial

251

19

Buschman (2003)

20

Alstad and Curry (2003)

21

Buschman (2004)

22

US

Book

Cultural criticism

Non-specific

Article

Cultural criticism

US

Article

Cultural criticism

Leckie (2004)

Canada

Article

Conceptual

23

Kranich (2004)

US

Chapter

Cultural criticism

24

McCook (2004)

US

Chapter

Textbook

25

Frohmann (2004)

Canada, US, UK

Review

Cultural criticism

26

Audunson (2005b)

Non-specific

Article

Conceptual

27

Aabø (2005)

Non-specific

Article

Conceptual

28

Andersen (2005)

Non-specific

Article

Cultural criticism

29

Buschman (2005a)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

30

Buschman (2005b)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

31

Ljødal (2005)

Norway

Report

Interviews

32

Black and Hoare (2006)

UK

Book

History

33

Buschman (2006)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

34

Taipale (2006)

Finland

Paper

Conceptual

35

Andersen and Skouvig (2006)

Denmark

Article

Conceptual

36

Leckie and Buschman (2007)

US and Canada

Chapter

Conceptual

37

Rothbauer (2007)

Non-specific

Chapter

Cultural criticism

38

Newman (2007)

UK

Article

Interviews

39

Buschman (2007)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

40

Audunson et al. (2007)

Norway

Paper

Survey

41

Vårheim, Steinmo, and Ide (2008)

OECD countries

Article

Survey/Interview

42

Burnett and Jaeger (2008)

US

Article

Conceptual

43

Braman (2009)

US

Chapter

Conceptual

44

Taipale (2009)

Finland

Thesis

Multiple case study

45

Jaeger and Burnett (2010)

US

Chapter

Conceptual

46

Aabø et al. (2010)

Norway

Article

Survey

47

Burnett and Jaeger (2011)

US

Article

Conceptual

252

48

Buschman (2012)

49

Aabø and Audunson (2012)

50

US

Book

Cultural criticism

Norway

Article

Ethnography

Buschman (2013)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

51

Kranich (2013)

US

Article

Cultural criticism

52

Jaeger et al. (2014)

US

Article

Conceptual

53

Frota (2014)

Brazil

Article

Cultural criticism

54

Machado et al. (2014)

Brazil

Article

Cultural criticism

55

Trosow (2014/2015)

Non-specific

Article

Cultural criticism

56

McNally (2014/2015)

Non-specific

Article

Cultural criticism

57

Richards et al. (2015)

Non-specific

Book

History

UK, Denmark,
Norway

Article

Interviews

58

Evjen (2015)

59

Ingraham (2015)

UK

Article

Discourse analysis

60

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2015a)

US

Paper

Content analysis

61

Widdersheim (2015b)

US

Poster

Content analysis

62

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2015b)

US

Paper

Content analysis

63

Widdersheim (2015a)

Non-specific

Article

Conceptual

64

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2016a)

US

Article

Content analysis

65

Audunson and Evjen (2016)

Norway

Paper

Survey, SPSS

66

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2016b)

Non-specific

Paper

Conceptual

67

Widdersheim (2016)

Non-specific

Paper

Conceptual

68

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2016c)

US

Paper

Content analysis

69

Koizumi and Widdersheim (2016)

Non-specific

Article

Conceptual

70

Widdersheim and Koizumi (2017)

US

Article

Content analysis

71

Audunson et al. (2017)

Non-specific

Session

Conceptual

253

APPENDIX B: ACLA LIBRARIES

Table B.1. ACLA member libraries, 2016.

1

Andrew Bayne Memorial Library

2

Andrew Carnegie Free Library

3

Avalon Public Library

4

Baldwin Borough Library

5

Bethel Park Public Library

6

Braddock Carnegie Library

7

Brentwood Library

8

Bridgeville Public Library

9

C. C. Mellor Memorial Library

10

Carnegie Free Library of Swissvale

11

Carnegie Library of Homestead

12

Carnegie Library of McKeesport

13

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

14

Clairton Public Library

15

Community Library of Allegheny Valley

16

Community Library of Castle Shannon

17

Cooper-Siegel Community Library

18

Coraopolis Memorial Library

19

Crafton Public Library

20

Dormont Public Library

21

F.O.R. Sto-Rox Library
254

22

Green Tree Public Library

23

Hampton Community Library

24

Jefferson Hills Public Library

25

Millvale Community Library

26

Monroeville Public Library

27

Moon Township Public Library

28

Mt. Lebanon Public Library

29

North Versailles Public Library

30

Northern Tier Regional Library

31

Northland Public Library

32

Oakmont Carnegie Library

33

Penn Hills Public Library

34

Pleasant Hills Public Library

35

Plum Community Library

36

Robinson Township Library

37

Scott Township Library

38

Sewickley Public Library

39

Shaler North Hills Library

40

South Fayette Township Library

41

South Park Township Library

42

Springdale Free Public Library

43

Upper St. Clair Township Library

44

Western Allegheny Community Library

45

Whitehall Public Library

46

Wilkinsburg Public Library

255

APPENDIX C: IRB APPROVAL LETTER

University of Pittsburgh
Institutional Review Board

3500 Fifth Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 383-1480
(412) 383-1508 (fax)
http://www.irb.pitt.edu

Memorandum
To:

Michael Widdersheim

From:

IRB Office

Date:

2/4/2016

IRB#:

PRO16010055

Subject: Legitimation, the public sphere, and regional public library infrastructure: A case study using
qualitative content analysis

The above-referenced project has been reviewed by the Institutional Review Board. Based on the
information provided, this project meets all the necessary criteria for an exemption, and is hereby
designated as "exempt" under section
45 CFR 46.101(b)(2)

256

Please note the following information:

•

Investigators should consult with the IRB whenever questions arise about whether planned
changes to an exempt study might alter the exempt status. Use the "Send Comments to IRB
Staff" link displayed on study workspace to request a review to ensure it continues to meet the
exempt category.

•

It is important to close your study when finished by using the "Study Completed" link displayed
on the study workspace.

•

Exempt studies will be archived after 3 years unless you choose to extend the study. If your study
is archived, you can continue conducting research activities as the IRB has made the
determination that your project met one of the required exempt categories. The only caveat is
that no changes can be made to the application. If a change is needed, you will need to submit a
NEW Exempt application.

Please be advised that your research study may be audited periodically by the University of Pittsburgh Research
Conduct and Compliance Office.

257

APPENDIX D: INFORMED CONSENT FORM

Legitimation, the Public Sphere, and Regional Public Library Infrastructure: A Case Study using
Qualitative Content Analysis

This research study is an investigation of how the Allegheny County Library Association is
legitimated in public communication. The study will draw from a variety of data sources in
order to develop a theory of the public sphere related to libraries. One source of data is
interviews. As an interviewee, there are no foreseeable risks or discomforts associated with
participation in this study, nor are there any direct benefits. This interview will be recorded, and
a transcript of the interview will be produced. The researcher will also take notes during the
interview process. The information provided by you in this interview may be used in published
research. Your identity will be kept confidential by following several steps:
•

In the event that portions of this interview are used in a published report, your name will
be replaced with a pseudonym, and only a generic descriptor of your position will be
used. No personally-identifying characteristics will be used in published research;

•

The paper notes taken during this interview will not be distributed to anyone, and they
will be kept in a locked file cabinet in the researcher’s office;

•

The electronic copies of the interview recording, transcript, and accompanying notes will
not be distributed to anyone, and they will be stored on a password-protected device;
258

•

The interview recording as well as accompanying notes and transcript will be destroyed
seven (7) years after the research is complete.

Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. Refusal to participate will involve no
penalty. You may discontinue participation at any time without penalty.

By signing below, I certify that I understand the nature of this research and I agree to participate.

Signature ___________________________________________________ Date _____________

259

APPENDIX E: DEFINITIONS OF KEY TERMS

DATA

Data are finite descriptions of the world that are created using the language and tools of a
particular research context. Patterns and relationships among collections of data can be analyzed
as a way to infer about larger processes or general phenomena. Data can be qualitative (beliefs,
values) or quantitative (measurements). Though data by themselves are facts, taken alone they
are meaningless. Data are inherently created by and for particular contexts: data are created by
certain vocabularies and practices, and they are created for particular research purposes.

CONCEPT

A concept is an idea that is put to paper: it is well-described and fixed in a tangible form.
Concepts are categories, sets of categories, and their relations that are used to describe the world.
A concept is general and abstract, and it applies broadly to a plurality of particular instances.

MODEL

A model is a simplified description of observable phenomena. It shows in an abstract way how
something works. It resembles a concept in that it usually takes the form of an image or
260

drawing, but it may be more sophisticated than a concept, or it may be composed of multiple
concepts. The purpose of a model is to show what the parts of a process are and how they work
together. In other words, a model shows the components of a process and their relationships. A
model answers what questions—it shows who, what, where, and when things happen, and in
what order. It does not answer why questions. Models are created through a research process
where observations are sorted into abstract categories and those categories are then arranged
together in order. Like a good concept, a good model is one that is generalizable—it can be
applied to any setting where the phenomena are observed. Figure 2.10 of the Machtkreislauf is
an example of a general model, one that does not include empirical data. The actor-power
networks and tessellation visualizations in Appendix L are examples of empirical models
because the models are infused with data from the case’s source materials.

FRAMEWORK

A framework is a theory or model that is used to orient a research project. The main categories
or relationships of the theory or model inform the research problems, research questions, and
data collection of the project. All research projects, the data they generate, and the conclusions
they draw work within a framework. It is therefore important for researchers to make explicit
whatever framework informs their studies. The framework for this study is the coding frame
whose concepts are described in section 4.2.1.

261

THEORY

The term theory is more difficult to define than concept, model, or framework. This is because
theory is used in different ways in different fields. The biggest split in usages generally aligns
with the suture between arts and sciences. In the arts and humanities, such as in literary theory, a
theory can be a metaphor or a set of central ideas that is used to interpret a text. In the sciences
or in law, by contrast, while a theory can be described in metaphorical terms, a theory is not just
a metaphor. In science, a theory is tied to empiricism: assumptions about observations, testing,
and fallibility.

In science, criminal law, and everyday life, a theory is the product of an

abductive leap from surprising facts in an effort to make sense of them. Theories can be
explanatory or descriptive. This sense of the word theory—as provisional knowledge—is the
sense that is used in this study. A theory is a rule that, if true, accounts for observable facts. A
theory has both epistemological and methodological features. Epistemologically, it describes or
explains phenomena, and in doing so it satisfies the natural urge to understand the world.
Methodologically, a theory is part of a mundane research process, one that includes modes of
inference called abduction, deduction, and induction (Reichertz, 2014). This process of inquiry
is used by ordinary folks every day, but it is also one that has been institutionalized in the form
of science. The distinctions between theory, concept, and model are visualized in Figure E.1.
The differences are a matter of degree.

262

Complex

Model
Theory

Simple

Concept

Description

Explanation

(what, when,
who, where,
how)

(why)

Figure E.1. Distinctions between concept, model, and theory.

One way to explain the meaning of theory is through an example. The process of theory
development begins with a problem or contradiction that arises in light of observations. Suppose
someone has a bird feeder in their yard. Every day, the bird feeder is filled. By nightfall, it is
observed that the feeder is still full. In the mornings, however, it is observed that the birdseed
from the feeder is gone. This observation is puzzling because it contradicts other knowledge.
Most birds can’t see at night, they don’t fly during that time, and because of that they are not
able to feed. Even if they could fly, it is unlikely that birds could consume all the birdseed in a
birdfeeder in a single day. In this example, the mystery of the disappearing bird seed represents
the research problem and calls out for an explanation.
The next step of theory development requires curiosity, questioning, and determination.
The observer might ask why the bird seed disappears at night and resolve to find the solution.
The question demands some explanation, some explanatory theory. A theory is a rule in the
263

form of a statement that accounts for the observations. The observer considers some theories
that could explain why the bird seed is missing. One theory that explains the disappearing bird
seed is this: A hungry neighbor sleepwalks outside at night and eats all the bird seed from the
feeder. This theory, if true, explains why the bird seed is missing every morning. The mode of
inference that leaps from an observed case to an explanatory theory is abduction.
The next step of theory development is to put the theory to work. An important feature of
a theory is its testability. Suppose the theory is: The sleepwalking neighbor eats all the birdseed
at night. Certain hypotheses follow from this theory. Hypotheses are logical implications that
follow from the theory.

The mode of inference that derives hypotheses from a theory is

deduction. For example, if the theory were true, then it would follow that footprints would be
found around the feeder that match the shoe size of the neighbor. Perhaps the neighbor left a
slipper there. If the somnambulant visits the feeder at night, then auditory or visual evidence
during the visits would prove it. These hypotheses are predictions that can be tested to confirm
or disconfirm the theory.
The next stage of theory development is testing. Based on the hypotheses derived from
the theory, a test is carried out. In the case of the birdfeeder, a wildlife camera (game cam) with
a motion sensor is installed. The hypothesis is that, supposing the neighbor visits the feeder
every night, then the game cam will document the visit.
Based on the results of the test, the theory is confirmed or disconfirmed. In the case of
the bird feeder mystery, the theory of the sleepwalking neighbor is falsified, but in light of the
results, a new theory is proposed to explain the missing bird seed (see Figure E.2). This theory is
then used to explain future cases. The application and extension of the existing theory to cases in
the future or to cases more generally uses induction as a mode of inference. As a theory is used

264

in more and more cases, it gradually fades into the background as just another unproblematic
piece of knowledge. It is no longer provisional, but dependable.

Figure E.2. Results of theory-testing in the bird feeder mystery.

The process of theory development that is used in everyday life to solve mundane
problems is the same one that is used in research projects such as this one. Like the mundane
theory development described in the example of the bird feeder mystery, in this project a
problem is stated, a question is posed, observations are gathered to answer the question, and a
theory is offered as a way to answer the question (see Figure E.3). The only difference between
the bird feeder example and this project is that the problems and questions in this project are
more abstract, and the data collection and analysis tools are more sophisticated.
265

Problem:

A surprising fact does not
fit with existing knowledge

Abduction:

Leap from surprising facts to a
new rule that accounts for them

Theory:

A rule that, if true, would
explain or describe the
surprising facts

Deduction:

Imagining hypotheses
from the theory that
could be tested

No Problem:

Facts fit with existing
knowledge, theory remains
unproblematic

Induction:

Extension of existing
theory to new facts

Observation:

Using hypotheses to confirm
or disconfirm the theory

Figure E.3. Problem-solving research cycle.

CAUSE

A cause is a condition, factor, or variable that produces an observable event. In the case of the
bird feeder mystery, hungry deer ate the bird seed and caused it to disappear overnight. Asking a
why question often means asking for a cause, or reason, to explain observable phenomena.

MECHANISM

A causal mechanism is a link between a cause and its effect. Identifying and describing a causal
mechanism means providing a detailed account of the process that leads from a cause to an
266

effect. There is a substantial body of literature in philosophy of science and the social sciences
about what causal mechanisms are and why they are important (see Gerring (2010) for a critical
overview of this literature). For the purposes of this project, it is enough to say that positing a
causal mechanism requires unpacking that link between cause and effect and clarifying how it
works.

267

APPENDIX F: PERIOD CHRONOLOGIES

PERIOD 1

Table F.1. Chronology of key events of period 1.

Year

Description of event

1923

Metropolitan Plan Commission authorized by the legislature and governor of
Pennsylvania to study municipal consolidation in the Pittsburgh area.

1924

Public Library Committee of the Civic Club of Allegheny County proposed
extending the services of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh to schools in North Side.

1925

Act No. 196 passed state legislature and approved by the governor; granted
counties the power to build and maintain libraries.

1926

Civic Club petitioned City Council to transfer control of the Carnegie Free Library
of Allegheny to the trustees of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1928

Amendment to the constitution of Pennsylvania passed by the legislature that
would allow for city-county federation.

1929

A regional government charter failed to pass special election in Allegheny County;
city and county are not consolidated.

1929

Civic Club appeared before Pittsburgh City Council to support increased funding
to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

1931

Act No. 329 approved state aid to county libraries.

1931

Civic Club worked with Ralph Munn to petition Pittsburgh Mayor and Council to
restore funding to Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1933

Civic Club petitioned City Council for a larger appropriation and higher salaries
for the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1937

Article published in The Federator by Mildred Stahl Fletcher on library service in
Allegheny County and outside the city.
268

1937

The Civic Club coordinated with the Pennsylvania Economy League to meet with
the Mayor and Council to consolidate the Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny with
the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1938

Civic Club, Public Library Committee, continued to review the advantages of
merging Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny with Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.
Endorsements for the merger from residents and public figures were gathered.
The plea was sent to City Council.

1938

Allegheny Parent-Teacher Council proposed that Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
become a county library.

1939

Mayor failed to follow through on merger of North Side library with the city’s
Carnegie system.

1939

Civic Club coordinated with Allegheny County Parent-Teachers’ Association to
advocate to County Commissioners for an extension of library services in the
county.

1940

The County Commissioners requested that the Civic Club reconcile the proposals
of the Federation of Women’s Clubs of Allegheny County and the ParentTeachers’ Group.

1940

Representatives from the Civic Club, Allegheny County Council of the ParentTeachers’ Association, Allegheny County Federation of Women’s Clubs, the
Council on Adult Education, the League of Women Voters, Ralph Munn of
Carnegie Library, and the principal of Aspinwall School District met to discuss
county library service.

1941

County Commissioners decided that no appropriations could be made for county
library services.

1942

Efforts toward county library services were abandoned because funding could not
be obtained during the war.

PERIOD 2

Table F.2. Chronology of key events of period 2.

Year

Description of event

1948

The Civic Club and Ralph Munn investigated the possibility for a county library
survey. They approached the Allegheny Conference on Community Development.
269

1950

Allegheny Conference on Community Development sponsored a library survey
conducted by Brahm and Sandoe from the State Library of Ohio. It was the first study
of county library services. It found a quality difference between city and county
libraries and called for a county library system. The survey was funded by the
Pittsburgh Foundation and the Arbuckel-Jamison Foundation.

1951

The Metropolitan Study Commission was created by state legislature to investigate
issues related to city-county consolidation. The Commission was administered by
representatives of the Allegheny Conference on Community Development and the
Pennsylvania Economy League, and it was financed by the Buhl Foundation.

1954

Pittsburgh City Council proposed transferring the library and zoo to the county in an
effort to avoid instituting new taxes. The effort to transfer library management failed,
and a wage tax was implemented.

1954

Civic Club of Allegheny County solicited letters in support of a merger between the
Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny and the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1954

Central North Side Neighborhood Council supported an Allegheny-Pittsburgh library
merger after a series of community meetings.

1955

The Metropolitan Study Commission published a home rule charter report, and in it
described library services in the county. The report on libraries was designed in part
by Ralph Munn. It recommended a county system with the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh as the nucleus and suggested that county libraries elect to join.

1955

The County Boroughs Association and other municipal leaders publicly opposed any
transfer of local power to city or county government.

1955

Mrs. Howard EnDean of the Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teachers’
Associations formed a citizens group for the promotion of county library services.

1955

The first meeting was held for the civil society group The Committee for Promotion of
County Library Service at Carnegie Library School. Mrs. Howard (Dorothea) EnDean
and Mrs. Charles (Dorothy) Strang were leaders. Mrs. George (Florence) Karnofsky
was elected chairman. This group became the Library Planning Committee of
Allegheny County.

1955

The Library Planning Committee worked with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh to
promote the idea of county library services. Bookmarks were distributed and a
bookmobile displayed at the County Fair.

1955

Representatives from the Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County,
Allegheny Conference on Community Development, Civic Club of Allegheny County,
and Ralph Munn met with County Commissioners to propose a county system.

1956

County Commissioners agreed to fund the “Munn plan” and contract with the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh. The plan initiated 1) free borrowing privileges in Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh for all residents of Allegheny County, 2) bookmobile service to
some areas lacking library service, 3) inter-library loans from the Carnegie system to
other libraries, and 4) centralized purchasing and cataloging services by the Carnegie
270

for other libraries.
1956

Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny and its Woods Run branch were merged with the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh system. The merger was approved by Mayor David L.
Lawrence.

1956

The Library Services Act (LSA) was passed by the US Congress to provide funding for
the construction of rural libraries. Funding was administered by the Library Services
Branch of the US Department of Education.

195657

Following the implementation of county services, the Library Planning Committee
worked toward strengthening existing services and fostering new ones, including the
development of service standards.

1957

County bookmobile service began.

1957

Pennsylvania State Library commissioned a state library survey and hired Lowell A.
Martin, Dean at Rutgers University, as lead surveyor. The survey was funded by
federal LSA money.

1958

Ralph Munn proposed a plan for the federation of libraries in the county. Librarians
and trustees from around the county met to discuss the plan. The plan was ultimately
abandoned in light of the Martin plan and other proposals at the state level.

1958

Lowell Martin published results and recommendations from the Pennsylvania Library
Survey. Recommendations for a state-wide plan based on the survey were known as
“the Martin Plan.”

1958

Hearings were held by the State Library, the Pennsylvania Library Association, and the
Governor’s Commission on Public Library Development to develop a state-wide plan
for libraries to propose as state legislation.

1960

Members of the Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County, now called the
Citizens Committee for County Library Service, met with County Commissioners to
discuss a federated system.

1960

Pennsylvania Library Association Legislative Committee attempted to pass a bill in the
state legislature to establish a library code.

1961

Ralph Munn formulated another plan that recommended a regional reference center
and funding of libraries by local school districts.

PERIOD 3

271

Table F.3. Chronology of key events of period 3.

Year

Description of event

1961

Act 188 was approved by the state General Assembly and signed by now-Governor
Lawrence. The act established a library code for the state. It also instituted state aid to
libraries, district library units, a Governor’s Advisory Council, and standards for public
library services.

1962

Preliminary steps were taken for a district services program in Pittsburgh.

1963

Pennsylvania state plan became effective; district services began.

1963

The Graduate School of Library and Information Sciences of the University of
Pittsburgh admitted is first class.

1964

The Library Services Act was renewed as the Library Services and Construction Act;
the bill was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson.

1965

A book storage and bookmobile parking facility was established behind the West End
Branch of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

1966

Keith Doms re-proposed Ralph Munn’s idea of a regional reference center to the County
Commissioners.

1967

A pilot facility for a regional reference center was approved by the County
Commissioners. Funding was allocated by the State Library from federal Library
Services and Construction Act (LSCA) monies.

1967

Lowell Martin made a study of the Pennsylvania plan in operation.

1967

Pennsylvania Library Association initiated discussions about the Martin re-survey.

1968

District libraries in Butler County were transferred from the Pittsburgh District to the
New Castle District

1969

The Allegheny County Regional Reference Library opened its first-year demonstration
period. The library was funded by the county and an LSCA grant.

PERIOD 4

Table F.4. Chronology of key events of period 4.

Year

Description of event
272

1970

Board of County Commissioners of Allegheny County commissioned former state
librarian Ralph Blasingame to conduct a study of libraries in the county. The
study suggested increased county support and a new countywide library system
centralized in Oakland and led by the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,

1970

Donald C. Potter, Associate Director of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, initiated
discussion about the Blasingame study with librarians and trustees throughout the
county.

1971

The Pennsylvania Library Association Trustee Division and Governor’s Advisory
Committee continued legislative efforts toward county library mandation, a key
finding of the Martin re-survey.

1972

The State Library released a statewide plan for Library Services and Construction
Act funds.

1972

Allegheny County Government Study Commission was instituted to study options
for restructuring county government.

1973

Regional library system proponents presented their case before the Allegheny
County Government Study Commission.

1974

The Government Study Commission published a Home Rule Charter. This charter
was rejected in a county referendum.

1974

Pennsylvania State Library issued a Master Plan report.

1976

The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh developed a plan for county library services to
present to the County Commissioners.

1976

The board of trustees of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh reorganized to include
representation from the County

1976

The County Commissioners, with the help of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
applied to the State Library for LSCA funding to initiate a study on libraries in the
county. The project became known as the Allegheny County Citizens Study
Committee on Libraries.

1977

Pennsylvania State Library released a new library development plan.

1977

The League of Women’s Voters Library Resource Committee met to discuss a
county plan.

1978

A home rule charter was again rejected by voters in Allegheny County.

1978

The Allegheny County Citizens Study Committee on Libraries issued its final
report.

1979

Comments were solicited and collected about the citizens’ study from librarians
and trustees around the county.

273

PERIOD 5

Table F.5. Chronology of key events of period 5.

Year

Description of event

1985

Access Pennsylvania, a resource sharing network funded by the state, began in
Pennsylvania.

1988

Allegheny County libraries joined Access Pennsylvania.

1989

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh initiated a President’s Advisory Committee on the
Library.

1989

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh unveiled an online public access catalog,
CAROLINE (Carnegie Online) at the main library. Barcodes replaced bookslips.

1990

The President’s Advisory Committee reported that the Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh was underfunded. The study also recommended a tiered countywide
library system managed by a central authority.

1990

Frank J. Lucchino, County Controller for Allegheny County, published a special
report that advocated for fiscal regionalism and home rule. The study identified
libraries as an area of inter-municipal cooperation.

1991

Lucchino visited a meeting of the Library Association of the South Hills (LASH)
and Northland library. He advocated for political action and inter-library
cooperation.

1991

Lucchino issued a second report that focused on libraries. The report called for a
special county commission on libraries, funding for a county library director, and
it urged local library cooperation.

1991

County Library Association Serving the People (CLASP) was formed. It was a
group of librarians and trustees concerned for library advocacy and cooperation. It
was the first countywide association of libraries.

1991

The Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County (CFLAC) was
formed as a special commission of the county. Lucchino served as chair.

1991

The Buhl Foundation decided to fund a county library director.

1991

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh began to connect branch libraries with a
telecommunications system and computer hardware.

1992

The Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County hired a new
274

county director, DeeAnna Cavinee

1992

The Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County, the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, and CLASP, with funding from LSCA and the County,
purchased computers and modems for branch libraries and some county libraries
to connect with CAROLINE and the Internet. Known as Project Link-Up, it was
the beginning of a digital automated circulation and catalog system in the county.

1992

Allegheny Conference on Community Development began to study a new means
for funding cultural assets in the Pittsburgh area.

1993

Reading rooms, known as Knowledge Connections, began to be established by
CFLAC in housing projects around the county.

1993

Assisted by CFLAC, fax machines were donated to county libraries.

PERIOD 6

Table F.6. Chronology of key events of period 6.

Year

Description of event

1993,
June–July

Susan Parker of the Pennsylvania Economy League contacted CLASP and the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh about plans for a Regional Asset District. The
special district would fund things like the zoo, aviary, conservatory, stadium, and
libraries.

1993,
September

Bob Croneberger hired RMG Consultants to help develop plans for electronic
delivery in all public libraries and branches.

1993,
September

CLP received a 2-year LSCA grant from the State Library to fund Three Rivers
Free-Net, an electronic community information network.

1993,
December

Lobbyists in Harrisburg pushed for the Regional Asset District. Proponents
included the Allegheny Conference on Community Development, Pennsylvania
Economy League, Mayor Tom Murphy, Pirates President Mark Sauer, and
Steelers President Dan Rooney.

1993,
December

Act 77 passed the State General Assembly and it was signed by Governor Casey to
authorize a Regional Asset District in Allegheny County. A governing board
would distribute one-half of a 1 percent sales tax increase to regional assets in the
county.

275

1993,
December

Lucchino and Doreen Boyce of the Buhl Foundation met with librarians and
trustees to announce a proposed Project Link-Up expansion. They called it the
Electronic Information Strategy. Boyce pledged to help obtain capital funding.

1994,
February

CLASP, CLP, and CFLAC worked with RMG consultants to further develop the
Electronic Information Strategy.

1994,
March

CLASP met with Jim Turner of the Allegheny Conference on Community
Development to develop plans for obtaining RAD funding.

1994, April

The County Commissioners approved the 1 percent sales tax increase and the
Regional Asset District.

1994, May

The Electronic Information Strategy became the Electronic Information Network.

1994, May

CLASP began to work with the consultant Bill Dodge to craft a RAD proposal.

1994, June

Pittsburgh District libraries in Westmoreland County were transferred to
Monessen District.

1994, July

CLASP governance was split into representation from 5 regions: North, South,
East, West, and Central.

1994, July

CFLAC and other libraries petitioned the Pennsylvania Public Utilities
Commission for reduce telecommunications rates for libraries.

1994,
August

CLASP restructured to become the Allegheny County Library Association
(ACLA) in order to petition for RAD funds. JoEllen Kenney was elected
President, Marilyn Jenkins was elected Vice-President

1994,
September

ACLA held a petition drive and solicited letters in support of county library
funding from RAD

1994, July

The extra 1 percent sales tax from RAD took effect.

1994, July

Lucchino and Croneberger pitched the EIN to local foundations for capital
funding.

1994,
September

ACLA and CLP submitted funding proposals to the RAD board. Monroeville
Library submitted a separate proposal.

1994,
October

ACLA was awarded 5 million dollars by the RAD board; CLP was awarded over
11 million dollars. Both were approved as statutory assets, meaning that their
funding was guaranteed for 10 years.

276

PERIOD 7

Table F.7. Chronology of key events of period 7.

Year

Description of event

1994,
October

ACLA leaders began to discuss with the RAD board how to allocate the 5 million
dollars to 40 libraries.

1994,
October

Croneberger received funding for Electronic Information Network. The group
began transition from planning to implementation.

ACLA submitted a preliminary budget and distribution formula to RAD. The 3
1994,
formula factors were: population, local government support, and distress. Money
November– was also budgeted for EIN and administration. The budget was based largely on
December recommendations from Jim Turner, a consultant for the Allegheny Conference for
Community Development and Pennsylvania Economy League.
1994,
December

DeeAnna Cavinee resigned as Allegheny County Library Director. A search for a
new Allegheny County Library Administrator was undertaken by CFLAC.

1994,
December

The RAD board adopted a 53 million dollar budget for 1995.

1995,
January
1995,
January
1995,
March
1995,
April–July

Marilyn Jenkins was hired as the Allegheny County Library Administrator.
Northland and Monroeville libraries decided not to receive RAD money and not to
act as county libraries due to perceived financial losses. Because they were not
county libraries, they became ineligible to join EIN.
The RAD board approved the ACLA distribution formula.
Director and staff were hired for EIN.

1995, May

ACLA hired Library Planning Associates to help create a 5-year plan for the RAD
board.

1995, July

The EIN board approved eligibility criteria for participation in the network. The
criteria were: libraries must be ACLA members, they must qualify for state aid,
and they must offer open-access services countywide.

1995, July

Northland Library applied for RAD funding independently.

1995,
November

EIN computers were installed in libraries.

277

1995,
December

ACLA and CLP received RAD funding budget for 1996.

1996,
January

Marilyn Jenkins was appointed interim executive director of ACLA.

1996,
January

EIN equipment continued to be installed in libraries.

1996,
March

EIN system training for librarians began.

1996,
March

Library Planning Associates completed a 5-year planning report for ACLA. The
plan addressed overlap between ACLA and CLP district services. The plan also
recommended that ACLA pursue federated system status.

1996, April

Jenkins and Kamper led a discussion with ACLA directors about a federated
library system.

1996, May

Northland and Green Tree decided not to participate in EIN.

1996, July

Marilyn Jenkins was hired as ACLA executive director. She also continued to
work as Allegheny County Library Administrator.

1996,
August

The ACLA membership passed a budget with a narrow margin. Some libraries
openly expressed concerns that the approval process did not leave ample time for
discussion. These concerns were relayed to the RAD board.

1996,
August

ACLA’s long-term plan was approved by the RAD board.

1996,
August

Legal requirements for becoming a federated system were worked out by ACLA
counsel. ACLA membership voted to continue to work toward federation.

1996,
September

EIN implementation continued with the distribution of peripheral equipment.

1996,
September

ACLA member libraries began to submit letters of intent to form a federated
system.

1996,
October

Anti-ACLA publications were faxed to county officials, including the RAD board.

1996,
October

Not all libraries chose to fully participate in EIN. Those that connected but did not
fully participate were called “linked libraries.”

1996,
December

Northland Public Library decided not to participate in the ACLA funding from
RAD.

1997,
March

Member libraries questioned whether non-participation in a federated system also
disqualified them from receiving RAD funding.

1997, June

ACLA membership voted to change ACLA into a federated system. The changes
278

included a reconstitution of the board, 4 classes of membership, and the start of a
Librarians Advisory Council.
1997, July

Allegheny County League of Municipalities expressed concern about the proposed
change to a federated system.

1997,
August

Some libraries protested to the RAD board the change in ACLA bylaws that called
for a citizen-led board, not one filled by librarians.

1997,
September

ACLA received notice from the State Library that it qualified as a federated
system and its bylaws were approved.

1997,
October

Northland Public Library received a special grant from the RAD board even
though Northland did not offer open-access services to the county.

1998,
November

Independent and county-led audits revealed that over 100,000 dollars of EIN
equipment was missing.

PERIOD 8

Table F.8. Chronology of key events of period 8.

Year

Description of event

1998

EIN board and libraries discussed Internet filtering software.

1998

A new ACLA board was seated. There were 7 members: 4 at-large members, 1
representative from CFLAC, one from the regions, and 1 from the Librarians
Advisory Council.

1998

Petitions continued regarding the ACLA distribution formula.

1999

Conflict arose between CLP and ACLA over control of EIN.

1999

ACLA contracted with Allegheny County to oversee Knowledge Connection sites.

2000

Allegheny County adopted home rule. The 3-commissioner system was replaced
by a County Executive position and a 15-member council.

2001

Library Planning Associates released a long-range planning report for ACLA.
Suggestions in the report included: revise the governance of EIN to become a
501(c)3 organization, dissolve the Commission on the Future of Libraries, develop
a tiered model of library service, move bookmobile services from CLP to ACLA,
and consider moving district services to ACLA.
279

2001

ACLA proposed service standards for libraries. Performance measures were new
to the funding formula.

2002

ACLA overtook county bookmobile administration from CLP.

2002

ACLA proposed more concrete service standards.

2002

The Electronic Information Network became a 501(c)3 and was renamed
eiNetwork. The organization had two members: Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
and Allegheny County Library Association.

2003

ACLA considered point-based funding with multiple levels.

2003

The state public library subsidy was reduced and the State Library no longer
enforced state standards.

2004

The Standards/Funding Task Force failed to develop a workable formula that
incorporated performance measures and incentive funding.

2005

The ACLA board reconvened the Standards/Funding Task Force.

2006

Several libraries criticized ACLA’s performance-based funding formula.

2007

Olszak Management Consulting assisted with the formula revision process.

2007

Service standards were adopted for ACLA member libraries.

2008

The economic recession led to increases in library usage.

2008

CLP became the fiscal agent of eiNetwork.

2009

ACLA revised the distribution formula and presented it to the RAD board for
approval. The RAD board rejected the initial proposal because it failed to account
for local community support.

2009

ACLA approved a new formula and presented it to the RAD board. The RAD
board approved the revised formula.

2009

State basic aid was reduced by 20 percent and AccessPA was eliminated for 2010.

2010

ACLA revisited formula revisions.

2011

A dedicated millage for Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh was approved through a
city referendum.

PERIOD 9

280

Table F.9. Chronology of key events of period 9.

Year

Description of event

2011

David Donahoe, Executive Director of RAD, requested a review of ACLA by
ParenteBeard.

2012

ParenteBeard issued its report. The reports found service duplication between
ACLA and CLP’s District Library Services Office. The report recommended
streamlining district services, centralizing purchasing and data collection tasks,
and placing eiNetwork under the control of one organization. The report further
found that ACLA headquarters must improve transparency and communication
with member libraries. A final recommendation for ACLA headquarters was to
separate into two functional units, one for administration of services, and the other
for funding and data collection.

2012

The RAD board urged ACLA and CLP to consider the findings of the
ParenteBeard report in their strategic planning processes.

2012

The Hill Group completed a report for ACLA on new potential services and
programs for the county. The report offered little informative value.

2013

ACLA and CLP hosted discussions with county libraries about new potential
service models.

2013

ACLA and CLP leaders decided to hire a consultant to lead a county study called
Library Service in the 21st Century.

2013

ACLA and CLP hired Nicole Swerhun to facilitate a countywide study.

2013

The 21st Century process began. From the start, there was a mismatch between
the problems identified in the ParenteBeard report and the approach adopted by
Swerhun.

2013

Libraries in Homestead and McKeesport received dedicated millage as a result of
municipal referenda.

2013–2014

2014

2014–2015
2015

The 21st Century process continued in libraries throughout the county.
The County-City Library Service Panel issued a final report from the 21st Century
process led by Swerhun. The report recommended that ACLA establish
mandatory standards for county libraries, monitor compliance with those
standards, and establish centralized services through a single, combined entity.
ACLA member libraries offered feedback on proposed library standards.
Despite protests, the ACLA board adopted mandatory standards for ACLA
member libraries.

281

APPENDIX G: SOURCES

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 1

Table G.1. Sources for period 1.

No.

Citation

1

[$24,514,875 county budget is requested - Pittsburgh Post-Gazette]. (1940, January 11).
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

2

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1930). Annual report.

3

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1940). Annual report.

4

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1940, March 20). [Board minutes]. Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

5

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1939-1941). [Board minutes from June 5, 1939 to
April 16, 1941]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

6

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1937-1939). [Board minutes from May 1, 1937 to
April 30, 1939]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

7

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1941-1943). [Board minutes from May 8, 1941 to
March 17, 1943]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

8

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1931-1932). [Board minutes June 1931 to June
1933]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

9

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1933-1935). [Board minutes June 1933 to May
1935]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
282

10

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1924-1925). [Board Minutes May 1924 to 1925].
Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1925-1927). [Board minutes May 1925 to May
1927]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

12

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1927-1929). [Board minutes May 1927 to May
1929]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1929-1931). [Board minutes May 1929 to April
1931]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

14

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1935-1937). [Board minutes May 1935 to May
1937]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30). University
of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

15

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1940, January/February). [Bulletin]. Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

16

Munn, R. W. (1970). [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh: History 1895-1969].
Pennsylvania Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

17

[Change asked for library on Northside - Pittsburgh Post-Gazette]. (1938, February 15).
Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 7, Folder 64).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

18

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1925-1926). [Civic Club Committees]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 28, Other 3, Annals of the Civic
Club binder). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

19

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1930-1931). [Civic Club Committees]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 3). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

20

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1926). [Civic club organizational map]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 1). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

21

[Civic Club to debate merger of libraries - Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph]. (1938, March
22). Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 7, Folder 64).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

22

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1928-1929). [Committee Lists]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 3). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1929-1930). [Committee Roster]. Civic Club of
283

Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 3). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
24

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1931-1932). [Committee Roster]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 3). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

25

[County asked for extension of libraries - Pittsburgh Press]. (1940). Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

[County fund sought for school libraries - Pittsburgh Press]. (1940). Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

27

[County hears P.-T.A. plea for rural library]. (1940). Director's Office Collection (Box
21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

28

[Cut expected in county tax - Pittsburgh Post-Gazette]. (1940, January 10). Director's
Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1925). History of House bills.

30

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1925). Laws of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania passed at the session of 1925. Harrisburg, PA:
J. L. L. Kuhn.

31

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1929). Laws of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania passed at the session of 1929.

32

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1931). Laws of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania passed at the session of 1931. Harrisburg, PA.

33

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1925). Legislative Journal. 126(22).

34

[Lending library program studied for county schools]. (1940). Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

Baird, G. M. P. (1933, December 6). [Letter from George M. P. Baird to Mr. Demmler].
Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 16, Folder 84).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

Grondahl, L. O. (1940, March 13). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John J. Kane].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

Grondahl, L. O. (1939, December 18). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John J. Kane.].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
284

38

Grondahl, L. O. (1941, June 4). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to Mrs. L. G. Stone].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

Munn, R. (1933, December 21). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Alan Bright]. Civic Club
of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 16, Folder 84). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

40

Munn, R. (1933, December 21). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Alan Bright]. Civic Club
of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 16, Folder 84). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

41

Houk, R. (1940, January 9). [Letter from Ruth Houk to John J. Kane]. Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

42

Houk, R. (1938, October 27). [Letter from Ruth Houk to library directors]. Director's
Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

43

Weiss, A. (1937, May 16). Library committee leader chooses best volumes for shelves
in her new home and favorite clubs. Pittsburgh Press.

44

[Library merger urged to aid north side unit - Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph]. (1938,
February 15). Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 7,
Folder 64). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

45

Fletcher, M. S. (1937). Library service in Allegheny County outside Pittsburgh. The
Federator, 12(11), 253-256.

46

Munn, R. W. (1966). [Movements toward library services in Allegheny County, 19351961: Documents, with connecting narrative]. Director's Office Collection (Box
21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

47

Egger, R. A. (1929). Pittsburgh - The world's third federated city. The American City,
38, 120-121.

48

Reed, T. H. (1927). Pittsburgh plans the world's most complete experiment in federated
city government. The American City, 36, 596-598.

49

Dermitt, H. M. (1938, March 23). [Please reserve]. Civic Club of Allegheny County
Records Collection (Box 7, Folder 64). University of Pittsburgh Archives
Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

50

[Renews library plea - Pittsburgh Post-Gazette]. (1938, March 21). Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 7, Folder 64). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

51

Community Councils, & Group Work Division of the Federation of Social Agencies.
(1935). Resources for leisure time: Circulating libraries in Pittsburgh. The
Federator, 9(8), 4-6.
285

52

Munn, R. (1964). Special report: 1928-1964.

53

Why the federated Pittsburgh plan failed to carry: Defeated plan to be resubmitted.
(1929). The American City, 41, 150.

54

Council acts for merger of libraries. (1956, June 5). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

55

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1945). Fifty years of civic history, 1895-1945.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 2

Table G.2. Sources for period 2.

No.

Citation

1

Munn, R. W. (1958). [A plan for the federation of libraries in Allegheny County].
Director's Office Collection (Box 49, Folder 9). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

2

Brahm, W. T., & Sandoe, M. W. (1950). Allegheny County Library Survey.

3

[Allegheny County organizes for improved library services: Outline for panel discussion].
(1955). District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

4

Metropolitan Study Commission of Allegheny County. (1953, October 15). [An
introductory outline of the committee's assignment and its relationship to the overall mission of the Metropolitan Commission]. District Services Collection, Series
2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

5

Metropolitan Study Commission of Allegheny County. (1955). An urban home rule
charter for Allegheny County: A report of the Metropolitan Study Commission of
Allegheny County.

6

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1955). Annual report.

7

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1956). Annual report.

8

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1957). Annual report.

9

Bookmobile for county service OK'd. (1956, June 20). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. 28.

10

Munn, R. W. (1970). [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh: History 1895-1969]. Pennsylvania
room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

286

11

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1958). [Civic Club committees]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 1). University of Pittsburgh
Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

12

County Controller's Office. (1957). [Controller's 96th Annual Report of the Fiscal Affairs
of Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31, 1956]. Detre Library &
Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

County Controller's Office. (1958). [Controller's 97th Annual Report of the Fiscal Affairs
of Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31, 1957]. Detre Library &
Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

14

County Controller's Office. (1956). [Controller's annual report for the fiscal affairs of
Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31, 1955]. Detre Library &
Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

15

Council acts for merger of libraries. (1956, June 5). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

16

County-wide library plan advocated. (1955, November 17). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

17

Pade, W. (1956 May 30). County-wide library system to be launched. Pittsburgh Press.

18

Pennsylvania Economy League. (1954). [Findings of study of public libraries in
Allegheny County: For the study committee on libraries, parks, and recreation
facilities of the metropolitan study commission]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 6, Manual 3). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

19

Munn, R. W. (1957, March 29). [From the Steering Committee to Library Planning
Committee of Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

20

Munn, R. W. (1955, October). [Larger units of library administration: What has happened
in Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

21

Kurzman, D. H. (1953, November 27). [Letter from David H. Kurtzman to Ralph Munn].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

22

EnDean, D. S. (1960). [Letter from Dorothea S. Endean to Ralph Munn]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

Gallup, E. H. (1954, July 8). [Letter from E. H. Gallup to Fabian C. McIntosh]. Civic
Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 19, Folder 134). University of
Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

24

Davis, M. A. (1955, September 9). [Letter from Marie A. Davis to Mrs. George
287

Karnofsky]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
25

Plank, M. S. (1954, July 30). [Letter from Marion S. Plank to Civic Club of Allegheny
County]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 19, Folder
134). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, July 12). [Letter from Mrs. George Karnofsky to friends and
members]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

27

Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, November 23). [Letter from Mrs. George Karnofsky to Library
Planning Committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

28

EnDean, D. S. (1955, December 1). [Letter from Mrs. Howard EnDean to the Library
planning committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Martin, P. H. (1955, July 21). [Letter from Park H. Martin to Marie A. Davis]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

30

Amann, R. O. (1954, July 8). [Letter from R. Otto Amann to Members of Study
Committee #5]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

31

Amann, R. O. (1954, August 5). [Letter from R. Otto Amann to Members of Study
Committee #5]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

32

Munn, R. W. (1953, November 18). [Letter from Ralph Munn to David H. Kurtzman].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

33

Munn, R. W. (1954, July 6). [Letter from Ralph Munn to David H. Kurtzman]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

34

Munn, R. W. (1954, April 2). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Librarians of Allegheny
County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

Munn, R. W. (1957, December 11). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Librarians of Allegheny
County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

288

36

Munn, R. W. (1957). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Librarians of Allegheny County].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

Munn, R. W. (1958). Libraries for Allegheny County. Carnegie Magazine, 32.

38

Library expansion, unification planned. (1957, February 7). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

39

Library plans to purchase 2 mobile units. (1956, March 13). Pittsburgh Press.

40

Martin, L. A., Estes, G. W., Palmer, D. C., & Summers, F. W. (1958). Library service in
Pennsylvania: Present and Proposed; A survey commissioned by the Pennsylvania
state librarian at the request of the honorable George M. Leader, Governor of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

41

Library shift may be illegal. (1954, February 18). Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph.

42

Metropolitan Study Commission of Allegheny County. (1954, March 12). [Metropolitan
Study Commission News Memo]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

43

Steering committee of library planning committee. (1956, March 1). [Minutes of Steering
Committee of Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

44

County Commissioners. (1956). [Minutes: Jan. 2, 1956 to Dec. 27, 1956, Vol. 37]. Detre
Library & Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

45

Munn, R. W. (1966). [Movements toward library services in Allegheny County, 19351961: Documents, with connecting narrative]. Director's Office Collection (Box
21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

46

New report lists many objections to charter plan. (1955, October 1). Pittsburgh Press.

47

[Present status and future plans of the Metropolitan Study Commission of Allegheny
County]. (1953, December 7). District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder
6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

48

Munn, R. W. (1961). [Public library service in Allegheny County: A study, with
recommendations, made at the request of the Board of County Commissioners].
Director's Office Collection (Box 49, Folder 12). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

49

Central North Side Neighborhood Council. (1954, January 18). [Report of Temporary
Library Committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
289

50

Munn, R. W. (1964). Special report: 1928-1964.

51

Brown, K. (1960). [State aid to libraries of Allegheny County]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

52

Step to merge libraries due in council. (1956, March 11). Pittsburgh Press.

53

Pennsylvania State Library. (1958). [Summary of recommendations of the Pennsylvania
Library Survey]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

54

Brown, K. (1956). The new library service plan. Carnegie Magazine.

55

Munn, R. W. (1956). Unified library service. Carnegie Magazine, 30(10), 330-332.

56

[What does good library service mean to you?]. (1955). District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

57

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1930). [Civic Club pamphlets]. Civic Club of
Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 12, Folder 1). University of Pittsburgh
Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 3

Table G.3. Sources for period 3.

No.

Citation

1

Doms, K. (1963). [A public library for Penn Hills, Pennsylvania]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

2

Doms, K. (1963). [A public library for the Churchill Area]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

3

Beasley, K. E., & Robinson, C. E. (1962). [A study and recommendations of library
districts for Pennsylvania]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 10, Manual
4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

4

Doerschuk, E. E. (1967, November 9). [Agenda of Library legislation considerations in
290

Martin resurvey]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
5

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1962). Annual report.

6

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1961). Annual report.

7

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1963). Annual report.

8

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1964). Annual report.

9

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1965). Annual report.

10

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1970). Annual report.

11

Munn, R. W. (1970). [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh: History 1895-1969]. Pennsylvania
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

12

Committee on Standards for District Library Center Libraries. (1966, February 25).
[Committee on Standards for District Library Center Libraries, summary of
discussion]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1965). [District Library Center, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh: A brief history, 1963-1965]. District Services Collection, Series 2
(Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

14

Pyle, C. (1966, October 31). [Letter from Claire Pyle to Keith Doms]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

15

Gross, D. C. (1967, November 20). [Letter from Dean C. Gross to Ernest K. Doerschuk].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

16

Potter, D. C. (1969, November 26). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Mrs. Richard
Kadar]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

17

Bendix, D. (1966, September 9). [Letter from Dorothy Bendix to members of the district
center standards committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder
1). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

18

Doherty, E. J. (1968, March 27). [Letter from Edmond J. Doherty to Library
Development Committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

19

Hess, J. L. (1968, January 10). [Letter from Jayne L. Hess to County Librarians]. District
291

Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
20

Falgione, J. F. (1967, December 21). [Letter from Joseph F. Falgione to James M.
Walton]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

21

Falgione, J. F. (1966, August 19). [Letter from Joseph F. Falgione to James T. Golden].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

22

Falgione, J. F. (1968, February). [Letter from Joseph F. Falgione to Keith Doms]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

Falgione, J. F. (1968, March 4). [Letter from Joseph Falgione to Edmond Doherty].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

24

Doms, K. (1968?). [Letter from Keith Doms to County Librarians]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

25

Doms, K. (1968, January 8). [Letter from Keith Doms to district libraries]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

Doms, K. (1968, November 29). [Letter from Keith Doms to Donald C. Potter]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

27

Doms, K. (1968). [Letter from Keith Doms to library directors]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

28

Doms, K. (1967, December 11). [Letter from Keith Doms to Mrs. Charles H. Bost].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Doms, K. (1967, December 11). [Letter from Keith Doms to Mrs. Franklin Malick].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

30

Doms, K. (1969, May 22). [Letter from Keith Doms to Ralph C. Heckel]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

31

Kadar, M. R. D. (1969, November 20). [Letter from Mrs. Richard D. Kadar to Donald C.
Potter]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

292

32

Saperstein, S. (1968, February 7). [Letter from Sylvia Saperstein to Keith Doms]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

33

Lytle, W. (1968, January 30). [Letter from Wally Lytle to Keith Doms]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

34

Lytle, W. (1967, December 16). [Letter from Wally Lytle to Keith Doms]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

Pennsylvania Library Association. (1968, April 2-3). [Library Development Committee
Meeting of the Public Library and Trustee Sub-Committee]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

Pennsylvania Library Association. (1968, April 19). [Library Development Committee
Meeting of the Public Library and Trustee Sub-Committee]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

Sebastian, M. L. (1968, June 1). [Library history of Northland Public Library]. University
of Pittsburgh collections.

38

Pennsylvania State Library. (1967, August). [Progress and problems of Pennsylvania
Libraries]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

Martin, L. A. (1967). Progress and problems of Pennsylvania libraries: A re-survey.
Retrieved from Harrisburg, PA:

40

Green, B. Y. (1967, April). [Public library service in Allegheny County--Past and
present]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

41

Doms, K. (1966, October 10). [Regional reference center proposal]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

42

Munn, R. W. (1964). Special report: 1928-1964.

43

Falgione, J. F. (1967, August). [State funds for C.L.P. under new Martin Plan]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

44

Doerschuk, E. E. (1969). [Summary of "A study of library services program"]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 10, Manual 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

45

Doms, K. (1963). [The Northland Public Library: A cooperative library for Ross
Township, West View Borough, McCandless Township, Franklin Park Borough,
293

Pine Township, Bradford Woods Borough, Marshall Township]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
46

Bowen, H. (1967, August). The Township of Shaler, North Hills Library, a brief history.
PLA Bulletin, 57-58.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 4

Table G.4. Sources for period 4.

No.

Citation

1

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (1977). [1976-1981 Pennsylvania library development
plan]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 7, Manual 3). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

2

A county library system? (1973, August 10). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

3

State Library of Pennsylvania. (1971). [A five-year plan: Pennsylvania library
development, 1971-1976, Library Services and Construction Act]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 9, Manual 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

4

Allegheny County Government Study Commission. (1978). [A home rule charter for
Allegheny County]. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania room.

5

League of Women Voters of Greater Pittsburgh. (2008). Allegheny County government:
Organizations, facilities and services. Pittsburgh, PA: Community Information
Center.

6

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1971, July 26). [Allegheny County Public Library
Service: A discussion of the Blasingame Study]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 3). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

7

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1970). Annual report.

8

Potter, D. C. (1978, July 26). [Comments on the action plan]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 9). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

9

Potter, D. C. (1975, January 28). [County Commissioners, Strang, State Library meeting].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
294

10

Martin, A. A. (1970, November 20). [County Public Library Services: Two summaries
and inclusion of "Plan for Establishment of a County Public Library Service
System for Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5,
Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

Falgione, J. F. (1976, July 6). [Draft of proposal for county-wide library service for
Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 5).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

12

Government Study Commission. (1974, March 15). [Final report of the Allegheny County
Government study commission, its findings and recommendations, fiscal report
and proposed home rule charter for Allegheny County]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

Hirschl, B. (1976). [Home rule study report - county library system]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

14

Anderson, A. (1979, February 27). [Letter from Ada Anderson to Park Martin]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

15

Conley, C. C. (1970, December 15). [Letter from Catherine C. Conley to Donald C.
Potter]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

16

Schlesinger, D. (1979, January 3). [Letter from Deborah Schlesinger to Keith Gilbert].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

17

Potter, D. C. (1971, March 9). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Alice F. Reilly]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

18

Potter, D. C. (1976, July 30). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Anthony A. Martin and
Joseph F. Falgione]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 3).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

19

Potter, D. C. (1970, December 8). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Catherine C. Conley].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

20

Potter, D. C. (1971, March 10). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to CLP admins: Meeting
with Dormont]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
295

21

Potter, D. C. (1970, November 28). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to CLP admins:
Meeting with Mt. Lebanon board]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

22

Potter, D. C. (1971, May 11). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to CLP admins: Meeting with
Northland]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

Potter, D. C. (1971, January 5). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to CLP admins: Meeting
with USC board]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

24

Potter, D. C. (1971, March 12). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Donell J. Gaertner].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

25

Potter, D. C. (1971, February 26). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Dorothea M. Strang].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

Potter, D. C. (1971, July 8). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Dorothea M. Strang].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

27

Potter, D. C. (1971, March 9). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Harold J. Sander]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

28

Potter, D. C. (1970, October 19). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Library Trustees and
Librarians of Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2,
Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Potter, D. C. (1976, August 25). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Patricia Broderick].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

30

Strang, D. M. (1976, August 4). [Letter from Dorothea M. Strang to Director and Board
of Trustees]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

31

Strang, D. M. (1977, August 8). [Letter from Dorothea M. Strang to League of Women
Voters, Library Resource Committee members]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

32

Dowlin, C. E. (1978, February 24). [Letter from Ed Dowlin to Tony Martin: Citizens
study committee on libraries]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder
1). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
296

Pittsburgh, PA.
33

Milton, E. W. (1970, November 19). [Letter from Elsie W. Milton to Donald C. Potter].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

34

Doerschuk, E. E. (1976, December 10). [Letter from Ernest E. Doerschuk to Jim
Flaherty]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

Walton, J. M. (1976, March 5). [Letter from James M. Walton to trustees, staff, and
friends of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh]. District Services Collection, Series 2
(Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

Albrecht, L. K. (1977, November 15). [Letter from Lois K. Albrecht to Mr. & Mrs. C.
Edwin Dowlin]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

37

Albrecht, L. K. (1978, January 10). [Letter from Lois K. Albrecht to Robert N. Peirce,
Jr.]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

38

Albrecht, L. K. (1977, June 9). [Letter from Lois K. Albrecht to William Rumpf]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

Albrecht, L. K. (1977, October 11). [Letter from Lois K. Albrecht to William Rumpf].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

40

Bellows, M. R. (1978, December 16). [Letter from Margaret R. Bellows to Keith L.
Gilbert]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

41

Broderick, P. M. (1976, July 29). [Letter from Patricia M. Broderick to Della E. Britton].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 3). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

42

Nese, R. J. (1976, August 24). [Letter from Ross J. Nese to Donald C. Potter]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 3). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

43

Nese, R. J. (1976, August 25). [Letter from Ross J. Nese to Patricia Broderick]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

44

Ostrum, R. M. (1979, January 11). [Letter from Roxane M. Ostrum to Keith L. Gilbert].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
297

45

Richards, R. (1979, February 15). [Letter from Ruth Richards to Keith Gilbert]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

46

Foerster, T. J. (1976, March 26). [Letter from Thomas J. Foerster to M. J. Johns]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

47

Hutchison, V. (1979, February 9). [Letter from Violet Hutchison to Keith Gilbert].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

48

Rumpf, W. (1977, May 26). [Letter from William Rumpf to study committee]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

49

Potter, D. C. (1976, January 23). [Meeting - County Commissioners]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

50

[Meeting summary, county-wide library system]. (1976, March 12). District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

51

State Library of Pennsylvania Bureau of Library Development. (1978, June). [Minimum
standards and guidelines for Pennsylvania public library systems receiving state
aid]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 9). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

52

[Notes on community library meetings]. (1978, September). District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

53

Blasingame, R., DeProspo, E. R., & Goldberg, R. L. (1970, February). [Organization for
public library services in an urban field: Plan for establishment of a county public
library service system for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Manual 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

54

State Library of Pennsylvania. (1974). [Pennsylvania Library Master Plan committee
report]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 7, Manual 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

55

Board of Commissioners of Allegheny County. (1976, August 26). [Project Application,
LSCA Title I: Citizens' Commission for Library Service]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

56

Allegheny County Citizens Study Committee on Libraries. (1978, September 30). [Public
libraries in Allegheny County...A Plan of Action]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 1, Manual 10). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
298

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

57

[Report from hearing before Allegheny County Gov't. Study Commission on county
library system]. (1973, May 23). District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5,
Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

58

Gilbert, K. L. (1978, November 17). [Study commission letter on county commissioner
meeting]. Director's Office Collection (Box 49, Folder 11). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

59

Kennedy, M. (1979, January 15). Study criticizes library services in the county.
Pittsburgh Press.

60

State Library of Pennsylvania, Bureau of Library Development. (1979). [Summary of
state aid payments to public libraries, 1979]. Pennsylvania Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh.

61

Strang, D. M. (1971, January 5). [Toward a county library system]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 5

Table G.5. Sources for period 5.

No.

Citation

1

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1986). 1986 Annual report.

2

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1987). 1987 Annual report.

3

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1988). 1988 Annual report.

4

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1989). 1989 Annual report.

5

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1991). 1991 Annual report.

6

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1992). 1992 Annual report.

7

Rabold, J. F. (1992, April 1). [Minutes of the executive meeting of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

8

Rabold, J. F. (1992, December 7). [Minutes of the CLASP executive committee
meeting]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee).
299

Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
9

Rabold, J. F. (1992, June 23). [Minutes of the CLASP meeting]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

10

Cavinee, D. R. (1992, May 12). [CLASP executive committee meeting]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

Rabold, J. F. (1992, May 12). [Minutes of the executive meeting of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

12

Rabold, J. F. (1992, October 7). [Minutes of the CLASP executive committee meeting].
ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

CFLAC. (1993, February 16). [Meeting minutes: SLIS and FreeNet, CLASP morale,
state library code]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

14

CFLAC. (1993, February 9). [Press release: Document express links up libraries]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Projects). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

15

CLASP. (1993, February). [The CLASP Report 2(1): CLASP meets to consider public
library project]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

16

Rabold, J. F. (1993, June 2). [Minutes of the CLASP executive committee meeting].
ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

17

Lutton, J. (1993, March 9). [Minutes of the CLASP executive committee meeting].
ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

18

Lucchino, F. J. (1991). [A quiet crisis: Libraries in Allegheny County]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

19

[Allegheny County district libraries: Library characteristics]. (1989, February 27).
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

20

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1989). [Allegheny County usage status report January 1
through September 30, 1989]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

300

21

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1990). Annual report.

22

Leonard, P. (1991, April 15). [C.L.A.S.P. flyer]. District Services Collection, Series 2
(Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

[Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Branch Characteristics]. (1989, February 27). District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

24

Cavinee, D. R. (1988, November). [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh report on services to
Allegheny County residents: Prepared for the Allegheny County Commissioners].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

25

CFLAC. (1992, January). [CFLAC: An annotated timeline of its history and important
future dates]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

Fuoco, L. W. (1991, July 10). Commission probing ways to fund libraries. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette, p. 3.

27

CLASP. (1991, May 28). [County Library Association Serving the People: By-Laws].
ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

28

Kamper, A. F. (1991, March 5). [County System impact on CLP funding]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Hoover, B. (1990, May 3). Countywide library system urged. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

30

Essential reading. (1990, May 15). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

31

Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview transcript]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

32

O'Matz, M. (1991, March 13). Funding proposed for county libraries. Pittsburgh Press.

33

Kamper, A. F. (1989, March 17). [Future outlets: Response to Dee Cavinee]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

34

State Library of Pennsylvania, Advisory Council on Library Development. (1991).
[Improved access to Pennsylvania's library resources]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 8, Manual 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

Librarian 2. (2015, May 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

36

Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview notes]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.
301

37

Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 7). [Letter from Al Kamper to Cabinet]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

38

Kamper, A. F. (1991, March 20). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to Betty Ann Funk].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 27). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to Cabinet]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

40

Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 28). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to Main Lib. Dept.
Heads/Branch Librarians]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder
2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.

41

Kamper, A. F. (1988, January 26). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to Robert B.
Croneberger]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 4). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

42

Schifferle, A. (1990, April 27). [Letter from Anne Schifferle to Albert F. Kamper].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 1). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

43

Cavinee, D. R. (1989, March 13). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to Al Kamper]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

44

Cavinee, D. R. (1988, October 14). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to Bob Croneberger].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

45

Tumolo, G. A. (1987, May 22). [Letter from Guy A. Tumolo to Robert C. Wilburn].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

46

Leonard, P. (1991, March 11). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Albert F. Kamper]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

47

Chielli, J. (1992, December 16). [Libraries enter computer era: Quantum leap for library
services]. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania room.

48

State Library of Pennsylvania. (1991, January 29). [Library aid initial payment, state
library, Pennsylvania Department of Education]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

49

Murphy, P. (1988, April 28). Library cooperation works--for some. Pittsburgh PostGazette.
302

50

Library panel catalogs shortcomings of county system. (1992, April 23). Pittsburgh
Press.

51

Lucchino, F. J. (1990, June 12). [Looking beyond our past]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

52

CFLAC. (1992, October 20). [Meeting minutes: Bookmobile, first Project Link-up
computers, Knowledge connections, CLASP newsletter]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

53

CFLAC. (1991, August 21). [Meeting minutes: Buhl grant for director, search
committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

54

CFLAC. (1992, May 20). [Meeting minutes: CFLAC role, fax machines, electronic linkup]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

55

CFLAC. (1992, February 19). [Meeting minutes: CFLAC roles, access to CLP
CAROLINE]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

56

CFLAC. (1992, June 23). [Meeting minutes: Fax machines, Project Link-Up, ACLA
membership, reading centers]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

57

CFLAC. (1992, March 18). [Meeting minutes: Goals for Project Link-Up, multimunicipal projects]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

58

CFLAC. (1992, January 15). [Meeting minutes: Hiring of director, link-up computers at
Wilkinsburg]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

59

CFLAC. (1992, September 9). [Meeting minutes: Project link-up first phase, reading
centers]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

60

CFLAC. (1992, July 29). [Meeting minutes: Project Link-Up participation, CLASP
automation proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

61

CFLAC. (1992, November 17). [Meeting minutes: Project Link-Up, CLASP
membership]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

62

CFLAC. (1991, October 22). [Meeting minutes: Search committee, Bell of PA
telecommunications grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
303

63

CLASP. (1991, November 6). [Minutes of the general meeting of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

64

Not so quiet library crisis. (1991). Pittsburgh Press.

65

PCBL. (1991, Spring). [Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries Newsletter 14(2)].
Pennsylvania Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.

66

President's Advisory Committee on the Library. (1990, April). [Report of the President's
Advisory Committee on the Library]. Director's Office Collection (Box 44,
Folder 9). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

67

Cavinee, D. R. (1992, December 18). [Report to Buhl Foundation: Allegheny County
Library Director Grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

68

Cavinee, D. R. (1992, June 11). [Report to Buhl Foundation: Allegheny County Library
Director Grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

69

Kane, M. (1990, April 19). Rumor of closing creates sounding board for library needs.
Pittsburgh Press.

70

Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library. (1989, February 21). [The Carnegie:
Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library Meeting]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

71

CLASP. (1992, September). [The CLASP report 1(1): Commission on the Future of
Libraries institutes "Project Linkup;" CLASP plans enlargement of the program].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

72

CLASP. (1992, November). [The CLASP report 1(2): Robin Rogers to speak on the
working book]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

73

Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

74

Allegheny Conference on Community Development. (1992, November 23). [The future
of our region: New ways of working together, new alliance for improving our
quality of life]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative Information on ARAD
Tax). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

304

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 6

Table G.6. Sources for period 6.

No.

Citation

1

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1993). 1993 annual report.

2

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1994). 1994 annual report.

3

Barnes, T., & Bull, J. M. R. (1994, April 22). 6 named to board to divide regional assets
tax. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. B1.

4

Pennsylvania Economy League. (1993, June 11). [A case for the western Pennsylvania
Regional Asset District]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD-Pre-Legislation).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

5

Dodge, W. R. (1994, August). [A Consultant's thoughts on the planning process]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA Proposal to ARAD Jo Ellen's Speech). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

6

King, P. B. (1994, September 11). A modem for the common man. Pittsburgh PostGazette, pp. J1, J4.

7

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 12). [ACLA press release]. Pennsylvania Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh.

8

CFLAC. (1994, July 27). [Agenda and meeting minutes: EIN funding, knowledge
connections]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

9

CFLAC. (1994, July 27). [Agenda and meeting minutes: Knowledge connections, EIN
capital campaign, CLASP plans for RAD]. ACLA history file. Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

10

CFLAC. (1994, June 8). [Agenda and Minutes: PA utility commission petition, CLASP
funding, EIN foundation presentations]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

ACLA. (1994, August 11). [Allegheny County Library Association ARAD proposal].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

12

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 11). [Allegheny County Library Association ARAD
proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

13

ACLA. (1994, August). [Allegheny County Library Association fact sheet: Prepared for
the Regional Asset District Board]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Informational Breakfast). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
305

Pittsburgh, PA.
14

Kenney, J. E. (1994, September 21). [ARAD board speech]. Private collection.

15

Jenkins, M. A. (1994, August 30). [ARAD presentation]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ARAD Informational Breakfast). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

16

ACLA. (1994). [ARAD rationale]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to
Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

17

Barnes, T. (1994, August 31). Asset tax board gathers data. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p.
B4.

18

Opalka, W. (1994, March 6). Assets tax leaves library funding in limbo. Pittsburgh
Tribune Review, p. A8.

19

ACLA. (1994, September 22). [Assumptions and basis for application of proposed
formula for ARAD funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

20

Allegheny Conference on Community Development. (1994, March). [Cities and suburbs
linked in growth and decline]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative
Information on ARAD Tax). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

21

CLASP. (1994, August 10). [CLASP ARAD Committee proposal group meeting].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

22

Kamper, A. F. (1994, July 21). [CLASP county regions]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

23

CLASP. (1993, March). [CLASP drafts grant proposal for Project Link-Up]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

24

CLASP executive committee. (1994, July 28). [CLASP executive committee meeting
agenda]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

25

Toth, C. (1994, July). [CLASP list]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

26

Boyd, L. (1993, June 29). [CLASP minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP
Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

27

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, February). [CLASP newsletter: Allegheny County library
director's comments]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

306

28

CLASP. (1994, August 4). [CLASP regional asset district committee]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Public relations subcommittee, CLASP. (1994, July 28). [CLASP report]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

30

Russ, L. V. (1993). [CLASP: Proposed budget 1994]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
CLASP). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

31

CLASP. (1994, June 15). [County Library Association Serving the People: Official ByLaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

32

Barnes, T. (1994, February 23). County sales tax may be 7% by July. Pittsburgh PostGazette, p. A1.

33

Barnes, T. (1994, October 3). Day of decision for the asset district. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

34

CFLAC. (1993, November). [Director goals: Northern tier study, EIN review group,
Knowledge connection development]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

CFLAC. (1994, January). [Director goals: Northern tier, EIN public opinion
management]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

CFLAC. (1994, April 5). [Director's report: EIN funding, RAD response plan]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

CFLAC. (1994, March 9). [Director's report: EIN planning, Northern Tier study]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

38

Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County. (1994, April 28).
[Electronic information network for public libraries in Allegheny County]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

CFLAC. (1993, December). [Electronic information strategies for public libraries in
Allegheny County]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

40

Barnes, T. (1994, September 13). First asset district check: $2.1 million. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

41

RMG consultants. (1993, November). [Goals of an Allegheny County public library
information strategy]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
307

42

ACLA. (1994). [In soliciting ARAD support, ACLA has received the following letters of
endorsement to date]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

43

Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

44

Library Administrator 2. (2015, July 8). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

45

Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

46

Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

47

Cook, D., & Sabol, J. (1994). Jackpot for jocks, snake-eyes for books.

48

ACLA board. (1994, October 12). [Letter from ACLA board to library directors,
trustees, and officials: $5 million award]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Proposal). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

49

Kamper, A. F., & Shelley, L. (1994, September 6). [Letter from Al Kamper and Laura
Shelley to all libraries in Allegheny County: Information gathering for RAD].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Proposal to ARAD Jo Ellen's Speech).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

50

Kamper, A. F. (1994, August 11). [Letter from Al Kamper to ACLA executive board and
finance subcommittee members: Strategy for ARAD funding]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

51

Kamper, A. F. (1994, February 28). [Letter from Al Kamper to Allegheny County
District Libraries: CLASP survey]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History
to Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

52

Kamper, A. F. (1994, August 13). [Letter from Al Kamper to RAD proposal committee:
Bill's notes on meeting and proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black
Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

53

Kamper, A. F. (1993, June 30). [Letter from Al Kamper to Susan Parker: CLP and
county library reports data]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

54

Dodge, W. R. (1994, May 4). [Letter from Bill Dodge to Carolyn Toth: Public relations
documents]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

55

Dodge, W. R. (1994, May 25). [Letter from Bill Dodge to Carolyn Toth: Suggested
revisions on RAD proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to
Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

56

Dodge, W. R. (1994, July 18). [Letter from Bill Dodge to CLASP ARAD proposal
308

group]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
57

Dodge, W. R. (1994, August 25). [Letter from Bill Dodge to Jo Ellen Kenney, Marilyn
Jenkins, Laura Shelley, and DeeAnna Cavinee]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

58

Dodge, W. R. (1994, August 1). [Letter from Bill Dodge to Proposal group]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

59

Croneberger, R. B. (1993, June 10). [Letter from Bob Croneberger to DeeAnna Cavinee:
CLP data for PA Economy League]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

60

Marks, C. (1994, August 15). [Letter from Carolyn Marks to Jo Ellen Kenney: Regional
Asset District budget request]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

61

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 24). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to ACLA directors: Letters to
senators and representatives]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Letters of
Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

62

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 22). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to ACLA directors: Request
for library endorsement letters]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Letters of
Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

63

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 30). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to ACLA library directors].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

64

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 4). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to ACLA library directors:
CLASP statement on RAD funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

65

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 10). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to ACLA regional
representatives: Position on RAD funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

66

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 22). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Anthony Deluca:
Informational breakfast and endorsement request]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA Letters of Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

67

Toth, C. A. (1994, July 9). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to CLASP library directors:
Meeting with RAD board members]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
309

PA.
68

Toth, C. A. (1994, July 21). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to David Rolka: Telephone rate
for public libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

69

Toth, C. A. (1994, October 4). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Dee Anna Cavinee: Yea for
ACLA]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

70

Toth, C. A. (1994, August 13). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Loretta O'Brien]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

71

Toth, C. A. (1994, September 26). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Marilyn Jenkins].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

72

CLASP. (1994, May 14). [Letter from CLASP to library trustees]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

73

Croneberger, R. B., Natale, S. F., & Horvath, R. T. (1994, June 7). [Letter from
Croneberger, Natale, and Horvath to Sara Parker]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 11, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

74

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, May 16). [Letter from Dee Cavinee to CLASP executive
committee members: Agreements for EIN and legal consortium]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

75

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, April 27). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to members of the
Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

76

Cavinee, D. R. (1993, November 23). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to CLASP
members interested in Regional Asset District]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

77

Farmer, E. F. (1993, December 20). [Letter from Elaine Farmer to Allegheny County
constituents]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

78

Lucchino, F. J. (1994, March 16). [Letter from Frank Lucchino to DeeAnna Cavinee:
Money raised by CFLAC]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Money).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

79

Lucchino, F. J. (1994, September 14). [Letter from Frank Lucchino to Linda Dickerson:
310

Request for endorsement of RAD funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
Letters of Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
80

Beiber, J. (1994, March 9). [Letter from Jan Beiber to DeeAnna Cavinee: Concerns
about local library funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Newspaper
Coverage). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

81

Turner, J. (1994, March 28). [Letter from Jim Turner to DeeAnna Cavinee: County
Commissioners meeting on RAD]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

82

Firestone, K. L. (1994, September). [Letter from Kathy Firestone to ACLA libraries:
Petition rally]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Pre-RAD). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

83

Shelley, L. (1994, June). [Letter from Laura Shelley to all CLASP/RAD committee
members]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

84

Shelley, L. (1994, August 13). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Carolyn Toth]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

85

Shelley, L. (1994, March 31). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Regional Asset District
Committee of CLASP]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

86

Shelley, L. (1994, June 23). [Letter from Laura Shelley to the CLASP committee on
RAD: Three committee groups]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to
Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

87

Boyd, L. (1993, June 19). [Letter from Lee Boyd to DeeAnna Cavinee: CLASP
executive board meeting with Susan Parker]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

88

Jenkins, M. A. (1994, September 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Commission on the
Future of Libraries in Allegheny County: Request for letter of support]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ARAD Informational Breakfast). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

89

Jenkins, M. A. (1994, September 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Henry Ewalt:
ACLA projected estimates]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

90

Murphy, T. (1994, October 7). [Letter from mayor Tom Murphy to senator Mike Fisher:
Confirmed support for RAD funding to libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA Letters of Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

311

91

Fisher, D. M. (1994, August 5). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Dot Corbet]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Legislative Information on ARAD Tax). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

92

Fisher, D. M. (1994, March 10). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Henry Wick: Notice of
RAD funding for libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative Information
on ARAD Tax). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

93

Fisher, D. M. (1993, December 20). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Monica Stoicovy].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative Information on ARAD Tax). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

94

Fisher, D. M. (1994, July 20). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Rick Stafford]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Legislative Information on ARAD Tax). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

95

Stoicovy, M. (1994, June 8). [Letter from Monica Stoicovy to the Commission on the
Future of Libraries: Principles for the regional asset district to use with libraries].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

96

Leger, P. (1993, December 20). [Letter from Paul Leger to Bob Croneberger:
Background on county libraries and RAD]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black
Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

97

Leonard, P. (1994, July 13). [Letter from Peter Leonard to CLASP RAD justification
committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

98

Leonard, P. (1994, August 12). [Letter from Peter Leonard to County Libraries: Survey
on County library use]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive
Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

99

Leonard, P. (1994, August 12). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Justification Committee
members]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

100

Leonard, P. (1994, July 25). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Justification Committee
members]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

101

Leonard, P. (1994, August 12). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

102

Leonard, P. (1994, August 12). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Marilyn Jenkins: ARAD
proposal files]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive
Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

103

Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 16). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Alison Spence: Contact
to CLASP from the PA Economy League about RAD]. ACLA historical file
312

(Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
104

Cohen, R. A. (1994, March). [Letter from Robert Cohen to all library directors, trustees,
and interested parties]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP
Newsletters). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

105

Cohen, R. A. (1993, November 23). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Libraries in Allegheny
County]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

106

Moore, S. P. (1994, September 26). [Letter from Sue Pellant Moore to DeeAnna
Cavinee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

107

Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 12). [Letters from Robert Cohen to Tom Foerster, Pete
Flaherty, and Larry Dunn]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Projects).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

108

Franklin, H. R. (1994, July 27). Libraries: On-ramp to the info highway. Washington
Post.

109

Barnes, T. (1994, September 17). Lots of hands out, not enough funds in asset district.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. D.

110

Matter named to asset district board. (1994, June 28). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

111

CFLAC. (1994, September 7). [Meeting agenda and minutes]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

112

CFLAC. (1994, January 12). [Meeting agenda and minutes: RMG consultants and
Project Link-Up]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

113

CFLAC. (1994, April 27). [Meeting minutes: Draft RAD funding suggestions]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

114

CFLAC. (1994, July 27). [Meeting minutes: EIN capital funding, CLASP plans]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

115

CFLAC. (1994, June 8). [Meeting minutes: EIN proposal for foundations, CLASP
strategy, PA utility commission petition]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

116

CFLAC. (1994, March 9). [Meeting minutes: Intro to Mary Buckley, CLASP strategy
with Jim Turner, EIN strategy]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

117

CFLAC. (1993, June 15). [Meeting minutes: Project Link-Up governance, administrator
313

position extension]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
118

CFLAC. (1993, September 14). [Meeting minutes: Project Link-Up, Three Rivers
FreeNet]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

119

CFLAC. (1993, October 27). [Meeting minutes: Three Rivers FreeNet, Project Link-Up].
ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

120

Croneberger, R. B. (1994, March). [Message from the director]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

121

CLASP. (1994, July 21). [Minutes of the CLASP general meeting]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

122

Rabold, J. F. (1994, February 2). [Minutes of the executive board of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

123

Rabold, J. F. (1994, January 11). [Minutes of the executive board of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

124

Rabold, J. F. (1994, April 14). [Minutes of the meeting of the executive board of
CLASP]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CLASP Executive Committee).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

125

CFLAC. (1994, March). [Money obtained from July 1, 1991 to March 15, 1994]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Money). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

126

Twedt, S. (1994, June 27). New asset district tax will bite on Friday. Pittsburgh PostGazette, p. B1.

127

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, June). [Newsletter of the Electronic Information Network of
Public libraries in Allegheny County (3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
Newspaper Articles General Library). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

128

No. 1993-77. (1993). Laws of Pennsylvania.

129

CLASP. (1994, June). [Notes on ACLA plans for RAD funding]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

130

CLASP. (1994, April). [Notes on how CLASP and EIN restructured to receive RAD
funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
314

131

Duerst, K. (1994, March 2). Pleasant Hills approves county sales tax.

132

Pennsylvania Economy League. (1994). [Presentation on RAD]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

133

Stoicovy, M. (1994, June 8). [Principles for the regional asset district to use with
libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

134

CLASP. (1994, June). [Principles of CLASP for RAD and purpose of CLASP]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

135

Cohen, R. A. (1993, July 21). [Progress report from CLASP to all Allegheny County
Libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

136

ACLA. (1994, September 15). [Proposal for ARAD funding, Allegheny County Library
Association]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Letters of Support for ARAD
Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

137

CLASP. (1994). [Proposal for RAD funding of Allegheny County Libraries]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

138

ACLA finance committee. (1994, August). [Proposed formula for distribution of ARAD
funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Proposal to ARAD Jo Ellen's
Speech). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

139

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, May). [Public libraries: A critical asset for Allegheny County
Residents]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

140

Schmitz, J., & Reeves, F. (1993, December 3). Push is on for early Pa. sales tax increase.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

141

CLASP member libraries. (1994, July). [RAD supplemental funds survey]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

142

CLASP. (1993, November). [Regional asset district and Allegheny County Sales Tax:
Summary prepared in reaction to Nov. 21 news article]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

143

Marks, C. (1994, August 15). [Regional Asset District budget request sent to JoEllen
Kenney]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

144

Allegheny Conference on Community Development. (1994, March). [Regional
directions]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County
315

Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
145

Rose, E. (1993, March). [Report from the public relations committee]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

146

Cavinee, D. R. (1993, September). [Report of the county librarian]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

147

Bull, J. M. R. (1994, March 30). Sales tax boost near. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. C1.

148

Sales tax may help library. (1994, March 24). North Journal, p. 6.

149

Reeves, T. (1993, December 14). Senate OKs sales tax. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. A1.

150

Bull, J. M. R. (1994, April 1). Split board approves 1 percent sales tax increase.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. A1.

151

Barnes, T. (1994, October 4). Stadium's the winner in sales tax handout. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

152

ACLA. (1994, August). [Suggestions for future expansion of CLASP/ACLA]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

153

Weiss, I. (1993). Summary of Act 77 of 1993: The Allegheny Regional Asset District
legislation.

154

CLASP. (1994, April 5). [Summary of CLASP regional assets committee meeting].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

155

CLASP. (1994, February 17). [Summary of meeting, Regional Asset District
Committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

156

CLASP member libraries. (1994, July 28). [Supplemental Funds Survey]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

157

ACLA Finance committee. (1994, August 31). [Tasks for the finance committee: What
will happen if funded]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Proposal to ARAD
Jo Ellen's Speech). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

158

Reeves, T. (1993, December 12). Tax push campaign a lesson in lobbying. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette, p. A21.

159

Shelley, L. (1994, March 18). [Testimony of Laura Shelley at Public Hearing on
Regional Asset District in Allegheny County]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
316

160

Croneberger, R. B. (1994, March 18). [Testimony on Regional Asset District]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive Funding). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

161

Kenney, J. E. (1994, March 18). [Testimony on Regional Asset District]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

162

CLASP. (1993, April). [The CLASP report 2(2): President's message, Project Link-Up].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

163

Cohen, R. A. (1993, September). [The CLASP Report 2(3): September meeting features
CD-ROM workshop]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-CLASP Newsletters).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

164

ACLA. (1994?). [Two cases of what ARAD funds could mean on a local level]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 7

Table G.7. Sources for period 7.

No.
1

Citation
Kamper, A. F. (1994, December 5). ["Green sheet" info: 1993 AR's - not complete].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

2

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1995). 1995 Annual report.

3

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1996). 1996 annual report.

4

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1997). 1997 annual report.

5

Dahlgren, A. C., Johnson, D. W., & Bocher, R. (1996). A plan for library service in
Allegheny County. Streamwood, IL: Library Planning Associates.

6

Library Planning Associates. (1996, March). A plan for library service in Allegheny
County (Vol. ACLA historical file (Folder: County Plan Organization Task
Force). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA).
Streamwood, IL: Library Planning Associates.

7

Newman, M. (1997, April 20). A web of libraries. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. F3.

8

Homyak, J. B. (1997, April 27). About Northland Library. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. E2.
317

9

ACLA. (1994, November 10). [ACLA ARAD draft distribution]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

10

Kochan, B. J. (1997, February 24). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

11

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, November 25). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

12

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, October 28). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

13

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, September 23). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

14

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, April 28). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

15

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, January 27). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

16

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, March 24). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

17

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, May 28). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

18

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, April 24). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

19

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, August 26). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

20

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, December 16). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

21

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, February 26). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

22

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, January 11). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

23

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, July 15). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

24

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, March 25). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

25

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, May 28). ACLA board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

26 Kochan, B. J. (1996, November 13). ACLA general membership meeting minutes.
318

Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla
27

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, April 30). ACLA general membership meeting minutes. Retrieved
from https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

28

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, October 29). ACLA general membership meeting minutes.
Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

29

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, January 29). ACLA general membership meeting minutes.
Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

ACLA. (1997, September 9). [ACLA libraries (42) eligible for "full" system member
30
status: Opposition notes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library
Agreement). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
31

Volkmar, J. L. (1997, March 18). ACLA special general membership meeting minutes.
Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

32

Volkmar, J. L. (1996, January 29). ACLA special meeting of the board. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/www.clpgh.org/acla

33

ACLA. (1996, April). [acLIBS 1(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

34

ACLA. (1996, June). [acLIBS 1(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

35

ACLA. (1996, September). [ACLibs 1(3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

ACLA. (1997, January). [ACLibs 2(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

ACLA. (1997, May). [ACLibs 2(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

38

ACLA. (1997, October). [ACLibs 2(3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

39

CFLAC. (1994, October 19). [Agenda and meeting minutes: Special telecommunications
rates for linked libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Blankowski, B. A. (1996, December 18). [Allegheny County Library Association
40
Regional Grant Report Form]. ACLA historical file (Folder: 1995 Knowledge
Connections). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1995). [Allegheny County library association: Impact of 1995 ARAD
41
distribution]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
42

ACLA. (1995). [Allegheny County Library Association: Mission and Purpose]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association
319

Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
43

Cavinee, D. R. (1994, November 30). [Allegheny County Library Director, progress
report, CFLAC: EIN board appointees]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

44 Allegheny regional asset district allocations. (1997, October 2). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
CFLAC. (1995, August 15). [Application for Allegheny County Library Association
45
ARAD grants]. ACLA historical file (Folder: KC's-Awards). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
46

Ovenshine, G. (1997, August 30). Area libraries protest new system. North Hills News
Record, p. A3.

47

Schmitz, J. (1994, December 2). Asset district adopts $53 million '95 budget. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

48

Chute, E. (1995, March 2). Asset tax formula for library criticized. Pittsburgh PostGazette, p. E1.

49

Drake, S. (1996, April 3). Baseball stadium could pull funds from library. The Herald, p.
6.

50

Nelson, G. J. (1995, March 24). Board should keep out of fiscal matters. North Hills News
Record, p. A7.

51

Houser, M. (1997, December 5). Budget plan threatens library's electronic network,
bookmobile. Pittsburgh Tribune Record, p. B1.

52

Heller, L. (1997, June 18). Carnegie Library's changes visionary. Pittsburgh TribuneReview, p. F4.

CFLAC. (1996, January). [CFLAC projects from 1991 to 1995]. ACLA historical file
53
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1995, October 25). [CFLAC regular report: County libraries, ACLA
consultants, knowledge connections, bookmobiles, EIN, CCAC connectivity].
54
ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1995, June 6). [CFLAC regular report: County library updates, ACLA,
55
bookmobile, knowledge connections]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, March 20). [CFLAC regular report: Northern tier, south hills, StoRox, Northland, ACLA, Knowledge Connections, Bookmobile, EIN]. ACLA
56
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
57 Jenkins, M. A. (1995, September 12). [CFLAC regular report: Northland proposal, ACLA
320

advised by ARAD to hire executive director, EIN developments]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1995, April 18). [CFLAC update: RAD, ACLA, EIN]. ACLA historical
58
file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
59

Jenkins, M. A. (1995, February 21). [CFLAC update: Sto-Rox opens, Open access issues
with Northland and Monroeville]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Hebditch. (1997). [Comments/questions -- proposed federated system]. ACLA historical
60
file (Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
61

Walsh, L. (1997, December 24). Computer equipment is missing from library. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1997, November 18). [County EIN Audits]. ACLA
62
historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Audit). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
63

Potts, J. (1997, June 16). Critic says kids can access porn at libraries. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

ACLA. (1995, December 20). [Distribution formula, revised 12/20/95, Allegheny
Regional Asset District (ARAD) funds for 1995 by the Allegheny County Library
64
Association]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
65

Kenney, J. E. (1995, November 10). [Draft distribution formula]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Formula 1995). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

66

EIN. (1996, April 8). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

67

EIN. (1996, December 12). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

68

EIN. (1996, February 5). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

69

EIN. (1996, March 11). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

70

EIN. (1996, October 21). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

71

EIN. (1996, September 16). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein
321

72

EIN. (1997, February 11). EIN board meeting minutes. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.clpgh.org/ein

73

EIN. (1995, June). [EIN governance principles]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

74

CFLAC. (1995, May). [EIN project organization and management]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

Electronic Information Network for Public Libraries in Allegheny County (EIN) Project
Review Group. (1995, April 17). [EIN: Governance Principles]. ACLA historical
75
file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
eiNetwork. (1996, February 22). [Electronic Information Network for Libraries in
Allegheny County: Implementation Progress report issued 22 February 1996].
76
ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
EIN. (1995, July 15). [Electronic Information Network for Libraries in Allegheny County:
Implementation progress report issued July 15, 1995]. ACLA historical file
77
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Cavinee, D. R. (1994). [Electronic information network for public libraries in Allegheny
78
County]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
79

EIN. (1994). [Electronic Information Network for Public Libraries in Allegheny County].
EIN archives.

EIN. (1995, July 31). [Electronic Information Network for Public Libraries in Allegheny
80
County: Six month progress report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
81

Williams, T. D. (1995, March 15). Ending nonresident library fees fuels debate.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. N2.

Allegheny County Institution District. (1997, February 27). [Funding from Allegheny
County to Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh for EIN]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
82
eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Electronic Information Network. (1995, July 26). [Funding report]. ACLA historical file
83
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
84

Toth, C. A., Walsh, G. A., Jenkins, M. A., Keich, C., M., Saperstein, S., Hof, M., . . .
Leipold, J. (1996, August to October ). [Glenn Walsh concerns]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
322

Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
85 The Times. (1995, March 10). Good returns. Beaver County Times.
86

ACLA. (1997, May 29). [Grant agreement (Electronic Information Network)]. ACLA
historical file (EIN Grant Agreement 1997, loosely filed). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

ACLA. (1997, June). [History of ACLA discussion of federated system]. ACLA historical
87
file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
88 Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.
89

Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

90 Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.
ACLA board. (1997, June 4). [Letter from ACLA board to ACLA secretary]. ACLA
91
historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA board. (1994, October 12). [Letter from ACLA board to library directors, trustees,
92
and officials: $5 million award]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Proposal). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
93

Kamper, A. F. (1995, May 12). [Letter from Al Kamper to Atu Faruquee: DLC meeting
with Kenney, Jenkins, and Croneberger]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Proposal). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

94

Kamper, A. F. (1997, February 26). [Letter from Al Kamper to Betty Ann O'Brien].
ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Kamper, A. F. (1996, August 20). [Letter from Al Kamper to Carolyn Toth and Marilyn
95
Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1994, October 27). [Letter from Al Kamper to CLP]. District Services
96
Collection, Series 2 (Box 11, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1996, December 17). [Letter from Al Kamper to David Donahoe:
Commonwealth libraries and countywide services]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
97
ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1995, January 30). [Letter from Al Kamper to Laura Shelley: Update on
98
adjustments to formula sheet]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Budget). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

323

Kamper, A. F. (1995, October 2). [Letter from Al Kamper to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
99
historical file (Folder: 1995 Knowledge Connections). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1997, March 6). [Letter from Al Kamper to Members, Director's
100
administrative cabinet]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Background). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
101

Capellman, A. M. (1997, April 18). [Letter from Alice Capellman to David Matter].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Brodsky, A. J. (1997, April 18). [Letter from Allan Brodsky to David Donahoe:
102
Springdale impact]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Brodsky, A. J. (1997, April 9). [Letter from Allan Brodsky to Larry Dunn: Annual
103
retreat]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
104

Brodsky, A. J. (1997, March 11). [Letter from Allan Brodsky to Nick Fisfis]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

105

Brodsky, A. J. (1997, April 1). [Letter from Allan Brodsky to Victor Robb]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Brodsky, A., Kamper, A. F., & Jenkins, M. A. (1997, February 19). [Letter from Allan
Brodsky, Al Kamper, and Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA directors, delegates, and
106
alternates]. ACLA history file. Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Allegheny League of Municipalities. (1997, July 9). [Letter from Allegheny League of
Municipalities to municipal officials: Federated library system]. ACLA historical
107
file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
108

Agnew, A. A. (1997, June 16). [Letter from Anne Agnew to Marilyn Jenkins: Emsworth
delegate]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

109

Agnew, A. A. (1997, June 11). [Letter from Anne Agnew to Marilyn Jenkins: Emsworth
membership]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Kochan, B. J. (1997, January 8). [Letter from B. J. Kochan to Maria: General membership
110
meeting notice]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Newspaper Articles).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
111 Dodge, W. R. (1994, October 17). [Letter from Bill Dodge to DeeAnna Cavinee:
324

Discussions about ARAD allocations]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Newspaper Coverage). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Mullaney, B. (1997, June 5). [Letter from BJ Mullaney to Marilyn Jenkins: Changes to
112
bylaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
113

Schultz, B., & Lowden, E. (1996, October 29). [Letter from Blanche Schultz and Eleanor
Lowden to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Croneberger, R. B. (1996, October 17). [Letter from Bob Croneberger to David Donohoe:
114
Library reporter concerns]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Croneberger, R. B. (1997, September 23). [Letter from Bob Croneberger to Marilyn
115
Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
116

Marks, C. (1997, February 21). [Letter from Carolyn Marks to Marilyn Jenkins: ARAD
formula committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

117

Marks, C. (1997, April 2). [Letter from Carolyn Marks to Marilyn Jenkins: ARAD library
sub-committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Toth, C. A., & Jenkins, M. A. (1996, October 1). [Letter from Carolyn Toth and Marilyn
Jenkins to ARAD formula subcommittee]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
118
Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
119

Toth, C. A. (1996, September 2). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Christine Keith: Formula
revisions]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Toth, C. A. (1996, July 18). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to David Donahoe: 1997 budget
120
request]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Toth, C. A. (1996, March 8). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to David Donahoe: Extension for
121
use of 1995 funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
122

Toth, C. A. (1996, January 12). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to David Donahoe: Funding
schedule]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

123

Toth, C. A. (1994, October 4). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Dee Anna Cavinee: Yea for
ACLA]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny
325

County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
124

Toth, C. A. (1996, November 5). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Douglas Watkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

125

Toth, C. A. (1996, November 5). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Fred Baker: Election
bylaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Toth, C. A. (1997, May 1). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to Gerald Voros]. ACLA historical
126
file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Toth, C. A. (1996, May 6). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to the Commission on the Future of
Libraries in Allegheny County: Hiring Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file
127
(Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Toth, C. A. (1995, August 4). [Letter from Carolyn Toth to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette:
128
On supplemental funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Newspaper
Coverage). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Keith, C. M. (1996, August 15). [Letter from Christine Keith to Carolyn Toth: Revised
129
ACLA budget]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
130

Miller, D. (1994, December 6). [Letter from Dave Miller to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

131

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, June 4). [Letter from David Donahoe to Allan Brodsky: Audit
committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Donahoe, D. L. (1996, August 12). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth:
132
Approval of long term plan]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
133

Donahoe, D. L. (1996, March 18). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth:
Carryover distribution]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

134

Donahoe, D. L. (1996, May 17). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth: Extension
for annual report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Donahoe, D. L. (1996, January 19). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth:
135
Extension for long term plan]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
136 Donahoe, D. L. (1996, June 19). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth: Interest
326

earnings]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
137

Donahoe, D. L. (1996, May 31). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth: Revising
minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, July 31). [Letter from David Donahoe to Glenn Walsh: ACLA
138
federation decision]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
139

Donahoe, D. L. (1995, December 5). [Letter from David Donahoe to Jo Ellen Kenney:
RAD budget for 1996]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Budget).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

140

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, January 21). [Letter from David Donahoe to Kathleen Kennedy:
ARAD cooperation amendment]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, January 3). [Letter from David Donahoe to Marilyn Jenkins].
141
ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Donahoe, D. L. (1997, April 9). [Letter from David Donahoe to Marilyn Jenkins: ACLA
142
capital project requests]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
143

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, December 4). [Letter from David Donahoe to Marilyn Jenkins:
Interruption of ARAD payments]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

144

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, January 21). [Letter from David Donahoe to Marilyn Jenkins:
Request for ADA improvements]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Donahoe, D. L. (1997, September 2). [Letter from David Donahoe to W. David Montz:
Lingering concerns about ACLA federation]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
145
ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
146

Watkins, D. A. (1997, March 18). [Letter from Douglas Watkins to Allan Brodsky: ACLA
federation]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Watkins, D. A. (1996, October 29). [Letter from Douglas Watkins to Carolyn Toth].
147
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
148

Mandell, E. (1997, May 28). [Letter from Ed Mandell to Al Kamper: Regional grant].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
327

Comas, E. (1997, June). [Letter from Edward Comas to Mr. Reddy]. ACLA historical file
149
(Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Engel, E. F., & Toth, C. A. (1996, October 15). [Letter from Ellen Engel and Carolyn Toth
150
to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
151

Lucchino, F. J. (1996, May 24). [Letter from Frank Lucchino to Carolyn Toth]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Baker, F. (1996, October 24). [Letter from Fred Baker to Carolyn Toth: Conflict in ACLA
152
exec election]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Mcadoo, G. H. (1997, June 23). [Letter from Garland H. Mcadoo to Marilyn Jenkins].
153
ACLA historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Mcadoo, G. H. (1996, March 25). [Letter from Garland McAdoo to Kathy Nowalk, Judy
Volkmar, Beth Burr, Al Kamper, Marilyn Jenkins, and Carolyn Toth: Upper Saint
154
Clair agreement]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Klingman, G. J. (1997, July 21). [Letter from Gary J. Klingman to Robert Cohen]. ACLA
155
historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
156

Walsh, G. A. (1997, July 10). [Letter from Glenn A. Walsh to David M. Matter]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

157

Walsh, G. A. (1997, April 9). [Letter from Glenn Walsh to ACLA members]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Walsh, G. A. (1997, February 6). [Letter from Glenn Walsh to Allegheny County library
158
board presidents]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Walsh, G. A. (1997, March 29). [Letter from Glenn Walsh to Mary Anne Craft]. ACLA
159
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
160

Stoddart, J. (1997, October 29). [Letter from Ja Stoddart to David Matter: Northland
objection]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

161

Cummings, J. (1997, May 30). [Letter from Jacquelynn Cummings to Marilyn Jenkins].
ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
328

Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
162

Duffy, J. R. (1997, June 23). [Letter from James R. Duffy to Edmond J. Reddy]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

163

Vidt, J. E. (1997, October 24). [Letter from James Vidt to David Donahoe: ACLA's
leverage]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Turner, J. (1994, December 12). [Letter from Jim Turner to Joyce Baskins]. ACLA
164
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kenney, J. E. (1995, March 10). [Letter from Jo Ellen Kenney to ACLA board: Bylaws
165
and regional use funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to Receive
Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
166

Kenney, J. E. (1995, March 7). [Letter from Jo Ellen Kenney to ACLA members: ARAD
approves revised formula]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History to
Receive Funding). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

167

Kenney, J. E. (1995, July 31). [Letter from Jo Ellen Kenney to David Matter: Independent
Northland proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Newspaper Coverage).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Kenney, J. E. (1995, December 19). [Letter from Jo Ellen Kenney to Joan Homyak:
168
Northland rejection]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
169

Homyak, J. B. (1995, August 4). [Letter from Joan Homyak to Jo Ellen Kenney:
Northland censure]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

170

Homyak, J. B. (1995, November 29). [Letter from Joan Homyak to Jo Ellen Kenney:
Northland proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Homyak, J. B. (1997, August 21). [Letter from Joan Homyak to Marilyn Jenkins:
171
Deadline extension]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Bonassi, J. R. (1997, June 11). [Letter from John Bonassi to ACLA member libraries:
172
ACLA bylaws and federation]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
173

Smart, J. W. (1996, October 2). [Letter from John Smart to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

174

Shelley, L. (1995, July 25). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Jo Ellen Kenney: Northland
withdrawal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
329

County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
175

Shelley, L. (1997, September 22). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Marilyn Jenkins: ACLA
bylaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

176

Shelley, L. (1996, December 2). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Marilyn Jenkins: Northland
decision]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Shelley, L. (1997, October 8). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Marilyn Jenkins: Northland
177
position]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Shelley, L. (1997, September 22). [Letter from Laura Shelley to Marilyn Jenkins:
178
Northland status]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
179

O'Brien, L. (1994, December 6). [Letter from Loretta O'Brien to Marilyn Jenkins and
Laura Shelley]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

180

Sander, L. F. (1996, July 18). [Letter from Lou Sander to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Sander, L. F. (1997, June 17). [Letter from Louis Sander to Robert Cohen]. ACLA
181
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
182

Duessel, M. (1997, August 13). [Letter from Maher Duessel to ARAD: Audit report].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

183

Taylor, M. (1997, May 27). [Letter from Marcia Taylor to Wilmer K. Baldwin]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1994, December 7). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA ad hoc
184
distribution committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, April). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA member libraries].
185
ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, September 11). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA member
libraries and directors: Federated system and letters of intent]. ACLA historical
186
file (Folder: System Letters of Intent). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
187 Jenkins, M. A. (1997, April 9). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA members]. ACLA
330

historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
188

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 15). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Al Kamper]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, August 8). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Amie Downs: Allegheny
League of Municipalities questions]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Allegheny
189
County League of Municipalities). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 16). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Andrew Carnegie
190
Free Library]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, June 13). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Anne Agnew: Emsworth
191
representation]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
192

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, October 30). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ARAD board of
directors: Response to audit report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

193

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 29). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Bob Croneberger].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1995, December 7). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Brentwood Library
194
board]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Background Information). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, April 11). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to county commissioners].
195
ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
196

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, October 7). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

197

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, February 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe:
ARAD amendment proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, August 5). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe: ARAD
198
counsel opinion on ACLA bylaw changes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
199

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, January 2). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe:
Northland funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
331

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, September 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe:
200
Northland, formula, federation issues]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLAARAD Proposal). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, November 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Matter: ACLA
201
adjustments]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
202

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, October 20). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Matter:
Amended by-laws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 18). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Matter:
203
Northland request]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, January 30). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Douglas Watkins:
204
Federated system]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, October 16). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Frank Lucchino:
CFLAC, bookmobile to head start programs]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
205
CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, July 14). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Gary Wolfe]. ACLA
206
historical file (Folder: Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
207

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 8). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Gerald Voros:
Recommendations for ACLA]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

208

Jenkins, M. A. (1995, March 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Guy Tumolo: County
funds for CLP and EIN]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, November 26). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Joan Homyak].
209
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, July 21). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Joan Homyak: Northland
210
decision]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
211

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, August 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Joan Homyak:
Northland extension]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

212

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, January 18). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Larry Dunn: CFLAC
update]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County
332

Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
213

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, November 22). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Larry Horkovich:
Carnegie free library funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

214

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, October 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Laura Shelley: Conflict
resolution]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, July 29). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Lou Sander:
215
Congratulations]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, November 18). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Mark Whittaker:
216
North Hills article]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
217

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, October 22). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Pittsburgh PostGazette: Deceptive headlines]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

218

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, September 8). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Ralph DeStefano:
Decision to federate]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, November 5). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Robert Valeriano:
219
Collection development funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
220

Jenkins, M. A. (1995, August 1). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Stephen Gifford: Library
in Pine and Hampton]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

221

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, January 3). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Sylvia Saperstein].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Jenkins, M. A. (1997, May 13). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Terry Griffin]. ACLA
222
historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, August 11). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Whitehall Board of
223
Directors: Opt-out provision]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
224

Craft, M. A. (1997, April 1). [Letter from Mary Anne Craft to Glenn Walsh]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

225

Sheridan, M. (1997, April 8). [Letter from Maureen Sheridan to ACLA member libraries].
ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
333

Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Murphy, T. (1994, October 7). [Letter from mayor Tom Murphy to senator Mike Fisher:
Confirmed support for RAD funding to libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
226
ACLA Letters of Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Hart, M. A. (1996, March 5). [Letter from Melissa Hart to David Donahoe: Avalon
227
funding]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
228

Fisfis, N. S. (1997, March 6). [Letter from Nick Fisfis to Allan Brodsky: ACLA
concerns]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

229

Fisfis, N. S. (1996, October 4). [Letter from Nick Fisfis to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Southorn, P. (1997, May 22). [Letter from P. Southorn to R. Crown]. ACLA historical file
230
(Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Cohen, R. A. (1997, November 7). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Marilyn Jenkins: Speech
231
to RAD board]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
232

Cohen, R. A. (1997, June 13). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Marilyn Jenkins: Support for
federation]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

233

McKown, R. (1997, May 28). [Letter from Robert McKown to Whitehall Borough Library
Board]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library Agreement). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Miranda, R. A. (1996, February 12). [Letter from Rowan Miranda to Marilyn Jenkins].
234
ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
235

Ostrum, R. M. (1996, July 24). [Letter from Roxane Ostrum to BJ Kochan: Avalon and
Lou Sander]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

236

Coyne, S., & Firestone, K. L. (1996, October 9). [Letter from Sally Coyne and Kathryn
Firestone to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Coyne, S. J. (1997, February 22). [Letter from Sally Coyne to EIN board of directors].
237
ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
238 Kuchta, S. A. (1996, February 22). [Letter from Shirley Kuchta to Carolyn Toth]. ACLA
334

historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
239

Saperstein, S. (1996, December 26). [Letter from Sylvia Saperstein to Marilyn Jenkins:
Collection development funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

ACLA system formation committee. (1997, January 16). [Letter from System formation
240
committee to all ACLA members]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Committee
Meetings). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
241

Alvord, T., & Spence, A. (1996, October 10). [Letter from Thomas Alvord and Alison
Spence to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

242

Herward, T. J., & Bogie, S. S. (1996, October 25). [Letter from Tom Herward and Sarah
Bogie to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Robb, V. E. (1997, March 28). [Letter from Victor Robb to Allan Brodsky: ACLA
243
federation]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Montz, W. D. (1997, May 6). [Letter from W. David Montz to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA
244
historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
245

DeLuca, W. V. (1997, March 20). [Letter from Wayne DeLuca to John Brennan]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

246

Western Allegheny Community Library. (1996, October 21). [Letter from Western
Allegheny Community Library to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
Letters of Intent). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Kastroll, W. C., & Clark, S. S. (1996, October 31). [Letter from Wilfrd Kastroll and
247
Suzanne Clark to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of
Intent). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
248

Neely, W. J., & Yates, D. G. (1996, October 10). [Letter from William Neely and Diane
Yates to Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Letters of Intent).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

249

Neely, W. J. (1997, October 20). [Letter from William Neely to ARAD board: Northland
special grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Yates, D. G. (1997, April 22). [Letter to ACLA members]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
250
General Information). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
251 Craft, M. A. (1997, March 19). [Letter to Glenn Walsh from Mary Anne Craft]. ACLA
335

historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Downs, A. (1997, July 28). [Letter to Marilyn Jenkins from Amie Downs, Allegheny
League of Municipalities]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Allegheny County
252
League of Municipalities). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
253

ACLA libraries. (1996, September to May 1997). [Letters of intent]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: System Letters of Intent). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

254 Toth, C. A. (1995, August 13). Libraries and RAD. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
255

Niederberger, M. (1997, October 19). Libraries are to shelve their independence, join
system. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. B2.

256

Williams, T. D. (1995, March 16). Libraries catalog their plans for money. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette, pp. N1, N2.

Gaul, G. M., & Tobia, P. (1997, June). Libraries in distress: A reprint of a series published
257
in The Philadelphia Inquirer from June 1 through June 4, 1997. The Philadelphia
Inquirer.
258 Brown, C. G. (1995, March 2). Libraries making wish lists. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
259

Commings, K. (1995). Libraries of the future ... Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh expands
on-ramps to its information highway. Computers in Libraries, 15(1), 14.

260

Immel, J. (1997, June 22). Libraries seek clout through federation. North Hills News
Record, p. A1.

261

Leonard, K. T. (1997, April 27). Libraries vote on power structure. Pittsburgh TribuneReview, pp. A1, A6.

ARAD library formula committee. (1997, October 1). [Library committee report]. ACLA
262
historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
263

Leonard, K. T. (1997, June 18). Library delegates OK plan for county. Pittsburgh Tribune
Review, p. B1.

264

Haynes, M. L. (1994, October 13). Library group awaits meeting before it budgets asset
money. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

Jenkins, M. A., Walsh, G. A., Sander, L. F., & Kamper, A. F. (1997, September). [Listserv
265
discussion on ACLA bylaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Member Library
Agreement). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
266

CFLAC. (1994, November 30). [Meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

267 CFLAC. (1995, October 25). [Meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC336

Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
268

CFLAC. (1996, June 25). [Meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

269

CFLAC. (1996, May 8). [Meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

270

CFLAC. (1996, October 30). [Meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

CFLAC. (1995, April 18). [Meeting minutes: Contract with county and CLP for EIN].
271
ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
CFLAC. (1995, February 21). [Meeting minutes: Knowledge connections, ACLA
272
bookkeeper, EIN]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
273

CFLAC. (1995, June 6). [Meeting minutes: Knowledge connections, ACLA bylaw
revisions, EIN proposals, EIN project manager]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

274

CFLAC. (1995, September 12). [Meeting minutes: Knowledge connections, seniors,
consideration of ACLA administrator]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

CFLAC. (1994, October 19). [Meeting minutes: Resignation of DeeAnna, EIN funds,
275
ACLA funds]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
276

Allegheny County Library Association. (1997). Member library agreement, Allegheny
County Library Association, federated library system. Retrieved from

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, August 2). [Memo to CFLAC re Sept 11 meeting]. ACLA historical
277
file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
278

Mcadoo, G. H. (1996, August 26). [Memorandum to executive committee: ACLA and
federated library system]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Documents). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

279

CFLAC. (1996, March 20). [Minutes for March 20 meeting]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

ACLA. (1996, April 22). [Notes from the ACLA directors' discussion re. federated system
280
development]. ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
281

Leonard, K. T. (1996, June 23). Plan suggests Allegheny libraries form central system.
Pittsburgh Tribune Review, pp. B1, B3.
337

EIN board. (1995, July 31). [Policy: Electronic Information Network Membership
282
Criteria]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Library Planning Associates. (1995, May 29). [Proposal for services]. ACLA historical
283
file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
284

Andrew Carnegie Free Library Board of Trustees. (1997, June 16). [Proposed bylaw
amendments for proposed federated library system bylaws]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

ACLA. (1994, December). [Proposed distribution of ARAD funds]. ACLA historical file
285
(Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Kenney, J. E. (1995, February 28). [Proposed distribution of ARAD funds for 1995].
286
ACLA historical file (Folder: Formula 1995). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
287 Schmitz, J. (1995, December 5). RAD board adopts '96 budget. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
288

Tipping, E. (1995, March 12). RAD board: Libraries must open doors or skip funding.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, p. A4.

289

Loeffler, W. (1995, March 6). RAD money not a deal for library. North Hills News
Record.

290

Chute, E. (1997, February 20). RAD revenue helps keep millage down. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

291

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. (1995, September 9). RAD waste: Why Northland Library should
treat all patrons equally. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

Allegheny Regional Asset District. (1996, March 15). [RADFax: Regional approach
292
launches library in "Northern Tier"]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, June 25). [Regular CFLAC report: Crafton, LA West, Northern tier,
federation, knowledge connections, EIN, new contract for Marilyn]. ACLA
293
historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, May 8). [Regular report for CFLAC: Federated system, knowledge
294
connections, bookmobile, EIN]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
295

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, December 18). [Regular report, CFLAC]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

296 Jenkins, M. A. (1996, October 30). [Regular report, Commission on the Future of
338

Libraries in Allegheny County]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
297

Jenkins, M. A. (1996, September 11). [Regular report: CFLAC]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Minutes-1996). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

298

Angotti, R. (1995, March 26). Ross Township library questions RAD mandates.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, p. D5.

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of State Corporation Bureau. (1997,
December 26). Second amendment and restatement of the articles of incorporation
299
of Allegheny County Library Association. Retrieved from Pennsylvania
Department of State:
300

Barnes, T. (1994, October 4). Stadium's the winner in sales tax handout. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

301

EIN Board. (1997, June 11). [Statement of the EIN Board on public access to the Internet,
especially by young people]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork
Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

302

EIN. (1997, November 6). [Statement, Electronic Information Network: Prepared by the
board of directors for the Regional Asset District Public hearings, 11/6/97].

EIN Board of directors. (1997, November 6). [Statement: Electronic Information Network:
prepared by the board of directors for the regional asset district public hearings,
303
11/6/97]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
304

ACLA. (1996, March). [Summary and commentary, long term plan, Allegheny County
Library Association (ACLA)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

305

ACLA system formation committee. (1997, April 1). [System formation committee
report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Committee Meetings). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

ACLA system formation committee. (1997, April 3). [System formation committee
306
report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Committee Meetings). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA system formation committee. (1997, January 14). [System formation committee
307
report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Committee Meetings). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
308

ACLA. (1997, June 4). [System formation: Letters of intent]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: System Letters of Intent). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

309

ACLA. (1997, April 10). [The ACLA Report 1(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
339

310

ACLA. (1997, May 28). [The ACLA Report 1(10)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

311

ACLA. (1997, July 18). [The ACLA Report 1(11)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

312

ACLA. (1997, April 16). [The ACLA Report 1(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

313

ACLA. (1997, April 17). [The ACLA Report 1(3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

314

ACLA. (1997, April 18). [The ACLA Report 1(4)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

315

ACLA. (1997, April 21). [The ACLA Report 1(5)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

316

ACLA. (1997, April 24). [The ACLA Report 1(6)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

317

ACLA. (1997, May 15). [The ACLA Report 1(7)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

318

ACLA. (1997, May 16). [The ACLA Report 1(8)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

319

ACLA. (1997, May 27). [The ACLA Report 1(9)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

Organizational task force subcommittee of system benefits. (1996, July 11). [The benefits
of a federated system for Allegheny County: A brief description]. ACLA
320
historical file (Folder: General Information). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
321

Leonard, K. T. (1997, June 16). Tuesday vote to decide future of library system.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, pp. B1, B3.

322 Brown, C. (1997, May 20). Turning a page for funding. Valley News Dispatch, p. A3.
CFLAC. (1995, December 4). [Update report: Knowledge connections, EIN, seniors,
323
ACLA]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
324

Kamper, A. F. (1995, April 5). Why debate over funds for library? Pittsburgh PostGazette.

325

Robinet, J.-E. (1994, October 17-23). Winning asset district funding could be revenue
drag. Pittsburgh Business Times.

326

Allegheny regional asset district allocations. (1996, November 26). Pittsburgh PostGazette.

340

327

Pennsylvania Library Association. (1998). The platform for Twenty-first century libraries:
Pennsylvania's future demands better libraries.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 8

Table G.8. Sources for period 8.

No.

Citation

1

ACLA. (2011, September 19). "Consolidated" services in a federated system. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com

2

Dahlgren, A. C., Johnson, D. W., & Bocher, R. (2001). A new plan for a new millennium:
A review of the long-range plan for the Allegheny County Library Association.
Madison, WI: Library Planning Associates.

3

ACLA. (2001). [A plan for the new Millennium: Ad Hoc Committees]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

4

ACLA. (2001, May 14). [ACLA service standards for local libraries]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

5

ACLA. (2009, July 31). ACLA support for meeting standards. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

6

ACLA. (1998, April). [acLIBS 3(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

7

ACLA. (1999, July). [ACLibs 4(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

8

ACLA. (1999, November). [ACLibs 4(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

9

ACLA. (2000, September). [ACLibs 5(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

10

Electronic Information Network (EIN) and Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1999, January
1). [Agreement between the Electronic Information Network (EIN) and Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

League of Women Voters of Greater Pittsburgh. (2008). Allegheny County government:
Organizations, facilities and services. Pittsburgh, PA: Community Information
341

Center.
12

Library Decision Snapshot. (2008, December 10). Allegheny County Library Association.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

13

ACLA. (2001). [Allegheny County Library Association: A new plan for the new
millennium, municipal meetings handouts]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
Countywide Development). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

14

Allegheny Regional Asset District. (2009). Amended and restated cooperation and
support agreement with Allegheny County Library Association.

15

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (2000). Annual report.

16

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (2010). Annual report.

17

Titmus, D. (2000, August 10). Area libraries share and Shareco alike. South Hills Record
Star, p. 8.

18

Sleeper, S., & Rudavsky, R. (2009). Assessing the future of Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh: Pathways to sustainability. Retrieved from Santa Monica, CA:

19

Hoover, B. (2009, October 13). Bad year for Pittsburgh's libraries with cuts and closings.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

20

Fuoco, L. W. (2011). Balancing the books. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. N1.

21

Barczak, E. (2003, April 17). Budgetary cliffhanger. Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

22

Lord, R. (2011, November 9). Carnegie Library funding approved by big margin.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

23

Allegheny County Industrial Development Authority. (2002). Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, Regional Asset District Revenue
Bonds, Series of 2002.

24

ACLA. (2011). Cataloging checklist. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

25

Niederberger, M. (2009, May 21). Change in formula may push libraries funds down, up.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

26

Change of heart. (1999, December 14). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

27

Countywide Library Development Issues committee. (2001, November 16). [Committee
retreat, meeting minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide
Development). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

28

Jenkins, M. A. (1998). [Commonwealth Libraries LSTA fund 1998: NetShare
application]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA 1998). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

29

Lash, C. (1999, December 11). County restores library Internet funds. Pittsburgh Post342

Gazette, p. B1.
30

ACLA. (2001, July 10). [County wide library development issues committee]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

31

ACLA. (2000, January 31). [County wide library services]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.

32

ACLA. (2000, June 6). [County wide library services committee]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

33

ACLA. (2000, May 2). [County Wide library services committee]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

34

ACLA. (2001, February 27). [County wide library services committee]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

35

ACLA. (1998, January 28). [County wide library services committee, goals for 1998].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

36

ACLA. (2001, November 16). [Countywide development brainstorming session]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

37

ACLA. (2007, April). Customer services standards and practices. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

38

EIN. (2000, August 28). EIN promotional video for Buhl foundation.

39

ACLA. (2008). eiNetwork Task Force Recommendations. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

40

Allegheny County Library Association and Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1998,
January 1). [Electronic Information Network Grant Agreement]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

41

EIN. (1998). Electronic Information Network: Strategic Plan 1999-2002.

42

Zlatos, B. (2007, July 21). Groups seek $98.6M in RAD funds. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

43

ACLA. (2003). [How to configure points]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

44

Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.
343

45

Library Administrator 1. (2016, January 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

46

Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

47

Library Administrator 8. (2016, April 18). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

48

Library Administrator 9. (2015, September 18). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

49

ACLA. (2011, March 8). LAC restructuring: Areas of operational oversight. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com

50

Cole, B. (2005, July 22). [Letter from Barbara Cole to District Library Center
Administrators, System Administrators, and Public Library Directors]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.

51

Richey, C. (2001). [Letter from Cynthia Richey to ACLA countywide library
development committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide
Development). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

52

Greenman, E. (2004). [Letter from Elliot Greenman to Jennifer Rabold, Marcia Taylor,
and Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

53

Norris, J. H. (2010, November 23). Letter from James H. Norris to John W. Smart.

54

Rabold, J. (2004, July 14). [Letter from Jennifer Rabold to Elliot Greenman, Marilyn
Jenkins, and Marcia Taylor]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

55

Rafalko, K. J. (2002, May 20). [Letter from K. J. Rafalko to ACLA Board]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Countywide Services). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

56

Jenkins, M. A. (2001, November 5). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA member
libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

57

Jenkins, M. A. (2001, May 4). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Ad Hoc committee chairs].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

58

Jenkins, M. A. (2005, July 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Board Presidents of
ACLA member libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

59

Jenkins, M. A. (2003, August 19). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Marcia Taylor]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
344

Pittsburgh, PA.
60

Jenkins, M. A. (1999, October 28). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Mary Kay Biagini].
ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

61

Jenkins, M. A. (1998, October 20). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Nick Fisfis: Full
member benefits]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Historical Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

62

O'Horo, T. P. (1999, September 9). [Letter from Terrence O'Horo to William McKain].
ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Audit). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

63

Zlatos, B. (2009, July 26). Libraries ask RAD for 1-time grant to soften expected cuts.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

64

Sciullo, M. (2009, October 15). Libraries debate plan for fund sharing. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

65

Zlatos, B. (2010, August 27). Libraries discuss solvency efforts. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

66

Lowry, P. (2003, March 14). Libraries face 50% cut in state funding. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

67

Wade, T. N. (2002, June 3). Libraries get marketing advice. Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

68

Niederberger, M. (1999, December 8). Libraries' Internet link facing budget ax.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, pp. B1, B2.

69

Wills, R. (2010, January 24). Libraries lament loss of funding for databases. Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review.

70

Zlatos, B. (2010, February 28). Libraries open arms to digital future. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

71

Barczak, E. (2003, April 24). Libraries prepare to cut staff, hours. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

72

Hoover, B. (2009, June 25). Libraries taken aback by RAD reslicing. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

73

Van Wert, L., & Hacke, S. (2009, July 23). Library directors brace for deep funding cuts.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

74

Zlatos, B. (2006, August 29). Library funding plan creates winners, losers. Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review.

75

Zlatos, B. (2010, June 22). Library funding shakeup urged. Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

76

Zlatos, B. (2010, June 11). Library group revises funding formula. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.
345

77

Smydo, J. (2011, July 26). Library supporters collect 10,000 names for tax referendum.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

78

Zlatos, B. (2007, August 28). Library, aviary, museums pitch for money. Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review.

79

ACLA. (2010). Municipal expenditures on libraries. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

80

Niederberger, M. (2009, May 14). New RAD formula may hurt libraries. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

81

ACLA east region. (2001, November 15). [Notes from East Region Meeting: Combined
regional responses]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Countywide Services).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

82

Open book: County libraries need a diverse funding plan. (2009, October 5). Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

83

Zlatos, B. (2007, October 2). Parks, Carnegie library get big boost. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

84

Niederberger, M. (2009, February 19). Patrons flock to libraries as the economy struggles.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

85

Wills, R. (2004, August 23). Porn filters expose flaws. Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

86

Sherman, J. L. (2005, March 30). Pornography filters urged at all libraries. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

87

ACLA standards/funding task force. (2003, March). [Preliminary report to the general
membership]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

88

Barnes, T. (1999, December 2). RAD board approves budget spending $74.6 million in
2000. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

89

Nereim, V. (2010, December 1). RAD board increases funding to arts groups. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

90

Hoover, B. (2009, September 30). RAD board rejects revised funding formula for
libraries. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

91

Barnes, T. (1998, September 8). RAD board to hear money pleas. Pittsburgh PostGazette.

92

Zlatos, B. (2010, December 1). RAD comes up with $900,000 extra. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.

93

Silver, J. D. (1998, November 13). RAD formula called unfair to poorer libraries.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

94

Zlatos, B. (2009, November 5). RAD looking between the lines. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.
346

95

ACLA Standards Taskforce. (2003, January). [Recommended standards for ACLA
libraries]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

96

County of Allegheny Office of the Controller. (1998, July 1). [Review of capital revenues
and expenditures for the Electronic Information Network for the period January 1,
1995 through march 31, 1998]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Audit).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

97

Riddle, R. (2000, October 17). SHARECO program expands for residents, businesses.
Daily News.

98

Taylor, B. (1999, July 23). Sheldon Park learning site opens. Valley news Dispatch, p. A3.

99

Zlatos, B. (2010, January 7). Shelved: Libraries forced to slash hours, staff, popular
programs as funding fades. Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.

100

ACLA. (2006). Standards for ACLA member libraries, standards for ACLA affiliates and
full service branches of member libraries. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

101

ACLA. (2002, December). Standards recommended for ACLA libraries. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

ACLA standards/funding task force. (2003, August 20). [Summary of discussion]. ACLA
102
historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA standards/funding task force. (2003, July 23). [Summary of discussion]. ACLA
103
historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
104

ACLA standards/funding task force. (2003, September 17). [Summary of discussion].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

105

Usher, H. (2008, May 29). Technology helps libraries evolve, remain relevant. Plum
Advance Leader.

106

ACLA. (1998, March 20). [The ACLA Report 2(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

107

ACLA. (2001). [Timeline: Review of "A new plan for the new millennium"]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Countywide Development). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

108

Baker, R. A. (2000, August 2). Township may support West Deer (?) library. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette, pp. N-7.

109

Hoover, B. (2009, December 2). Uncertainty about library funding ends with reslicing of
pie. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

110 ACLA. (2003, September 17). [West, East, North, South region standards worksheets].
347

ACLA historical file (Folder: Standards). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

SOURCES FOR PERIOD 9

Table G.9. Sources for period 9.

No.

Citation

1

ACLA. (2015, June 30). 2016 RAD proposal. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

2

County-City Library Service Panel. (2014, July). 21st century library service in
Allegheny County.

3

ACLA. (2015, June 15). ACLA board of directors meeting: Executive director's
summary of major action and discussion items. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

4

ACLA. (2015, May 11). ACLA board of directors meeting: Executive director's
summary of major action and discussion items. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

5

Swerhun. (2013, December 2). ACLA board update: LS21. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

6

ACLA. (2015, October 29). ACLA general membership meeting: Executive director's
summary of major action and discussion items. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

7

ACLA. (2015, October). ACLA service standards for local libraries. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

8

Riely, K. (2014, February 2). Allegheny County library systems look to cooperate.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved from http://www.postgazette.com/local/region/2014/02/03/A-new-look-forbooks/stories/201402030068

9

Carnegie Library of Homestead. (2014). Be part of the conversation about your library.
Carnegie of Homestead. Retrieved from http://carnegieofhomestead.com/partconversation-library/

10

ACLA. (2015, December 7). Board of directors meeting: Executive summary of major
action and discussion items. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

11

Allegheny County Library Association. (2013, July 24). Board resolution.

12

Karan, T. (2014, February 13). Brainstorming begins on ways libraries can better serve
348

users. TribLIVE. Retrieved from
http://triblive.com/neighborhoods/yourmckeesport/yourmckeesportmore/5583772
-74/library-libraries-carnegie
13

Bridgeville Public Library. (2014). Bridgeville Library events - April.

14

Upper St. Clair Township Library. (2014). Community meetings summary report.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

15

ACLA. (2013, January 29). County library service: New opportunities, new models.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

16

ACLA. (2014). County-city library services panel. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

17

Funk, H. (2013, November 7). Election 2013: Voters use referendum to make changes in
McKeesport, fund Homestead library. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

18

Swerhun. (2014, January). Engagement options for part one. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

19

ACLA Board meeting. (2016, March 31). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

20

ACLA general membership meeting. (2015, June 30). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael
M. Widdersheim.

21

ACLA general membership meeting. (2016, March 31). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by
Michael M. Widdersheim.

22

LAC Executive Meeting. (2016, March 10). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

23

LAC North Region meeting. (2016, February 16). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

24

LAC South Meeting. (2016, March 15). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

25

ACLA board meeting. (2015, March 30). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

26

ACLA general membership meeting. (2015, March 30). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by
Michael M. Widdersheim.

27

RAD hearings. (2015, August 26). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by Michael M. Widdersheim.

28

ACLA. (2014). Frequently asked questions regarding the County-City Library Service
Panel. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

29

Palascak, H. (2014, Summer). From the director's desk of Helen Palascak. Upper St.
Clair Today.

30

Swerhun. (2014, February). Integrated summary of community feedback. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com
349

31

Swerhun. (2014, May). Integrated summary of community feedback. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

32

Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

33

Library Administrator 5. (2015, July 16). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

34

Library Administrator 5. (2016, January 25). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

35

Library Administrator 6. (2015, March 6). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

36

Library Administrator 6. (2015, December 15). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

37

Library Administrator 6. (2015, August 6). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

38

Library Administrator 7. (2014, December 22). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

39

Library Administrator 7. (2015, February 17). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

40

Trustee 1. (2015, August 6). [Interview notes]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

41

Trustee 1. (2015, August 6). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

42

Trustee 2. (2015, July 2). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

43

Librarian 1. (2016, March 3). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

44

Trustee 2. (2016, January 26). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

45

Trustee 3. (2015, July 1). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

46

Librarian 2. (2015, May 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.

47

Library Administrator 1. (2015, August 10). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

48

Library Administrator 1. (2015, July 28). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

49

Library Administrator 2. (2015, July 8). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

50

Library Administrator 2. (2016, January 26). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

51

Library Administrator 3. (2015, July 21). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.
350

52

Library Administrator 3. (2016, January 25). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

53

Swerhun. (2014, January). January engagement training follow-up. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

54

Swerhun. (2013, November 14). LAC update #2: LS21. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

55

Swerhun. (2013, October 10). LAC update: LS21. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

56

Donahoe, D. (2012, March 28). Library Committee audit and report. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

57

ACLA. (2014, April 21). Library service in the 21st century. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

58

ACLA. (2014, February 13). Library service in the 21st century: A county-wide
conversation about public libraries (Part 1 of 3). Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

59

Visit Monroeville. (2014). Library service in the 21st century: A county-wide
conversation about public libraries (part 1). Retrieved from
http://www.visitmonroeville.com/event/library-service-21st-century-countywide-conversation-public-libraries-part-1/

60

ACLA. (2014, March, April). Library service in the 21st century: A county-wide
conversation about public libraries March/April 2014 (Part 2 of 3). Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com

61

Swerhun. (2014). Library service in the 21st century: Discussion guide 2. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

62

Swerhun. (2014, May 8 & 9). LS21: Draft discussion summary from meetings with
library directors. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com.

63

Swerhun. (2014, March 6 & 7). LS21: March engagement training follow-up. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com

64

Swerhun. (2013, October 31). LS21: October engagement training follow-up. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com

65

Swerhun. (2014, July). LS21: Overall conversation summary. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

66

Swerhun. (2014, February 13). LS21: Part 1 consultation with ACLA general
membership. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

67

Swerhun. (2014, April 3). LS21: Part two consultation with ACLA general membership.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

68

ACLA. (2014, May). LS21: Progress report. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

351

69

Swerhun. (2014, June 5). LS21: Working session #3 with ACLA general membership.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

70

DiVittorio, M. (2014, September 9). Mid-Mon Valley libraries weigh in on Allegheny
County recommendations. TribLIVE.

71

Borough of Edgewood. (2014). Minutes of January 21, 2014. Retrieved from
www.edgewood.pgh.pa.us

72

ACLA. (2014, October 29). Minutes, general membership meeting. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

73

Plaskon, D., & Sullivan, R. (2014). North Boroughs' libraries to be focus on
collaborative community meetings: County-wide library services initiative seeks
input from residents, leaders. Retrieved from northgate.k12.pa.us

74

County-City Library Service Panel. (2014, May 21). On behalf of the County-City
Library Service Panel. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

75

Hill Group. (2012, October 30). Our libraries of tomorrow: Final project report and
process; Overview with appendices. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

76

Fosbaugh, K. F. (2014, June 11). Public statement - South Park Township - Panel
meeting of 6/11/14. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

77

Goetz, J., & Donahoe, D. (2014). RAD approves $93.7 million budget for 2015.
Retrieved from www.radworkshere.org

78

Allegheny Regional Asset District Library Committee. (2012, March 27). Report of the
Library Committee. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

79

Allegheny Regional Asset District. (2012, February 8). Report on consulting services
regarding the Allegheny County Library Association (ParenteBeard report).
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

80

Sisterson. (2014, June 10). Report on review of projections prepared by Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Electronic Information Network and Allegheny County Library
Association. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

81

Jenkins, M. A. (2012, February 27). [Response to Parente Beard report].

82

ACLA. (2013, September 12). Service to underserved task force. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

83

ACLA. (2014). State requirements of ACLA & CLP. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

84

ACLA. (2015). Strategic plan 2016-2018. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

85

ACLA. (2013, March 8). Summary input from meetings with library directors.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

86

CCLS panel. (2014, May 21). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

352

87

CCLS panel. (2014, February 21). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

88

CCLS panel. (2014, January 24). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com

89

CCLS panel. (2014, June 11). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

90

CCLS panel. (2014, March 21). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

91

CCLS panel. (2014, May 19). Summary of meeting. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

92

South Park Library. (2014, February 12). Support our library: Participate in the
conversation. Retrieved from www.southparklibrary.org

93

Riely, K. (2014, May 25). Tax dedicated to library gets mixed voter results. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.

94

ACLA. (2010, January 1). Registered cardholders among Allegheny County
Municipalities. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

TYPES OF SOURCES COLLECTED

Table G.10. Names and definitions of source types.

Source type

Description

Meeting
minutes

Notes from meetings, including attendance, agendas, motions, votes, and
discussions.

News article

Article published in a newspaper, magazine, or journal.

Letter

A formal communication with a distinct sender and receiver. Includes
typewritten and handwritten letters, memos, notes; faxes; and emails.

Report

An in-depth study of a focused topic that uses a discernible methodology to
reach conclusions.

Announcement A broadcast about news or an event. Shorter than a news article. Includes a
bulletin, newsletter, flyer, advertisement, or poster.
Statute

Binding and enforceable agreement between parties.
contracts, acts of legislation, and policies.

Interview
transcript

Transcript from an in-person conversation with an interviewee.

353

Includes bylaws,

Interview
notes

Notes from non-recorded sections of an interview, observations not included in
a transcript, or notes from a phone interview that is not recorded.

Field notes

Observations from public meetings.

Speech

An oral presentation by an individual at a public event, such as a hearing.

Discussion
board

An online thread of messages with several participants.

Table G.11. Types of sources by period.

Period

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Totals

Ratio

Meeting minutes

11

2

3

4

22

25

43

12

13

135

.137

News articles

15

12

2

11

25

37

44

6

152

.154

Letters

8

19

21

36

10

62

168

13

3

340

.344

Reports

16

23

22

19

22

39

51

26

36

254

.257

Announcements

2

1

4

2

21

6

5

41

.041

Statutes

3

1

2

3

4

1

14

.014

Interview
transcripts

2

3

3

2

2

12

.012

Interview notes

2

1

3

19

25

.025

9

9

.009

5

.005

1

.001

988

1

Fieldnotes
Speeches

5

Discussion board
Totals

1
55

57

46

61

74

164

327

110

94

Table G.12. Source origins for the 9 periods.

Period

1

2

CLP Oliver Room
– Director’s Office
Collection

14

3

3

4

5

1

1

354

6

7

8

9

Totals Ratio
19

.019

CLP Oliver Room
– District Services
Collection Series 2

26

Pitt archives –
Civic Club
Collection

24

Allegheny County
Law Library

5

Heinz Center –
Detre Archives
CLP open stacks

35

54

22

1

28

.028

6

.006

4

.004

174

.176

1

.001

459

.465

62

.063

4

.004

12

44

.045

5

21

37

.037

2

9

12

.012

110

94

988

1

1
4

9

20

10

6

17

24

39

49

1

ACLA office –
history file

30

134

253

ACLA wiki

42
10

EIN archives

2
3
4

Fieldwork

4

3

1
55

57

46

61

74

355

164

327

52

2

29

Interviews

Total

.140

4

Pitt open stacks

World Wide Web

138

APPENDIX H: THE PILOT PHASE

THE SECOND CODER

The second coder chosen for this study was an advanced-level doctoral candidate in the
information sciences at the University of Pittsburgh. This individual was selected for several
reasons:
•

General subject area expertise in the information sciences;

•

Methodological training and knowledge of qualitative content analysis;

•

Ability to think abstractly and to express ideas clearly;

•

Insightfulness;

•

Rapport;

•

Availability for regular research meetings;

•

Critical distance from the research topic.

The situation in this study’s pilot phase was distinctive because, by pure chance, the second
coder also selected qualitative content analysis as a research method for their own dissertation
study and was in need of a second coder for that project. This coincidence created a quid pro
quo, mutually-beneficial situation where each researcher served as the second coder for the
other’s project. The dissertation projects shared identical timelines at that point, so the pilot
phases for both projects were conducted concurrently.
356

THE PILOT CODING TIMELINE AND SETTING

The pilot phase for this project began in January 2016 and continued into June 2016 (see Table
H.1). Meetings were held in person. With few exceptions, meetings were held at least once
weekly. The setting for the meetings was the University of Pittsburgh campus. The meeting
objectives progressed from 1) brainstorming and planning the pilot phase process, to 2)
providing the second coder a general background and introduction to the project, including key
concepts, to 3) exchanging codings, discussing them, measuring consistency, and revising the
coding frame.

During the coding process, blind coding was conducted between meeting

sessions. Meetings were held to exchange materials and compare coding results. Materials were
exchanged in hard copy form and shared online.

Table H.1. Meeting dates and topics with the second coder during the pilot phase.

Meeting

Date

Topic

1

1-27-16

Process planning; draft plan

2

2-3-16

Discussion of coding frame structure; how to segment; using NVivo to
code and generate reports (see Figure H.1 and Figure H.2).

3

2-10-16

Introduction to preliminary coding frame; planning the stages of the
pilot phase (see Figure H.3).

4

2-17-16

Discussion of coding frame categories, definitions, sub-categories, and
examples.

5

2-19-16

Discussion of key concepts and coding frame sub-categories (see Figure
H.4).

6

2-24-16

Discussion and revision of coding frame.

7

3-2-16

Exchange of coding frame with categories and definitions; discussion of
contextual units (see Figure H.5).

8

3-4-16

Exchange of segmented source materials for coding, provided
357

background materials on circulation of power model.
9

3-7-16

Discussion of coded materials and coding problems; exchange of new
segmented materials for coding.

10

3-11-16

Discussion of coded materials.

11

3-14-16

Discussion of coded materials; revision of coding frame; exchange of
new segmented source materials.

12

4-4-16

Exchange of segmented source materials for coding.

13

4-11-16

Exchange of coded materials.

14

4-12-16

Comparison of codings; discussion of coding frame; development of
data-driven concepts.

15

4-18-16

Determine total sources to be included in pilot phase.

16

4-19-16

Comparison of codings; discussion and refinement of key concepts.

17

4-26-16

Comparison of codings; discussion of coding frame.

18

5-4-16

Discussion of codings, coding frame, and key concepts.

19

5-10-16

Wrap-up planning session; exchange codings.

20

5-24-16

Exchange codings; plan for pilot phase conclusion.

21

6-8-16

Reflection on pilot coding process.

358

Figure H.1. Planning the pilot phase (2-3-16).

Figure H.2. Elements of the pilot phase (2-3-16).

359

Figure H.3. A preliminary timeline for the pilot phase (2-10-16).

360

Figure H.4. Coding frame and key concept discussion (2-19-16).

Figure H.5. Coding segments and coding categories (3-2-16).

361

STAGES OF THE PILOT PHASE

The pilot phase was conducted in 3 stages (see Table H.2). In the first stage, planning, coders
considered how to carry out the process. A schedule and timeline were outlined in this stage. It
was also decided to use a mix of hard copy materials and qualitative data analysis software for
the trial coding. NVivo was used for coding because in the end coders would use it to calculate
inter-coder reliability.

But codings were also copied onto paper matrices for use during

discussion meetings.

Table H.2. Stages of the pilot phase.

Stage

1

2

3

Name

Planning

Introduction

Trial coding

Actions

-Discuss how to conduct
the pilot phase
-Decide on coding
timeline
-Decide on coding
software

-Present key
concepts and
preliminary
coding frame to
second coder

-Exchange segmented source
materials
-Code source materials according to
coding frame
-Discuss inter-coder consistency
-Revise coding frame as necessary

Products

Timeline
Coding software

Preliminary
coding frame

Inter-coder reliability scores
Valid and reliable coding instrument

NVivo is a popular qualitative data analysis software package that is used to organize and
manage source material files, create coding nodes and a coding frame, perform coding on source
materials, share and exchange materials and codings, and calculate inter-coder reliability scores.
362

It was decided that managing sources, segmenting them, sharing files, coding materials, and
measuring inter-coder consistency might be better facilitated using NVivo as compared to doing
so using hard copies. One researcher already owned a license for the software, and a Mac
version could be provided to the second coder at no additional cost. At the same time, NVivo is
not so conducive for use in discussions because coding stripes are not easy to see. Paper-copy
matrices also therefore supplemented coding discussions (see Figure H.6). NVivo was used to
display the highlighted segments in the source materials (see Figure H.7).

363

Figure H.6. Example of a coding matrix sheet from trial coding round 9.

364

Figure H.7. View of a coding segment in NVivo during a trial coding.

365

In the second stage of the pilot phase, introduction, the second coder was presented a
general background of the research project and an overview of key concepts of the model that
would form the basis of the coding frame. The introduction stage was important to familiarize
the second coder to the types of source materials to be coded, the research perspective, and the
purpose of the study. A preliminary coding frame was also created and introduced at this time.
The third stage of the pilot phase was the trial codings. This stage was the primary focus
of the pilot phase. During this stage, coders read and analyzed source materials and coded them
according to the coding frame. Source materials were exchanged during meetings or online, and
blind coding was conducted between meetings. Coders then met to compare codings, discuss
their coding decisions, and propose modifications to the coding frame. Trial codings progressed
until 4 conditions were met: 1) inter-coder reliability scores showed that coders were consistent,
2) the coding frame was determined to be valid and reliable through discussions, 3) sufficient
numbers and types of sources had been coded from each period, 4) the entire frame had been
used.
In the introduction stage, coders decided to carry out the trial codings incrementally.
This means that instead of exchanging and coding a large volume of sources at one time, several
trial codings would be carried out where source materials were exchanged, coded, and discussed
a little at a time. There were several reasons for this decision. First, potentially big problems in
the coding frame could be fixed early on without wasting coding labor time. It made more sense
to code a little and gain a lot than to code a lot and gain relatively little. Second, the weekly
turnover provided more opportunities to think more deeply about the coding frame.

366

New

insights could be gained steadily over the course of several rounds of trial coding. The coding
frame was still in development during the pilot phase. Third, the structured chunking of the
exchanges and codings would make the coding process more manageable and less
overwhelming. Feedback about the coding frame could be obtained quickly and revisions could
be made immediately, making progress more visible. Coders would have room between weekly
meetings to code and prepare materials. Finally, coding the source materials and discussing the
coding frame over numerous meetings and several months established a paced routine where
coders could maintain otherwise busy schedules. In the end, 9 rounds of trial coding were
conducted during the pilot phase.

SOURCES CODED IN EACH TRIAL CODING ROUND

The trial coding progressed over a course of 9 coding rounds (see Table H.3). Different sources
were exchanged and coded in each round. Citations for the sources coded in each round can be
found in Appendix H.

Table H.3. Number of sources coded in each trial coding round.

Trial coding round

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Total

Number of sources coded

1

6

22

4

11

10

20

21

21

116

367

INTER-CODER RELIABILITY DURING THE PILOT PHASE

Inter-coder reliability was measured both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Qualitatively,

researchers discussed their codings in person, compared results, and raised issues regarding the
coding frame. When mutual understanding about the coding frame was reached, the instrument
was revised to reflect the new understandings and applied in the next round of trial coding. The
coding frame was said to be validated in a qualitative sense when both coders agreed that coding
categories were clearly understood.
Besides qualitative measurement through open-ended discussion, the coding frame was
also measured quantitatively by calculating Cohen’s kappa and percent agreement scores. These
values were calculated by importing both coders’ results from the blind codings into NVivo
software, then generating a coding comparison report that included Cohen’s kappa and percent
agreement scores for each node in the coding frame. This table of scores was then exported to
Excel where the Cohen’s kappa and percent agreement scores were averaged. These averages
were used as the inter-coder reliability scores for each round of trial coding (Table H.4).

368

Table H.4. Inter-coder reliability scores.

Trial coding round

Date measured

Cohen’s kappa

Percent agreement

1

3/7/2016

0.869

99.942

2

3/16/2016

0.9782

99.909

3

4/12/2016

0.943

99.925

4

4/19/2016

0.968

99.911

5

4/26/2016

0.982

99.924

6

5/4/2016

0.983

99.980

7

5/10/2016

0.995

99.995

8

5/25/2016

0.993

99.991

9

6/1/2016

0.993

99.988

Average

0.967

99.952

It should be noted that while the reliability scores appear relatively high throughout all
rounds of trial codings, the coding frame was modified little by little over the course of the
codings. This means that even if consistency appears high in a quantitative sense, it was still
essential to discuss the frame qualitatively.

Quantitative measures alone were therefore

insufficient criteria for assessing the frame.

SOURCES CODED FROM EACH PERIOD

In order to better validate the coding frame, it was important to test the frame on source materials
from all periods of the study. This was done by tracking how many sources were used from each
period in each of the trial coding rounds. The goal was to code around 10 percent of the total
369

number of sources from each period. This goal was achieved in 6 out of the 10 periods. Overall,
11.7 percent of the total sources were coded during the pilot phase (Table H.5. This fulfilled the
general rule to code between 10 and 20 percent of the total source material during the pilot
phase. Citations for the sources used in the pilot phase from each period can be found in
Appendix H.

Table H.5. Percent of sources coded in the pilot phase.

Period

Year range

Number of sources
coded in the pilot phase

Total number of
sources

Ratio of sources coded in
the pilot phase

1

1923–1945

17

55

0.309

2

1945–1960

13

57

0.228

3

1961–1970

8

46

0.174

4

1970–1979

9

61

0.148

5

1980–1992

11

74

0.149

6

1993–1994

17

164

0.104

7

1994–1997

24

327

0.073

8

1998–2011

8

110

0.073

9

2012–2016

9

94

0.096

Total

116

988

0.117

TYPES OF SOURCES CODED IN THE PILOT PHASE

It was also important to code a variety of types of source materials during the trial codings in
order to ensure that the coding frame could handle all types of sources. The number and types of
sources coded in each round are shown in Table H.6.
370

Table H.6. Types of sources coded in trial coding rounds.

Round

1

Interview transcripts

1

Meeting minutes

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2
6

2

News articles

6

Letters

9

Reports

4

Announcements

1

1

1

2

1

1

3

3

3

2

19

5

11

8

38

8

7

8

36

2

7

1

1

21

116

5
3

1

6

22

3

3

1

4

Total
3
12

3

Fieldnotes
Total

9

11

10

20

21

USE OF THE CODING FRAME DURING THE PILOT PHASE

All categories of the frame were used during the trial codings.

RESIDUAL SUB-CATEGORIES AND OVER-CODED SUB-CATEGORIES

There were no over-coded sub-categories during the trial codings.

371

SOURCES CODED IN EACH TRIAL CODING ROUND

Table H.7. Sources coded in each trial coding round.

Trial
Coding
Round

Source Citation

1

Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.

2

Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1925-1927). [Board minutes May 1925 to May
1927]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1927-1929). [Board minutes May 1927 to May
1929]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1929-1931). [Board minutes May 1929 to April
1931]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1931-1932). [Board minutes June 1931 to June
1933]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1933-1935). [Board minutes June 1933 to May
1935]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 30).
University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1937-1939). [Board minutes from May 1, 1937 to
April 30, 1939]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box
30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

3

Houk, R. (1938, October 27). [Letter from Ruth Houk to library directors]. Director's
Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
[Library merger urged to aid north side unit - Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph]. (1938,
February 15). Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box 7,
Folder 64). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1939, December 18). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John J. Kane.].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1940, January/February). [Bulletin]. Director's
372

Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1941-1943). [Board minutes from May 8, 1941 to
March 17, 1943]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection (Box
30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
[County fund sought for school libraries - Pittsburgh Press]. (1940). Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
[Lending library program studied for county schools]. (1940). Director's Office
Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1940, March 13). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John J. Kane].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Houk, R. (1940, January 9). [Letter from Ruth Houk to John J. Kane]. Director's
Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1941, June 4). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to Mrs. L. G. Stone].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Munn, R. W. (1954, April 2). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Librarians of Allegheny
County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
County Controller's Office. (1956). [Controller's annual report for the fiscal affairs of
Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31, 1955]. Detre Library
& Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
County-wide library plan advocated. (1955, November 17). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Munn, R. W. (1955, October). [Larger units of library administration: What has
happened in Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box
4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, July 12). [Letter from Mrs. George Karnofsky to friends
and members]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, November 23). [Letter from Mrs. George Karnofsky to
Library Planning Committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
373

Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
EnDean, D. S. (1955, December 1). [Letter from Mrs. Howard EnDean to the Library
planning committee]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
New report lists many objections to charter plan. (1955, October 1). Pittsburgh
Press.
County Controller's Office. (1957). [Controller's 96th Annual Report of the Fiscal
Affairs of Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31, 1956].
Detre Library & Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Pade, W. (1956 May 30). County-wide library system to be launched. Pittsburgh
Press.
County Commissioners. (1956). [Minutes: Jan. 2, 1956 to Dec. 27, 1956 inc., Vol.
37]. Detre Library & Archives, Heinz History Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Step to merge libraries due in council. (1956, March 11). Pittsburgh Press.
4

Why the federated Pittsburgh plan failed to carry: Defeated plan to be resubmitted.
(1929). The American City, 41, 150.
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1962). Annual report.
Martin, L. A., Estes, G. W., Palmer, D. C., & Summers, F. W. (1958). Library
service in Pennsylvania: Present and Proposed; A survey commissioned by
the Pennsylvania state librarian at the request of the honorable George M.
Leader, Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1965). [District Library Center, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh: A brief history, 1963-1965]. District Services Collection, Series 2
(Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

5

Cavinee, D. R. (1989, March 13). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to Al Kamper].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Hoover, B. (1990, May 3). Countywide library system urged. Pittsburgh PostGazette.
Kamper, A. F. (1989, March 17). [Future outlets: Response to Dee Cavinee]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 7). [Letter from Al Kamper to Cabinet]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

374

Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 27). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to Cabinet].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, P. (1991, April 15). [C.L.A.S.P. flyer]. District Services Collection, Series
2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, P. (1991, March 11). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Albert F. Kamper].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Lucchino, F. J. (1990, June 12). [Looking beyond our past]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Lucchino, F. J. (1991). [A quiet crisis: Libraries in Allegheny County]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
President's Advisory Committee on the Library. (1990, April). [Report of the
President's Advisory Committee on the Library]. Director's Office Collection
(Box 44, Folder 9). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library. (1989, February 21). [The
Carnegie: Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library Meeting].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 7). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
6

ACLA. (1994, September 15). [Proposal for ARAD funding, Allegheny County
Library Association]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA Letters of
Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Bull, J. M. R. (1994, April 1). Split board approves 1 percent sales tax increase.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. A1.
CLASP. (1994, February 17). [Summary of meeting, Regional Asset District
Committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
CLASP. (1994, July 21). [Minutes of the CLASP general meeting]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1994, July 21). [CLASP county regions]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kenney, J. E. (1994, September 21). [ARAD board speech]. Private collection.
375

Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.
Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M. Widdersheim.
Reeves, T. (1993, December 14). Senate OKs sales tax. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p.
A1.
Toth, C. A. (1994, August 12). [ACLA press release]. Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania room.
7

Jenkins, M. A. (1994, September 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Henry Ewalt:
ACLA projected estimates]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD
Background). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Barnes, T. (1994, October 4). Stadium's the winner in sales tax handout. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.
Barnes, T. (1994, October 3). Day of decision for the asset district. Pittsburgh PostGazette.
ACLA. (1994, November 10). [ACLA ARAD draft distribution]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, April). [acLIBS 1(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1994, December). [Proposed distribution of ARAD funds]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, April 22). [Notes from the ACLA directors' discussion re. federated
system development]. ACLA historical file (Folder: General Information).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, June). [acLIBS 1(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, September). [ACLibs 1(3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Blankowski, B. A. (1996, December 18). [Allegheny County Library Association
Regional Grant Report Form]. ACLA historical file (Folder: 1995
Knowledge Connections). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
EIN board. (1995, July 31). [Policy: Electronic Information Network Membership
Criteria]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Minutes). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
EIN Board. (1997, June 11). [Statement of the EIN Board on public access to the
376

Internet, especially by young people]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Electronic Information Network for Public Libraries in Allegheny County (EIN)
Project Review Group. (1995, April 17). [EIN: Governance Principles].
ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1995, March 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Guy Tumolo:
County funds for CLP and EIN]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork
Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, September 11). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to ACLA
member libraries and directors: Federated system and letters of intent].
ACLA historical file (Folder: System Letters of Intent). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1995, October 2). [Letter from Al Kamper to Marilyn Jenkins].
ACLA historical file (Folder: 1995 Knowledge Connections). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, K. T. (1996, June 23). Plan suggests Allegheny libraries form central
system. Pittsburgh Tribune Review, pp. B1, B3.
Library Planning Associates. (1995, May 29). [Proposal for services]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Library Planning Associates. (1996, March). A plan for library service in Allegheny
County (Vol. ACLA historical file (Folder: County Plan Organization Task
Force). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA).
Streamwood, IL: Library Planning Associates.
Miranda, R. A. (1996, February 12). [Letter from Rowan Miranda to Marilyn
Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
8

Andrew Carnegie Free Library Board of Trustees. (1997, June 16). [Proposed bylaw
amendments for proposed federated library system bylaws]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ARAD library formula committee. (1997, October 1). [Library committee report].
ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Donahoe, D. L. (1996, May 31). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn Toth:
Revising minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

377

Downs, A. (1997, July 28). [Letter to Marilyn Jenkins from Amie Downs, Allegheny
League of Municipalities]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Allegheny County
League of Municipalities). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Hoover, B. (2009, September 30). RAD board rejects revised funding formula for
libraries. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, February 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David Donahoe:
ARAD amendment proposal]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Neely, W. J. (1997, October 20). [Letter from William Neely to ARAD board:
Northland special grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Smydo, J. (2011, July 26). Library supporters collect 10,000 names for tax
referendum. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Walsh, G. A. (1997, July 10). [Letter from Glenn A. Walsh to David M. Matter].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Blasingame, R., DeProspo, E. R., & Goldberg, R. L. (1970, February). [Organization
for public library services in an urban field: Plan for establishment of a
county public library service system for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Manual 1). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Bowen, H. (1967, August). The Township of Shaler, North Hills Library, a brief
history. PLA Bulletin, 57-58.
A county library system? (1973, August 10). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Doms, K. (1966, October 10). [Regional reference center proposal]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Doms, K. (1968, January 8). [Letter from Keith Doms to district libraries]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Doms, K. (1968, November 29). [Letter from Keith Doms to Donald C. Potter].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Falgione, J. F. (1966, August 19). [Letter from Joseph F. Falgione to James T.
Golden]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
378

PA.
Green, B. Y. (1967, April). [Public library service in Allegheny County--Past and
present]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Potter, D. C. (1971, February 26). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Dorothea M.
Strang]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 4). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
[Report from hearing before Allegheny County Gov't. Study Commission on county
library system]. (1973, May 23). District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box
5, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Firestone, K. L. (1994, September). [Letter from Kathy Firestone to ACLA libraries:
Petition rally]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Pre-RAD). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Strang, D. M. (1971, January 5). [Toward a county library system]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
9

ACLA. (1998, April). [acLIBS 3(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (2002, December). Standards recommended for ACLA libraries. Retrieved
from acla.pbworks.com
ACLA general membership meeting. (2016, March 31). [Fieldnotes]. Recorded by
Michael M. Widdersheim.
Allegheny County Library Association. (2013, July 24). Board resolution.
Allegheny Regional Asset District. (2012, February 8). Report on consulting services
regarding the Allegheny County Library Association (ParenteBeard report).
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
County-City Library Service Panel. (2014, May 21). On behalf of the County-City
Library Service Panel. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
Donahoe, D. (2012, March 28). Library Committee audit and report. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com
EIN. (2000, August 28). EIN promotional video for Buhl foundation.
Jenkins, M. A. (1999, October 28). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Mary Kay
Biagini]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.

379

Jenkins, M. A. (2012, February 27). [Response to Parente Beard report].
Swerhun. (2013, December 2). ACLA board update: LS21. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com
Swerhun. (2013, October 31). LS21: October engagement training follow-up.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
Zlatos, B. (2006, August 29). Library funding plan creates winners, losers. Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review.
Zlatos, B. (2010, June 22). Library funding shakeup urged. Pittsburgh TribuneReview.
Allegheny County Citizens Study Committee on Libraries. (1978, September 30).
[Public libraries in Allegheny County...A Plan of Action]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 1, Manual 10). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Board of Commissioners of Allegheny County. (1976, August 26). [Project
Application, LSCA Title I: Citizens' Commission for Library Service].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 12). [Letters from Robert Cohen to Tom Foerster, Pete
Flaherty, and Larry Dunn]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLAC-Projects).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 16). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Alison Spence:
Contact to CLASP from the PA Economy League about RAD]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Fisher, D. M. (1993, December 20). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Monica Stoicovy].
ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative Information on ARAD Tax).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Schlesinger, D. (1979, January 3). [Letter from Deborah Schlesinger to Keith
Gilbert]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Walton, J. M. (1976, March 5). [Letter from James M. Walton to trustees, staff, and
friends of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

380

SOURCES TRIAL-CODED BY PERIOD

Table H.8. Sources trial-coded by period.

Period
1

Year
range
1923–
1945

Source citation
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1925-1927). [Board minutes May 1925 to
May 1927]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection
(Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1927-1929). [Board minutes May 1927 to
May 1929]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection
(Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1929-1931). [Board minutes May 1929 to
April 1931]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection
(Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1931-1932). [Board minutes June 1931 to
June 1933]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection
(Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1933-1935). [Board minutes June 1933 to
May 1935]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records Collection
(Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1937-1939). [Board minutes from May 1,
1937 to April 30, 1939]. Civic Club of Allegheny County Records
Collection (Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives Service
Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1940, January/February). [Bulletin].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Civic Club of Allegheny County. (1941-1943). [Board minutes from May 8,
1941 to March 17, 1943]. Civic Club of Allegheny County
Records Collection (Box 30). University of Pittsburgh Archives
Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
[County fund sought for school libraries - Pittsburgh Press]. (1940).
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1939, December 18). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John
J. Kane.]. Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William
381

R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1940, March 13). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to John J.
Kane]. Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Grondahl, L. O. (1941, June 4). [Letter from L. O. Grondahl to Mrs. L. G.
Stone]. Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Houk, R. (1938, October 27). [Letter from Ruth Houk to library directors].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Houk, R. (1940, January 9). [Letter from Ruth Houk to John J. Kane].
Director's Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
[Lending library program studied for county schools]. (1940). Director's
Office Collection (Box 21, Folder 4). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
[Library merger urged to aid north side unit - Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph].
(1938, February 15). Civic Club of Allegheny County Records
Collection (Box 7, Folder 64). University of Pittsburgh Archives
Service Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
Why the federated Pittsburgh plan failed to carry: Defeated plan to be
resubmitted. (1929). The American City, 41, 150.
2

1945–
1960

County-wide library plan advocated. (1955, November 17). Pittsburgh PostGazette.
County Commissioners. (1956). [Minutes: Jan. 2, 1956 to Dec. 27, 1956
inc., Vol. 37]. Detre Library & Archives, Heinz History Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
County Controller's Office. (1956). [Controller's annual report for the fiscal
affairs of Allegheny County: For the year ending December 31,
1955]. Detre Library & Archives, Heinz History Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
County Controller's Office. (1957). [Controller's 96th Annual Report of the
Fiscal Affairs of Allegheny County: For the year ending December
31, 1956]. Detre Library & Archives, Heinz History Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.
EnDean, D. S. (1955, December 1). [Letter from Mrs. Howard EnDean to
the Library planning committee]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, July 12). [Letter from Mrs. George Karnofsky to
382

friends and members]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box
4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Karnofsky, M. G. (1955, November 23). [Letter from Mrs. George
Karnofsky to Library Planning Committee]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Martin, L. A., Estes, G. W., Palmer, D. C., & Summers, F. W. (1958).
Library service in Pennsylvania: Present and Proposed; A survey
commissioned by the Pennsylvania state librarian at the request of
the honorable George M. Leader, Governor of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Retrieved from Harrisburg, PA:
Munn, R. W. (1954, April 2). [Letter from Ralph Munn to Librarians of
Allegheny County]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4,
Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Munn, R. W. (1955, October). [Larger units of library administration: What
has happened in Allegheny County]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 6). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
New report lists many objections to charter plan. (1955, October 1).
Pittsburgh Press.
Pade, W. (1956 May 30). County-wide library system to be launched.
Pittsburgh Press.
Step to merge libraries due in council. (1956, March 11). Pittsburgh Press.
3

1961–
1970

Bowen, H. (1967, August). The Township of Shaler, North Hills Library, a
brief history. PLA Bulletin, 57-58.
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1962). Annual report.
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. (1965). [District Library Center, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh: A brief history, 1963-1965]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Doms, K. (1966, October 10). [Regional reference center proposal]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Doms, K. (1968, January 8). [Letter from Keith Doms to district libraries].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 1). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Doms, K. (1968, November 29). [Letter from Keith Doms to Donald C.
Potter]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 7).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
383

Falgione, J. F. (1966, August 19). [Letter from Joseph F. Falgione to James
T. Golden]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder
5). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Green, B. Y. (1967, April). [Public library service in Allegheny County-Past and present]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5,
Folder 8). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
4

1970–
1979

Allegheny County Citizens Study Committee on Libraries. (1978, September
30). [Public libraries in Allegheny County...A Plan of Action].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 1, Manual 10). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Blasingame, R., DeProspo, E. R., & Goldberg, R. L. (1970, February).
[Organization for public library services in an urban field: Plan for
establishment of a county public library service system for
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 2, Manual 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Board of Commissioners of Allegheny County. (1976, August 26). [Project
Application, LSCA Title I: Citizens' Commission for Library
Service]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 4, Folder 5).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
A county library system? (1973, August 10). Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Potter, D. C. (1971, February 26). [Letter from Donald C. Potter to Dorothea
M. Strang]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder
4). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
[Report from hearing before Allegheny County Gov't. Study Commission on
county library system]. (1973, May 23). District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 5). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Schlesinger, D. (1979, January 3). [Letter from Deborah Schlesinger to
Keith Gilbert]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5,
Folder 1). William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Strang, D. M. (1971, January 5). [Toward a county library system]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 2, Folder 2). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Walton, J. M. (1976, March 5). [Letter from James M. Walton to trustees,
staff, and friends of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh]. District
Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 8). William R. Oliver
Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
384

Pittsburgh, PA.
5

1980–
1992

Cavinee, D. R. (1989, March 13). [Letter from DeeAnna Cavinee to Al
Kamper]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Hoover, B. (1990, May 3). Countywide library system urged. Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette.
Kamper, A. F. (1989, March 17). [Future outlets: Response to Dee Cavinee].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 6). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 7). [Letter from Al Kamper to Cabinet].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R.
Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1991, February 27). [Letter from Albert F. Kamper to
Cabinet]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, P. (1991, April 15). [C.L.A.S.P. flyer]. District Services Collection,
Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2). William R. Oliver Special Collections
Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, P. (1991, March 11). [Letter from Peter Leonard to Albert F.
Kamper]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Folder 2).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Lucchino, F. J. (1990, June 12). [Looking beyond our past]. District Services
Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 2). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Lucchino, F. J. (1991). [A quiet crisis: Libraries in Allegheny County].
District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 3, Manual 4). William
R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
President's Advisory Committee on the Library. (1990, April). [Report of the
President's Advisory Committee on the Library]. Director's Office
Collection (Box 44, Folder 9). William R. Oliver Special
Collections Room, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library. (1989, February 21). [The
Carnegie: Presidential Advisory Committee for the Library
Meeting]. District Services Collection, Series 2 (Box 5, Folder 7).
William R. Oliver Special Collections Room, Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

6

1993–
1994

ACLA. (1994, September 15). [Proposal for ARAD funding, Allegheny
County Library Association]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
Letters of Support for ARAD Funding 1994). Allegheny County
385

Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Barnes, T. (1994, October 3). Day of decision for the asset district.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Barnes, T. (1994, October 4). Stadium's the winner in sales tax handout.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Bull, J. M. R. (1994, April 1). Split board approves 1 percent sales tax
increase. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. A1.
CLASP. (1994, February 17). [Summary of meeting, Regional Asset District
Committee]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA History).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
CLASP. (1994, July 21). [Minutes of the CLASP general meeting]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 12). [Letters from Robert Cohen to Tom
Foerster, Pete Flaherty, and Larry Dunn]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: CFLAC-Projects). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Cohen, R. A. (1993, August 16). [Letter from Robert Cohen to Alison
Spence: Contact to CLASP from the PA Economy League about
RAD]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA-ARAD Background).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Firestone, K. L. (1994, September). [Letter from Kathy Firestone to ACLA
libraries: Petition rally]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Pre-RAD).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Fisher, D. M. (1993, December 20). [Letter from Mike Fisher to Monica
Stoicovy]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Legislative Information
on ARAD Tax). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1994, September 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Henry
Ewalt: ACLA projected estimates]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA-ARAD Background). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1994, July 21). [CLASP county regions]. ACLA historical
file (Folder: ACLA History). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kenney, J. E. (1994, September 21). [ARAD board speech]. Private
collection.
Library Administrator 4. (2015, July 14). [Interview]. Interviewed by
Michael M. Widdersheim.
Politician 1. (2015, July 27). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.
Reeves, T. (1993, December 14). Senate OKs sales tax. Pittsburgh PostGazette, p. A1.
Toth, C. A. (1994, August 12). [ACLA press release]. Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania room.

386

7

1994–
1997

ACLA. (1994, December). [Proposed distribution of ARAD funds]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1994, November 10). [ACLA ARAD draft distribution]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Black Binder). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, April). [acLIBS 1(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, April 22). [Notes from the ACLA directors' discussion re.
federated system development]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
General Information). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, June). [acLIBS 1(2)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
ACLA. (1996, September). [ACLibs 1(3)]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ACLA History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Andrew Carnegie Free Library Board of Trustees. (1997, June 16).
[Proposed bylaw amendments for proposed federated library
system bylaws]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
ARAD library formula committee. (1997, October 1). [Library committee
report]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD Correspondence).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Blankowski, B. A. (1996, December 18). [Allegheny County Library
Association Regional Grant Report Form]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: 1995 Knowledge Connections). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Donahoe, D. L. (1996, May 31). [Letter from David Donahoe to Carolyn
Toth: Revising minutes]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ARAD
Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Downs, A. (1997, July 28). [Letter to Marilyn Jenkins from Amie Downs,
Allegheny League of Municipalities]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: Allegheny County League of Municipalities). Allegheny
County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
EIN board. (1995, July 31). [Policy: Electronic Information Network
Membership Criteria]. ACLA historical file (Folder: CFLACMinutes). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
EIN Board. (1997, June 11). [Statement of the EIN Board on public access
to the Internet, especially by young people]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
387

Electronic Information Network for Public Libraries in Allegheny County
(EIN) Project Review Group. (1995, April 17). [EIN: Governance
Principles]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork Agreements).
Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1995, March 27). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Guy
Tumolo: County funds for CLP and EIN]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: eiNetwork Agreements). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1996, September 11). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to
ACLA member libraries and directors: Federated system and
letters of intent]. ACLA historical file (Folder: System Letters of
Intent). Allegheny County Library Association Office, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Jenkins, M. A. (1997, February 6). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to David
Donahoe: ARAD amendment proposal]. ACLA historical file
(Folder: ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kamper, A. F. (1995, October 2). [Letter from Al Kamper to Marilyn
Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: 1995 Knowledge
Connections). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Leonard, K. T. (1996, June 23). Plan suggests Allegheny libraries form
central system. Pittsburgh Tribune Review, pp. B1, B3.
Library Planning Associates. (1995, May 29). [Proposal for services]. ACLA
historical file (Folder: Background). Allegheny County Library
Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Library Planning Associates. (1996, March). A plan for library service in
Allegheny County (Vol. ACLA historical file (Folder: County Plan
Organization Task Force). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA). Streamwood, IL: Library Planning
Associates.
Miranda, R. A. (1996, February 12). [Letter from Rowan Miranda to
Marilyn Jenkins]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork
Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Neely, W. J. (1997, October 20). [Letter from William Neely to ARAD
board: Northland special grant]. ACLA historical file (Folder:
ARAD Correspondence). Allegheny County Library Association
Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
Walsh, G. A. (1997, July 10). [Letter from Glenn A. Walsh to David M.
Matter]. ACLA historical file (Folder: Bylaws). Allegheny County
Library Association Office, Pittsburgh, PA.
8

1998–
2011

ACLA. (1998, April). [acLIBS 3(1)]. ACLA historical file (Folder: ACLA
History). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
388

ACLA. (2002, December). Standards recommended for ACLA libraries.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
EIN. (2000, August 28). EIN promotional video for Buhl foundation.
Hoover, B. (2009, September 30). RAD board rejects revised funding
formula for libraries. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Jenkins, M. A. (1999, October 28). [Letter from Marilyn Jenkins to Mary
Kay Biagini]. ACLA historical file (Folder: eiNetwork
Agreements). Allegheny County Library Association Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Smydo, J. (2011, July 26). Library supporters collect 10,000 names for tax
referendum. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Zlatos, B. (2006, August 29). Library funding plan creates winners, losers.
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.
Zlatos, B. (2010, June 22). Library funding shakeup urged. Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review.
9

2012–
2016

ACLA general membership meeting. (2016, March 31). [Fieldnotes].
Recorded by Michael M. Widdersheim.
Allegheny County Library Association. (2013, July 24). Board resolution.
Allegheny Regional Asset District. (2012, February 8). Report on consulting
services regarding the Allegheny County Library Association
(ParenteBeard report). Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
County-City Library Service Panel. (2014, May 21). On behalf of the
County-City Library Service Panel. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com
Donahoe, D. (2012, March 28). Library Committee audit and report.
Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com
Jenkins, M. A. (2012, February 27). [Response to Parente Beard report].
Librarian 1. (2016, January 7). [Interview]. Interviewed by Michael M.
Widdersheim.
Swerhun. (2013, December 2). ACLA board update: LS21. Retrieved from
acla.pbworks.com
Swerhun. (2013, October 31). LS21: October engagement training followup. Retrieved from acla.pbworks.com

389

APPENDIX I: THE CODING FRAME

CATEGORIES AND SUB-CATEGORIES

Table I.1. Coding frame category and sub-category names, organized hierarchically.

00_Coding Segments
00_Context Segments
01_Power transmission
A_Administrative power
POWER_Administrative Broadcast
POWER_Administrative Narrowcast
B_Communicative power
POWER_Communicative Broadcast
POWER_Communicative Narrowcast
C_Formal decision
POWER_Formal Decision
D_Social power
Narrowcast
POWER_Social Backroom deals
POWER_Social Economic power
POWER_Z_Unknown
02_Time
1900s
1920s

390

1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930s
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940s
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
391

1948
1949
1950s
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960s
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970s
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
392

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980s
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990s
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000s
2000s
2000
393

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010s
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
undefined
03_Actor
A_Federal government
SOURCE_1_cwa lwd
SOURCE_107_US supreme court
SOURCE_2_Library agencies
SOURCE_3_US Congress
B_State government
SOURCE_4_Governor
SOURCE_5_Pennsylvania state assembly
SOURCE_6_Pennsylvania state library
SOURCE_7_Secretary of Labor and Industry
SOURCE_8_voters
394

SOURCE_9_constitution of pa
SOURCE_97_Department of Revenue
SOURCE_98_Public Utility Commission
C_County government
SOURCE_10_Allegheny County Housing Authority
SOURCE_11_Board of County Commissioners
SOURCE_12_Citizen Study Committee on Libraries
SOURCE_13_Commission on the Future of Libraries
SOURCE_14_County controller
SOURCE_15_County court
SOURCE_16_County departments
SOURCE_17_Voters of Allegheny County
SOURCE_18_Allegheny County government study commission
SOURCE_99_Solicitor
D_Municipal and city government
SOURCE_19_City of Allegheny
SOURCE_20_City of Pittsburgh
SOURCE_21_both mayor and council
SOURCE_22_city council
SOURCE_23_Mayor
SOURCE_24_courts
SOURCE_25_unknown
SOURCE_26_County municipalities outside the city
SOURCE_27_local board
SOURCE_28_multiple municipalities
E_SOURCE_29_School districts
SOURCE_30_School boards
F_SOURCE_31_Regional Asset District
G_Library groups
ACLA and CLP directors
395

Allegheny County groups
SOURCE_32_ACLA
SOURCE_33_CLASP County Library Association Serving the People
SOURCE_34_LASH
SOURCE_35_SHLA
CLP
SOURCE_111_CLP advisory board
SOURCE_36_Allegheny director
SOURCE_37_CLP and Monessen district directors
SOURCE_38_CLP cabinet
SOURCE_39_CLP city libraries
SOURCE_40_CLP committee
SOURCE_41_CLP county services
SOURCE_42_CLP director
SOURCE_112_Mary Frances Cooper
SOURCE_43_Bob Croneberger
SOURCE_44_Keith Doms
SOURCE_45_Ralph Munn
SOURCE_91_Anthony A. Martin
SOURCE_92_Donald C. Potter
SOURCE_46_CLP district services
SOURCE_47_CLP services
SOURCE_48_EI Network
SOURCE_49_Friends groups
SOURCE_50_Trustees
SOURCE_51_Local libraries in Allegheny County
SOURCE_52_Trustees
SOURCE_53_Local libraries in Westmoreland County
SOURCE_54_RAD lobbyists
SOURCE_89_Other
396

H_Civil Society
Clubs and associations
SOURCE_100_Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
SOURCE_101_Public Library Project
SOURCE_102_Urban Library Council
SOURCE_108_American Libraries Association
SOURCE_109_Buhl Foundation
SOURCE_113_21st century library study
SOURCE_55_Allegheny Conference on Community Development
SOURCE_56_Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations
SOURCE_57_Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs
SOURCE_58_Allegheny League of Municipalities
SOURCE_59_Building owners and managers association
SOURCE_60_Civic Club of Allegheny County
SOURCE_61_Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
SOURCE_62_Metropolitan Plan Commission
SOURCE_63_Metropolitan Study Commission
SOURCE_64_Pennsylvania Economy League
SOURCE_65_Pennsylvania Library Association
SOURCE_66_y_other
SOURCE_67_z_Multiple groups
SOURCE_68_real estate board
SOURCE_85_County Boroughs Association
SOURCE_90_Governor's advisory council
SOURCE_94_League of Women Voters
SOURCE_69_Experts and consultants
SOURCE_70_Library or Citizens advisory council
SOURCE_71_Private actor
SOURCE_72_Private corporation
I_Economic system
397

SOURCE_74_Contractor
SOURCE_75_Mass media outlets
SOURCE_76_Private actor
SOURCE_77_Private business
J_SOURCE_78_Some combination of city, county, and civil society groups
Z_SOURCE_79_Unknown
04_Actor's Position and Role
A_Political system
Actor Circuit_201_National political system
Actor Core
US Congress
US supreme court
Actor Inner periphery
cwa lwd
State library agencies
Actor Outer periphery
Suppliers
Actor Circuit_202_State political system
Actor Core
Executive
Governor
Legislative body
General assembly
Policy committees
Actor Inner periphery
01_Central authority
Department of Revenue
Labor and Industry
Public Utility Commission
State library
398

02_Regional authority
Allegheny County
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County library
District library
Library system
03_Local authority
All authorities
Local libraries
Labor and Industry
Actor Outer periphery
Customer
ACLA
civil society groups
County commissioners
Library trustees
Municipality
Other
PaLA
Supplier
Civil society group
Commission on the Future of Libraries
commissioned study
Metropolitan Plan Commission
Governor's advisory council
Local libraries
PaLA
Pennsylvania citizens for better libraries
Pittsburgh city mayor
voters
399

z_multiple groups
Actor Circuit_203_County political system
Actor Core
County commissioners
County controller
County Council
County referendum
Court
Orphans court
Solicitor
Actor Inner periphery
Allegheny County Housing Authority
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County departments
County library
County library director
EIN
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
ACLA
City of Pittsburgh
Library trustees
Local libraries
Suppliers
ACLA
Citizen Study committee
Civil society group
Library Planning Committee
CLP
Contractor
400

EIN
Library study
Local libraries
Mass media
Municipality
State library
Voters
Actor Circuit_204_Pittsburgh city political system
Actor Core
both mayor and council
City Council
north side Allegheny library committee
General elections
Mayor
Referenda
unknown
Actor Inner periphery
Allegheny Northside library
City library system
City Planning Department
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
Civil society group
Friends of the library group
z_multiple groups
CLP
General assembly
Actor Circuit_205_ACLA political system
Actor Core
401

ACLA Board
Committees
Executive director
LAC executive
Member library voters
Actor Inner periphery
EIN
Headquarters
Executive director
Staff
LAC
Center region
East region
LAC board
North region
South region
West region
Libraries
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
Actor Circuit_206_Intra-library political system
Actor Core
Board of Trustees
Cabinet
CLP advisory board
Committee
Director
Unknown
Actor Inner periphery
402

Departments
District Services
Electronic Information Network
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
CLP
County Commissioners
Liaison
Suppliers
ACLA
Advisory council
CFLAC
Civil society group
CLASP
CLP
CLP county services
Committee
Consultant
General assembly
Private actor
Actor Circuit_207_Local municipal political system
Actor Core
City council
Local board
referendum voters
Township supervisor
Unknown
Actor Inner periphery
Local libraries
Municipal departments
403

Actor Outer periphery
Customers
ACLA
Andrew Carnegie
Library trustees
Local library
Suppliers
ACLA
Citizens groups
CLP county services
CLP district services
commissioned study
Friends of the library groups
Actor Circuit_208_Local school district political system
Actor Core
School board
Actor Inner periphery
Local libraries
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
Supplier
Actor Circuit_209_Regional Asset District political system
Actor Core
Executive Director
Library Committee
RAD board
Actor Inner periphery
Acting regional assets
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
404

Potential regional assets
Suppliers
Actor Circuit_210_Electronic information network
Actor Core
ACLA
CFLAC
CLP
Joint board
Actor Inner periphery
ACLA libraries
Staff and support
Actor Outer periphery
Customer
Supplier
Actor Circuit_211_Civil society group political system
Actor Core
Board of directors
lead facilitator
Members
Officers
Actor Inner periphery
Committee chairs
Committees
discussion leader
Funded entity
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
Actor Circuit_213_Unknown
Actor Core
405

Actor Inner periphery
Actor Outer Periphery
B_Actor Circuit_212_Economic system news media
Actor Core
board
consultants
Editors
Actor Inner periphery
Outlets
Actor Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
05_Audience
Broadcast
TARGET_103_National population
TARGET_105_Contractors
TARGET_80_Allegheny County Residents
TARGET_81_Civil society groups
TARGET_82_County libraries
TARGET_83_Pennsylvania counties
TARGET_84_Pennsylvania district libraries
TARGET_86_Allegheny municipalities
TARGET_87_Pennsylvania residents
TARGET_95_National libraries
TARGET_96_Pennsylvania libraries
Narrowcast
A_Federal government
TARGET_1_csa lwd
TARGET_2_State library agencies
TARGET_3_US Congress
406

B_State government
TARGET_106_department of state
TARGET_4_Governor
TARGET_5_Pennsylvania state assembly
TARGET_6_Pennsylvania state library
TARGET_7_secretary of labor and industry
TARGET_8_voters
TARGET_9_constitution
TARGET_97_IRS
TARGET_98_Public Utility Commission
C_County government
TARGET_10_Allegheny County Housing Authority
TARGET_104_AIM authority for improvements in municipalities
TARGET_11_County commissioners
TARGET_110_knowledge connections
TARGET_12_citizen study committee on libraries
TARGET_13_Commission on the future of libraries
TARGET_14_County controller
TARGET_15_Courts
TARGET_16_county departments
TARGET_17_Voters of Allegheny county
TARGET_18_Allegheny County Government Study Commission
D_Municipal and city government
TARGET_19_City of Allegheny
TARGET_20_City of Pittsburgh
TARGET_21_Both mayor and council
TARGET_22_City Council
TARGET_23_Mayor
TARGET_24_Courts
TARGET_25_Unknown
407

TARGET_26_Local Municipality
TARGET_27_Local board
TARGET_28_Multiple municipalities
E_TARGET_29_School districts
TARGET_30_school boards
F_TARGET_31_Regional Asset District
G_Library groups
Allegheny County library groups
TARGET_32_ACLA
TARGET_33_CLASP County Library Association Serving the People
TARGET_34_LASH
TARGET_35_SHLA
CLP
TARGET_36_Allegheny director
TARGET_37_CLP and Monessen district directors
TARGET_38_CLP cabinet
TARGET_39_CLP city libraries
TARGET_40_Committee
TARGET_41_CLP county services
TARGET_42_CLP director
TARGET_112_Mary Frances Cooper
TARGET_43_Bob Croneberger
TARGET_44_Keith Doms
TARGET_45_Ralph Munn
TARGET_91_Anthony A. Martin
TARGET_92_Donald C. Potter
TARGET_46_CLP district services
TARGET_47_CLP services
TARGET_48_EIN
TARGET_49_friends groups
408

TARGET_50_Trustees
TARGET_114_ACLA and CLP directors
TARGET_51_Local libraries in Allegheny County
TARGET_52_trustees
TARGET_53_Local libraries in Westmoreland County
TARGET_54_RAD lobbyists
TARGET_93_Libraries outside Allegheny county
H_Civil Society
Clubs and associations
TARGET_100_Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
TARGET_113_21st century library service
TARGET_55_Allegheny Conference on Community Development
TARGET_56_Allegheny County Council of Parent Teacher Associations
TARGET_57_Womens clubs
TARGET_58_League of Municipalities
TARGET_59_building owners and managers association
TARGET_60_Civic Club of Allegheny County
TARGET_61_Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
TARGET_62_Metropolitan Plan Commission
TARGET_63_Metropolitan Study Commission
TARGET_64_Pennsylvania Economy League
TARGET_65_Pennsylvania Library Association
TARGET_66_y_other
TARGET_67_z_multiple clubs
TARGET_68_Real Estate Board
TARGET_88_Health and Welfare Federation
TARGET_94_League of women voters
TARGET_69_Experts and consultants
TARGET_70_Library or citizens advisory council
TARGET_71_Private actor
409

TARGET_72_Private corporation or foundation
TARGET_73_Voluntary citizens group
I_Economic system
TARGET_74_Contractor
TARGET_75_Mass media outlets
TARGET_76_Private actor
TARGET_77_Private business
TARGET_78_some combination of city, county, and civil society groups
TARGET_79_Unknown
06_Audience's Role and Position
Audience circuit 999_diffuse public
Allegheny County Residents
Allegheny municipalities
Civil society groups
Contractors
County libraries
National libraries
National population
Pennsylvania counties
Pennsylvania district libraries
Pennsylvania libraries
Pennsylvania residents
Audience Circuit_213_Unknown
Audience Core
Audience Inner Periphery
Audience Outer Periphery
Narrowcast
A_Political system
Audience Circuit_201_National political system
Audience Core
410

US Congress
Audience Inner periphery
LSCA grant recipients
new deal groups
State library agencies
Audience Outer periphery
Audience Circuit_202_State political system
Audience Core
constitution
Executive
Governor
Legislative body
General assembly
Policy committees
Audience Inner periphery
01_Central authority
department of state
IRS
Public Utility Commission
State library
02_Regional authority
Allegheny County
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County library
District library
Library system
non-profit entity
RAD
03_Local authority
Local libraries
411

Local municipality
School districts
04_All authorities
Audience Outer periphery
Customer
Other
PaLA
Supplier
Civil society group
Commissioned study
Governor’s advisory council
PaLA
Pennsylvania citizens for better libraries
Pittsburgh city mayor
Voters
Audience Circuit_203_County political system
Audience Core
County commissioners
County controller
County council
Courts
Voters
Audience Inner periphery
administrative departments
AIM
Allegheny County Housing Authority
Knowledge Connections
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County library
county library director
412

EIN
RAD board
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
City of Pittsburgh
local libraries
Suppliers
Allegheny County Government Study Commission
Civil society group
CLASP
CLP
Library Planning Committee
Library study
Audience Circuit_204_Pittsburgh city political system
Audience Core
Both mayor and council
City Council
Northside Allegheny library committee
General elections
Mayor
Referenda
Unknown
Audience Inner periphery
Allegheny north side library
City library system
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
Civil society group
Friends of the library group
413

Multiple groups
Audience Circuit_205_ACLA political system
Audience Core
ACLA Board
Committees
Executive director
LAC executive
Member library voters
Audience Inner periphery
business contracts
EIN
Grant recipients
Headquarters
Executive director
Staff
LAC
Center region
East region
LAC board
North region
South region
West region
Member libraries
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
Audience Circuit_206_Intra-library political system
Audience Core
Board
Cabinet
414

DeeAnna Cavinee
Committee
Director
Unknown
Audience Inner periphery
Departments
county services
District Services
EIN
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
County Commissioners
Suppliers
Advisory council
CLASP
CLP county services
CLP district services
Audience Circuit_207_Local municipal political system
Audience Core
City council
Local board
Township supervisor
Unknown
Audience Inner periphery
Local libraries
Municipal departments
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Andrew Carnegie
Suppliers
415

CLP county services
Friends of the library groups
Audience Circuit_208_Local school district political system
Audience Core
School board
Audience Inner periphery
Local libraries
schools
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Supplier
Audience Circuit_209_Regional Asset District political system
Audience Core
Executive director
Library committee
RAD board
Audience Inner periphery
Acting assets
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Potential regional assets
Suppliers
Audience Circuit_210_Electronic information network
Audience Core
ACLA
CFLAC
CLP
Joint board
Audience Inner periphery
Member libraries
416

Staff and support
Audience Outer periphery
Customer
Supplier
Audience Circuit_211_Civil society group political system
Audience Core
Board of directors
lead facilitator
Members
Officers
Audience Inner periphery
Committee chairs
Committees
Discussion leader
Funded entity
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
B_Audience Circuit_212_Economic system
Audience Core
auditors
editors
Audience Inner periphery
loan recipient
Audience Outer periphery
Customers
Suppliers
07_Issue
County legislation or policies
ISSUE_1_RAD legislation
417

ISSUE_2_City county consolidation
ISSUE_3_Commission on the Future of Libraries
ISSUE_4_County department funding
ISSUE_5_County library director
iSSUE_6_Home rule
ISSUE_7_RAD board
ISSUE_8_tax increase
ISSUE_29_quality of formal debate
ISSUE_50_unknown
ISSUE_51_z_miscellaneous
Local Funding
ISSUE_10_compliance with ACLA
ISSUE_52_standards
ISSUE_11_compliance with RAD
ISSUE_12_grants
ISSUE_13_Local allocations for libraries
ISSUE_14_Local millage for libraries
ISSUE_15_RAD funding
ISSUE_9_ACLA grant
Local organizations
City library system
ISSUE_16_City library budget
ISSUE_17_Librarian wages
ISSUE_18_north side Allegheny library governance
ISSUE_19_Pittsburgh city Allegheny city library merger
ISSUE_20_Staffing
ISSUE_21_z_miscellaneous issues
ISSUE_22_Incorporation
ISSUE_23_Local library administration
ISSUE_24_Local library formation
418

National funding
ISSUE_25_Internet
ISSUE_26_LSCA
ISSUE_27_national planning
ISSUE_28_new deal funding
ISSUE_53_LSTA
Regional organization
ISSUE_30_ACLA formation and governance
ISSUE_31_computerization
ISSUE_32_County funding
ISSUE_33_Countywide system formation and unification
ISSUE_34_distribution formula
ISSUE_35_fax machines
ISSUE_36_federated system
ISSUE_37_Formation of county library organizations
ISSUE_38_library study
ISSUE_39_local library coordination
ISSUE_40_Reading centers in the housing projects Knowledge Connections
ISSUE_42_Three Rivers Free Net
ISSUE_43_Union catalog
ISSUE_44_EIN
ISSUE_54_delivery service
Regional boundaries
ISSUE_41_Redrawing district lines
State system
ISSUE_45_AccessPA
ISSUE_46_library telecommunications rates
ISSUE_47_Local funding from state
ISSUE_48_PA state code and state plan
ISSUE_49_State budget
419

08_Legitimation outcome
Indications of failure
LEGITIMATION_Failure Bypass representative public
LEGITIMATION_Failure Objections
Indications of success
LEGITIMATION_Success Consensus
LEGITIMATION_Success Discussion or periphery support
LEGITIMATION_Unknown
09_Implementation outcome
IMPLEMENTATION_Failure
IMPLEMENTATION_Success
IMPLEMENTATION_Unknown

POWER

Administrative power – Narrowcast. Administrative power is authority derived from a
pre-determined arrangement.

It coordinates actions by orienting actors to the positive or

negative consequences of that agreement. It is asymmetrical, top-down and it can be can be
thought of as command power. Negative sanctions might include loss of money or rank, and
positive sanctions might include monetary benefits. Administrative power includes oversight
and monitoring of other actors.

Administrative power might be legitimate or illegitimate,

depending on the process that led up to the implementation of administrative power, the statute,
agreement, or policy that forms the basis of administrative power, or the way the authority is
carried out.

420

In a circuit, a narrowcast of administrative power is transmitted from core to inner
periphery, within the core, or within the inner periphery (see Figure I.1). In a narrowcast, the
audience is targeted by the sender and is therefore clearly decipherable in the source material.
Indicators of administrative power include verbs in the imperative form, the delegation of roles
or duties, or the institution of deadlines.

Core

Actor 2
Administrative
Power Narrowcast

Administrative
Power Narrowcast

Diffuse Public
Circuit 1

Actor 1
Inner Periphery

Actor 3
Administrative
Power Narrowcast

Outer Periphery

Figure I.1. Administrative power – narrowcast pathways in a circuit.

Administrative power is distinguished from communicative power because administrative
power orients actions according to consequences whereas communicative power orients actions
based on mutual understanding and agreement. In cases of administrative power, understanding
is presupposed and is based on some already-existing contract, agreement, or act of legislation.
Administrative power is distinct from formal decision because in the case of formal decision, a
contract or act of legislation is decided upon, whereas in the case of administrative power, the
421

agreement forms the basis of the power relationship. Table I.2 provides summary characteristics
for administrative power – narrowcast.

Table I.2. Summary characteristics of administrative power – narrowcast.

Sub-category name

Administrative power - narrowcast

Definition

A communicative transmission where a sender orients a receiver’s actions
according to consequences or based on a pre-determined agreement.

Circulation in a
circuit

core to inner periphery, core to core, or inner periphery to inner periphery

Indicators

verbs in imperative form, such as orders and commands; distribution of
forms and applications; transmission of information regarding deadlines,
duties, meeting dates; project management

Decision rules

Examples

Excludes votes and referenda (formal decision)
Excludes proposals and discussion (communicative power)
Audience is targeted and clearly identifiable.
RAD tells ACLA to amend meeting minutes.
ACLA executive committee members appraise association members of
legislative actions and solicit input regarding a federated system.

As an example of administrative power, in 1996 David Donahoe, the executive director
of RAD, directed Carolyn Toth, the executive board president of ACLA, to modify ACLA’s
meeting minutes (see Figure I.2). The communique was phrased as an order, and indeed ACLA
was in no position to negotiate or disobey because RAD money provided a large portion of
ACLA’s money. Moreover, in the form of an agreement of mutual understanding, ACLA had
previously agreed to relinquish some administrative control to RAD in order to become a RADfunded asset. This communication between RAD and ACLA was therefore coded as an instance
of administrative power.
422

Figure I.2. Example segment of administrative power - narrowcast.

423

Administrative power – Broadcast. Like administrative power – narrowcast,
administrative power – broadcast is authority derived from a predetermined agreement. Unlike a
narrowcast, however, the audience in a broadcast is not clearly identifiable. It is not clear who
receives or acts upon the broadcast. It can only be inferred to whom, in general, the transmission
was sent. In a circuit, administrative power – broadcasts can be sent from core to diffuse public,
or from inner periphery to diffuse public (see Figure I.3).

Summary characteristics for

administrative power – broadcasts are shown in Table I.3.

Core
Administrative
Power Broadcast

Actor 2

Diffuse Public
Administrative
Power Broadcast

Circuit 1

Actor 1

Actor 3
Outer Periphery

Inner Periphery

Figure I.3. Administrative power – broadcast pathways in a circuit.

Table I.3. Summary characteristics for administrative power – broadcast.

424

Sub-category name

Administrative power - broadcast

Definition

A communicative transmission where a sender orients a receiver’s actions
based on a pre-determined agreement.

Pathways in a
circuit
Indicators

Decision rules

Examples

core to diffuse public, inner periphery to diffuse public
verbs in imperative form, such as orders and commands; distribution of
forms and applications; transmission of information regarding deadlines
and meeting dates
Excludes votes and referenda (formal decision)
Excludes proposals and discussion (communicative power)
Audience is targeted and clearly identifiable.
Announcements by the state library of LSCA application procedures
Announcements by district library centers of annual report submission
guidelines.

An example of an administrative power – broadcast was when, in 1970, the State Library
of Pennsylvania announced in its long-range plan that it would create a Bureau of Library
Development to administer Library Services and Construction Act funding to libraries in
Pennsylvania (see Figure I.4). It can be inferred that copies of this announcement were sent to
all libraries in Pennsylvania, but in an example segment it is not entirely clear to whom the
message was sent, who received it, and who responded.
therefore the State Library’s diffuse public.

The audience of the message is

The agreement that forms the basis of this

administrative broadcast is the federal legislation of the Library Services and Construction Act.
Preceded by the Library Services Act of 1956, signed into law as the Library Services and
Construction Act in 1964, and revised in 1970 and 1971, the Act designates state library agencies
to distribute federal money to libraries in their respective states (Fry, 1975).

425

Figure I.4. Example segment of administrative power – broadcast.

426

Communicative Power – Narrowcast. Communicative power is transmission from
sender to receiver where the sender attempts to reach a mutual understanding with the receiver
about a shared concern. Discussions, proposals, and reports are instances of communicative
power. A communicative power – narrowcast has a clear target. In a circuit, the pathways of
communicative power – narrowcasts are from outer periphery to inner periphery, outer periphery
to core, inner periphery to core, inner periphery to inner periphery, and core to core (see Figure
I.5). These characteristics are summarized in Table I.4.

Core
Diffuse Public

Actor 2

Communicative
Power Narrowcast

Communicative
Power Narrowcast
Circuit 1

Actor 1
Inner Periphery

Actor 3
Communicative
Power Narrowcast

Outer Periphery

Figure I.5. Communicative power – narrowcast pathways in a circuit.

427

Table I.4. Summary characteristics of communicative power – narrowcast.

Sub-category name

Communicative power - narrowcast

Definition

A communicative transmission where a sender orients a receiver’s actions
based on reasons and mutual understanding. The audience is clearly
identifiable.

Pathways in a
circuit

outer periphery to inner periphery, outer periphery to core, inner periphery
to core, inner periphery to inner periphery, and core to core

Indicators

Decision rules

Examples

verbs such as propose, suggest, recommend, discuss
Excludes votes and referenda (formal decision)
Excludes announcements to a diffuse audience (communicative power broadcast)
Audience is targeted and clearly identifiable.
Petitions by the Civic Club to City Council for a qualified librarian on the
North Side.

An example of a communicative power – narrowcast is when in 1927 the Civic Club of
Allegheny County petitioned the City Council and mayor of Pittsburgh to hire a qualified
librarian for the North Side library which was at that time managed directly by the city and was
not yet a branch of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh system (see Figure I.6).

428

Figure I.6. Example segment of a communicative power – narrowcast.

429

Communicative Power – Broadcast. Like communicative power – narrowcasts,
communicative power broadcasts are transmissions where a sender attempts to orient a receiver’s
actions using reasons, argument, and mutual understanding.

Unlike narrowcasts, however,

communicative power – broadcasts have no clearly discernible audience. It is not known who
will receive the message or act upon it. The receiver of communicative power – broadcasts is
therefore a diffuse public. In a circuit, the pathways of communicative power – broadcast are
from core to diffuse public or from inner periphery to diffuse public (see Figure I.7). These
characteristics of communicative power-broadcasts are summarized in Table I.5.

Core
Communicative
Power Broadcast

Actor 2

Diffuse Public
Communicative
Power Broadcast

Circuit 1

Actor 1

Actor 3
Outer Periphery

Inner Periphery

Figure I.7. Communicative power – broadcast pathways in a circuit.

430

Table I.5. Summary characteristics of communicative power – broadcasts.

Sub-category name

Communicative power - broadcast

Definition

A communicative transmission where a sender orients a receiver’s actions
based on reasons and mutual understanding. The receiver is not clearly
identifiable.

Pathways in a
circuit
Indicators
Decision rules
Examples

core to diffuse public or from inner periphery to diffuse public
verbs such as announce, report
Communications transmitted via mass media outlets.
Unlike narrowcasts, the audience is not clearly identifiable.
Newspaper coverage of proposed changes to ACLA distribution formula

An example of a communicative power – broadcast was in the 2009 newspaper coverage
of the debates to change the RAD funding formulas to ACLA-member libraries. The mass
media informed the public of the issue of a funding formula, but it is not clear who precisely read
and reacted to the communicative transmissions (see Figure I.8).

431

Figure I.8. Example segment of communicative power – broadcast.

432

Formal Decision. A formal decision is one made by a vote, referendum, contract, or
executive order. A formal decision can be legitimate or illegitimate depending on the process
leading up to the decision, whether there was open discussion and deliberation. A legitimate
formal decision is informed by communicative power, and forms the basis of legitimate
administrative power. In a circuit, formal decision pathways are from core to inner periphery,
core to core, and inner periphery to inner periphery (see Figure I.9). These characteristics are
summarized in Table I.6. An example of a formal decision - narrowcast is from 1993 when the
Pennsylvania state Senate approved a bill to authorize Allegheny County to institute a regional
asset district and impose an additional 1 percent sales tax (see Figure I.10).

Core

Actor 2
Formal Decision
Formal Decision
Diffuse Public
Circuit 1

Actor 1
Inner Periphery

Actor 3
Formal Decision

Outer Periphery

Figure I.9. Formal decision pathways in a circuit.

433

Table I.6. Summary characteristics of a formal decision.

Sub-category name
Definition
Pathways in a
circuit
Indicators
Decision rules
Examples

Formal decision
A decision made by vote, referendum, contract, or other formal means
that affects a targeted audience.
core to inner periphery, core to core, and inner periphery to inner
periphery
verbs such as decide, approve, vote, pass
A formal decision may or may not result in a monetary distribution.
State Senate vote to pass a bill for a regional asset district

434

Figure I.10. Example segment of a formal decision.

435

Social Power – Economic. Social power – economic is a transmission of money. In a
circuit, social power – economic transmissions are sent from core to inner periphery, core to
outer periphery, core to core, inner periphery to inner periphery, and inner periphery to outer
periphery (see Figure I.11). These characteristics are summarized in Table I.7. An example of a
social power – economic transmission is from 1993 when the State of Pennsylvania award CLP a
grant to fund the Three Rivers FreeNet, a local electronic community information network (see
Figure I.12).

Core

Diffuse Public

Actor 2
Social Power Economic

Social Power Economic

Circuit 1

Actor 1
Inner Periphery

Actor 3
Social Power Economic

Outer Periphery

Figure I.11. Social power – economic pathways in a circuit.

436

Table I.7. Summary characteristics of social power – economic.

Sub-category name
Definition
Pathways in a
circuit
Indicators
Decision rules
Examples

Social power - economic
Transmission of money; funding power
core to inner periphery, core to outer periphery, core to core, inner
periphery to inner periphery, and inner periphery to outer periphery
grants, awards, funding
Often co-present with a formal decision
FreeNet funding grant to CLP from the State of Pennsylvania

437

Figure I.12. Example segment of social power – economic.

438

Social Power – Backroom Deals. Social power – backroom deals is an illegitimate
form of power where positions, awards, and status are distributed not as the result of an open,
deliberative process, but instead based on privilege, kinship ties, or business ties. In a circuit,
pathways of social power – backroom deals travel from core to core, core to inner periphery, and
inner periphery to inner periphery (see Figure I.13). These characteristic are summarized in
Table I.8. An example of a backroom deal is from 1933 when City Council elected a library
director as a reward for past service, not in light of qualifications (see Figure I.14).

Core

Actor 2
Social Power –
Backroom Deals

Social Power –
Backroom Deals

Diffuse Public
Circuit 1

Actor 1
Inner Periphery

Actor 3
Social Power –
Backroom Deals

Outer Periphery

Figure I.13. Social power – backroom deals pathways in a circuit.

Table I.8. Summary characteristics of social power – backroom deals.

439

Sub-category name
Definition
Pathways in a
circuit
Indicators
Decision rules
Examples

Social power – backroom deals
Transmissions of status and position that bypasses an open, deliberative
process
core to core, core to inner periphery, and inner periphery to inner
periphery
A decision or award that bypasses deliberation
Often co-present with a formal decision
Appointment of library director as a reward for past services

440

Figure I.14. Example segment of social power – backroom deals.

441

ACTORS

Federal government. Funding and administration of public libraries in the US is
reserved for state and local control. There is no federal oversight of public libraries, but several
agencies, authorities, and initiatives do affect local public libraries. There has been public
library funding in the form of state grants since 1956 with the passage of the Library Services
Act (Fry, 1975). This money was administered by the Department of Education. Rulings of the
US Supreme Court have also set conditions for libraries that receive federal funding. Federal
actors are listed and described in Table I.9.

Table I.9. Federal government actor names and descriptions.

Actor name

Actor description

Civil Works Administration, A New Deal jobs creation program. Sponsored a survey of
Local Works Division
library services in Pittsburgh in 1935.

Library agencies

US Congress
US Supreme Court

Federal agencies such as the Library Programs Office at the
Department of Education, the National Commission on Libraries
and Information Science, and the Institute for Museum and
Library Services
US Senate and US House of Representatives
Supreme Court of the US

442

State government. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is one of 50 US states. It has a
governor and a bicameral legislature known as the General Assembly. The legislature and
governor determine yearly state budget allocations for libraries. There are a number of state
departments, including the Department of Education, which includes the offices that oversee
public library development and funding. The names and structure of these library offices have
changed over time. The first state library code was implemented in 1961. The code initiated
state funding to qualifying libraries and organized the libraries into districts. In 2014, there were
474 state-aided libraries in the state, the state spent over 57 million dollars on operating
expenditures statewide, and almost 9 million of that was spent on Allegheny County libraries
(Office of Commonwealth Libraries, 2014). State actors are listed and described in Table I.10.

Table I.10. State government actor names and descriptions.

Actor name

Actor description

PA Governor

Executive leader of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania state library

PA Secretary of Labor and Industry
voters of PA
constitution of PA
PA Department of Revenue
PA Public Utility Commission

Includes both the House and Senate
Includes both the actual state library in Harrisburg and
the departments that coordinate library services across
the state and distribute state aid
Monitors employment practices in the state and provides
grants for job promotion initiatives
All registered voters in the state of PA. Voters are
actors in instances of formal decisions at a state level
Outlines basic rights and structure of government for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Charged with implementing tax collection procedures
for the state
Regulates utilities such as electricity, natural gas,
443

telecommunications, water, and transportation
PA Department of State

Registers non-profit corporations

County government. County government is a mix of both local and state services. The
legacy of county-level government was inherited from the English shire system (Salant, 2002, p.
117). There are 67 counties in Pennsylvania. Allegheny County is distinctive because in it is
located Pittsburgh, the second-largest city in Pennsylvania.

Like Philadelphia County,

Allegheny County flirted with prospects of a city-county merger, though this movement was
never successful in Pittsburgh as it was in Philadelphia. County government structure is set by
state law. At the core of this structure is a 3-commissioner system, which was how the county
was governed throughout the 20th century. The Pennsylvania Assembly and Allegheny County
approved a new Home Rule structure that began in 2000 and abolished the commissioner system.
County actors are listed and described in Table I.11.

Table I.11. County government actor names and descriptions.

Actor name
Allegheny County Housing Authority
Board of County Commissioners

Citizen Study Committee on Libraries

Actor description
Administers public housing in the County
Until 2000, a 3-member committee that decided
county-wide projects and funding
Committee formed in 1977 by Allegheny County
Commissioners and funded by LSCA money, assigned
to study library development in the County

Commission on the Future of Libraries CFLAC. Formed and chaired in 1991 by Frank
in Allegheny County
Lucchino, then County Controller, and tasked to
444

improve library services in the County
County Controller
County court
County departments
Voters of Allegheny County
Allegheny County Government Study
Commission
Allegheny County Solicitor
Authority for Improvements in
Municipalities (AIM)

Oversees fiscal affairs in the County
Court of Common Pleas, Orphan’s Court
Various county-funded departments such as Health and
Human Services
Voters in referenda and elections
Appointed in 1924 to study municipal consolidation in
Pittsburgh. Proposed a regional home rule charter that
failed to carry in Allegheny County in 1929
Lawyer for the County
A non-profit, county-created authority for managing
municipal facilities

Municipal and city government. The basic unit of local government is the
municipality.

Municipalities in Pennsylvania are of different sizes and types, including

boroughs, townships, and cities. Allegheny County has 130 municipalities, more than any other
county in the state and one of the most in the nation (Sleeper et al., 2004). Though the specifics
vary, most public libraries are funded or administered in some way through a municipality.
Municipal and city actors are listed and described in Table I.12.

Table I.12. Municipal and city government actor names and descriptions.

445

Actor description

Actor name
City of Allegheny

A separate municipality until annexed by Pittsburgh in
1907; library remained separate from CLP until 1956

City of Pittsburgh

Used as actor when more specific entity is unclear

both Mayor and Council
Pgh. City Council

Used as actor when both mayor and council transmit
some form of power
Decision makers for the city

Pgh. Mayor

Executive decision maker for the city

City courts

Municipal court for the city

Unknown

An unknown actor associated with the city

County municipalities outside the city Local municipalities outside the city of Pittsburgh
Local municipal board

The board of a municipality outside the city

Multiple municipalities

A group of municipalities outside the city

School districts. School districts are special-purpose government authorities initiated
through the state Department of Education by local municipalities. Like water, parking, or other
special authorities, school districts have a specialized purpose, and that is education. School
districts are governed by school boards whose members are elected and can levy property taxes
within the district to fund school services. Some school districts also fund or govern public
libraries within the county. School district actors are listed and described in Table I.13.

Table I.13. School district actor name and descriptions.

Actor name
School districts

Actor description
Used as an actor when more precise information is not available

446

School boards

Decision makers for school districts

Regional Asset District. Regional Asset District is a special-purpose district designed
in part to offload the funding of cultural assets from the city and county to the surrounding
region. It funds these assets through an extra 1 percent sales tax in the county, atop the state’s 6
percent. The Allegheny County Library Association, the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, and the
Electronic Information Network are 3 of the district’s contractual assets. Combined, in 2016,
they received over 30 million dollars, almost one-third of the district’s total budget of over 90
million dollars (Allegheny Regional Asset District, 2016). Regional Asset District actors are
listed and described in Table I.14.

Table I.14. Regional Asset District name and description.

Actor name

Actor description

Allegheny Regional
Asset District

Formed in 1994, RAD is a special-purpose district whose jurisdiction
coincides with Allegheny County. The district levies an extra 1 percent
sales tax on most purchases within the county. Half of the revenue from
this tax is redistributed to county municipalities. The other half is
dispersed to cultural assets. A 7-member board decides on the assets and
budget. 4 members are appointed by the county chief executive, 2 by the
mayor of Pittsburgh, and 1 at-large member is voted on by the appointees.

447

Library groups. There are a number of libraries and library groups that have operated in
Allegheny County throughout the 20th century and into the 21st. Library actors are listed and
described in Table I.15.

Table I.15. Library group actor names and descriptions.

Actor description

Actor name

ACLA

Allegheny County Library Association. A non-profit
member association of public libraries in Allegheny
County. Formed in 1994 in order to receive and
distribute RAD money. 1 of 33 library systems in the
state.

CLASP

County Library Association Serving the People.
Precursor to ACLA. A loose membership association of
librarians and trustees in Allegheny County. Formed in
1991 in response Lucchino’s Quiet Crisis report.
Transformed into ACLA in 1994.

LASH

Library Association of South Hills. A group of librarians
that coordinated services in South Hills libraries. Predated CLASP and ACLA

SHLA

South Hills Library Association. A group of trustees
from libraries in South Hills.

Allegheny County library director

Position first opened and filled in 1992 by the
Commission for the Future of Libraries in Allegheny
County and at the request of Frank Lucchino. First
funded through Buhl Foundation grants, then countyfunded. Helped to coordinate Three Rivers Free Net,
EIN, and RAD funding for ACLA. Merged into the
ACLA executive director position. First filled by
DeeAnna Cavinee, then Marilyn Jenkins.

CLP and Monessen district directors

Met to discuss re-drawing of district lines so that the
Pittsburgh District coincided with Allegheny County.

CLP cabinet

Administrators under Bob Croneberger at CLP. Included
assistant directors, associate director, and district
coordinators.

448

CLP city libraries

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh main and branches

CLP committee

Any committee of CLP formed by the director or trustees

CLP county services

Includes county-wide services at CLP since 1956, when
CLP initiated the county card and county bookmobile

CLP director

used as the actor when more precise details are not clear

CLP advisory board
Bob Croneberger

A special advisory board for CLP trustees formed by
librarians and trustees from around the county
The 8th CLP director; served from 1986-1998. Initiated
TRFN, EIN, and contracted with RAD.

Keith Doms

The 6th CLP director, from 1964-1969. Assistant director
under Munn. Went on to become director of the Free
Library of Philadelphia.

Ralph Munn

The 5th director of CLP, from 1928-1964. A number of
significant events occurred during Munn’s tenure.

Mary Frances Cooper

11th director of CLP. Served from 2012 to the present.

Anthony A. Martin

The 7th director of CLP. Served from 1969-1985. First
director of CLP Allegheny Branch after the merger in
1956.

Donald C. Potter

Assistant director of CLP under Tony Martin. Jointed
CLP in 1969. Previously served as Head of the Bureau of
Library Development at the PA State Library.

CLP district services

CLP acted as a district library center since 1961. District
services were implemented by 1963 to offer consultation
and coordination services to surrounding libraries in the
district.

CLP services

EI Network

Services and departments for libraries within the city.
Implemented by 1996, a shared catalog and computer
network system for libraries in Allegheny County.
Formed by CLP, ACLA, and CFLAC. Successor to
Project Link-up and Three Rivers Free-Net. Originally
funded by foundation and county monies. Original board
had 7 members: 2 from CLP, 2 from ACLA, 2 from
CFLAC, and 1 from the University of Pittsburgh School
of Library and Information Science. Now a non-profit
corporation and funded through RAD.

Friends groups

Non-librarian community advocates for CLP

CLP Trustees

Trustees who manage the library trust.
449

local libraries in Allegheny County
Local library trustees
local libraries in Westmoreland
County
Libraries outside Allegheny County
RAD lobbyists

Libraries outside the city and not a part of the CLP
system.
Trustees of the libraries outside the city
Libraries in the county west of Allegheny, including
Monessen
Libraries beyond Allegheny and Westmoreland
Any potential asset petitioning for funding

ACLA and CLP directors

Joint coordination or decision making by the directors of
CLP and ACLA

Knowledge Connections

Computer and homework-help rooms established in
public housing developments throughout Allegheny
County by CFLAC and Lucchino. Operational from
early 1994.

Library groups - other

Miscellaneous groups not mentioned elsewhere.

Civil society. Pittsburgh has an active civil society and a large number of civil society
groups, many of which have interacted with library groups and have advocated for or proposed
visions of a large-scale library system in the Pittsburgh region. Civil society is defined as nongovernment and non-business. A civil society group is a voluntary association whose members
organize to promote some issue or cause. Private actors who are not acting commercially or as
members of government are also considered part of civil society. Civil society actors are listed
and described in Table I.16.

Table I.16. Civil society actor group names and descriptions.

Actor description

Actor name
Allegheny Conference on Community

A non-profit think tank composed of leaders from
450

Development

Allegheny County Council of ParentTeacher Associations

business and government in the Pittsburgh area.
Proposes economic development plans. Sponsored
a library study in 1950. Group was an architect and
lobbyist for the RAD legislation.
An umbrella group for PTA groups in the county.

Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs

An umbrella group for women’s clubs in the
county.

Allegheny County Boroughs Association

Member municipalities in the association.

Allegheny League of Municipalities

An association of municipal leaders and home-rule
advocates.

Building Owners and Managers
Association

Association for commercial property owners.

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Progressive reform group active throughout the first
half of the 20th century. Early advocates of a
county library system.

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny
County

Citizen-led group in the 1950s and early 1960s that
worked with CLP to petition county commissioners
for expanded county-wide library services.
Successful in 1956 when initial steps were taken,
then continued to push for a consolidated system.

Metropolitan Plan Commission

Instituted in 1923, the Commission was charged
with the study of city-county consolidation. Their
proposal failed to pass a county referendum in
1929.

Metropolitan Study Commission

Formed in 1952 to study inter-municipal
cooperation in the Pittsburgh area. Led to a library
study and home rule charter published in 1955.

Pennsylvania Economy League

Think tank that weighs in on economic policy.
Active with libraries and Civic Club since early
20th century. Architects of RAD proposal.
Assisted CLASP libraries to receive RAD money.

Pennsylvania Library Association

Professional association and lobbying group for
libraries and librarians in Pennsylvania.

Civil society - other

Civil society group not otherwise mentioned.

Multiple civil society groups

Use as actor when more than one group bands
together to communicate a message.

Real Estate Board

Lobbyists for lower county real estate taxes.
451

Experts and consultants

Outside experts or consultants who comment on or
study the library situation in Pittsburgh. Non-paid.

library or citizens advisory council

Any citizens’ advisory council to local library
organizations.

Private civil society actor

A private person not associated with a group.

Private corporation or foundation
Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Non-profit entity, corporation, foundation.
Association for non-librarian and trustees that
sponsors advocacy training.

Public Library Project

Formed by State Librarian Sara Parker in 1992 to
recommend changes in the library code.

Urban Library Council

Association of large urban libraries in the US and
Canada.

American Libraries Association

Professional association, lobbying group, and
policy-making group for libraries in the US and
Canada.

Buhl Foundation

Offers grants to arts and education organizations in
Pittsburgh.

21st century library study

Begun by CLP and ACLA in 2012 at the request of
the RAD board to study options for restructuring
and economizing services.

PA library Governor's Advisory Council

A group of 12 library trustees, librarians, and
laypeople who offer advice to the governor,
secretary of education, and state librarian on library
policy.

League of Women Voters
Health and Welfare Federation
Voluntary citizens group

A non-profit political advocacy and education
group.
Non-profit group that promoted social work and
welfare in Pittsburgh
An unstructured, loose association.

452

Economic system. There were several economic actors identified in this study.
Economic actors are profit-driven and offer products or services in exchange for money.
Economic actors are listed and described in Table I.17.

Table I.17. Economic system actor names and descriptions.

Actor name

Actor description
A group or person hired to perform a task.

Contractor

Commercially-run mass-circulation media groups, such as
newspapers and television.

Mass media outlets
Private economic actor

A single actor buying or selling labor time or product.
A group coordinated by a shared interest in profit.

Private business

Other. There were two types of residual actors used in this study. These actors are listed
and described in Table I.18.

Table I.18. Miscellaneous actor names and descriptions.

Actor name
Some combination of City,
County, and civil society groups
Actor - Unknown

Actor description
Use as actor in cases where more than one group or type of
group join to perform a communicative event.
Cases where authorship or sender is unknown.

453

ACTOR POSITION AND ROLES

National circuit. The national circuit consists of the Congress and Supreme Court in the
core, various semi-autonomous agencies in the inner periphery, and an outer periphery that is
occupied by various suppliers and customers. These actors are listed and described in Table I.19.

Table I.19. Recurring actors in the national circuit.

Position
Core

Consistent actors
US Congress
US Supreme Court

Inner periphery

Civil Works Administration
State Library Agencies

Outer periphery

Suppliers
Customers

State circuit. The state circuit consists of the Governor, General Assembly, and various
policy committees at the core. The inner periphery is composed of central, regional, and local
actors. Central actors in the inner periphery include the Department of Revenue, the Department
of Labor and Industry, and the Public Utility Commission. Regional actors include county or
district libraries. Local actors include local libraries. In the outer periphery of the state circuit
are customers such as civil society groups and suppliers such as commissioned studies. These
actors are listed and described in Table I.20.

454

Table I.20. Recurring actors in state circuit.

Position
Core

Inner periphery

Consistent actors
Governor
General Assembly
Policy committees
Department of Revenue
Labor and Industry
Public Utility Commission
State Library
Allegheny County Offices
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County Library
District Library
Library System
Local libraries
Customers:
ACLA
Civil society groups
County Commissioners
Library Trustees
Municipality
Pennsylvania Library Association

Outer periphery

Suppliers:
Civil Society Groups
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Commissioned study (e.g. Metropolitan Plan Commission)
Governor’s Advisory Council
Local libraries
Pennsylvania Library Association
Pennsylvania Citizens for Betters Libraries
Pittsburgh city mayor
Pennsylvania voters

County circuit. The county circuit consists of the County Commissioners, County
Controller, and referenda and elections at the core.

In the core are the semi-autonomous

departments such as the Housing Authority and the Commission on the Future of Libraries. In
455

the outer periphery, customers include ACLA, the City, and local libraries. Suppliers include
various study committees and municipalities (see Table I.21).

Table I.21. Recurring actors in the county circuit.

Position

Core

Inner periphery

Consistent actors
County Commissioners
County Controller
County Council
County referendum
Orphans’ Court
Solicitor
Allegheny County Housing Authority
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County departments
County library
County library director
EIN
Customers:
ACLA
City of Pittsburgh
Library trustees
Local libraries

Outer periphery

Suppliers:
ACLA
Citizen Study Committee
Library Planning Committee
CLP
Contractors
EIN
Library study
Local libraries
Mass media
Municipality
State Library
Voters

456

Pittsburgh city circuit. The Pittsburgh circuit consists of the Mayor and City Council at
the core, along with city elections and referenda. The inner periphery includes city departments
and the library system. The outer periphery includes suppliers such as the Friends of the Library
group (see Table I.22).

Table I.22. Recurring actors in the city circuit.

Position

Core

Consistent actors
Both Mayor and Council
City Council
General elections
Mayor
Referenda

Inner periphery

Allegheny North Side Library
City library system
City Planning Department

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers:
Friends of the Library group
CLP
General Assembly

ACLA circuit. The ACLA circuit includes the board and executive director at the core.
The Librarians Advisory Council sometimes occupies the core position, other times it occupies
the inner periphery. Also in the inner periphery are eiNetwork and member libraries. In the
outer periphery are various customers and suppliers (Table I.23).

457

Table I.23. Recurring actors in the ACLA circuit.

Position

Core

Consistent actors
ACLA board
committees
Executive director
LAC executive
Member library voters

Inner periphery

EIN
Headquarters – executive director, staff
LAC
Member libraries

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers

Intra-library circuit. The intra-library circuit includes the board and director at the
core, departments in the inner periphery, and various customers and suppliers in the outer
periphery (Table I.24).

Table I.24. Recurring actors in the intra-library circuit.

Position

Core

Consistent actors
Board of Trustees
Cabinet
CLP advisory board
Committee
Director

Inner periphery

Departments – e.g., District Services, EIN

Outer periphery

Customers:
CLP
County Commissioners
Suppliers:
458

ACLA
Advisory Council
CFLAC
Civil Society Group
CLASP
CLP
CLP county services
Committee
Consultant
General Assembly
Private actors

Local municipal circuit. The local municipal circuit includes the city council, local
board, and supervisor at the core, municipal departments such as local libraries in the inner
periphery, and customers and suppliers in the outer periphery (Table I.25).

Table I.25. Recurring actors in the municipal circuit.

Position

Core

Inner periphery

Outer periphery

Consistent actors
City Council
Local board
Referendum voters
Township supervisor
Local libraries
Municipal departments
Customers:
ACLA
Andrew Carnegie
Library trustees
Local library
Suppliers:
ACLA
Citizens’ groups
459

CLP county services
Commissioned study
Friends of the Library groups

Local school district circuit. The local school district circuit includes the board in the
core, local libraries in the inner periphery, and customers and suppliers in the outer periphery
(Table I.26).

Table I.26. Recurring actors in the school district circuit.

Position

Consistent actors

Core

School board

Inner periphery

Local libraries

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers

Regional Asset District circuit. The Regional Asset District circuit includes the
executive director, library committee, and RAD board in the core; acting regional assets in the
inner periphery; and potential regional assets as customers in the outer periphery (Table I.27).

460

Table I.27. Recurring actors in the RAD circuit.

Position
Core
Inner periphery

Outer periphery

Consistent actors
Executive Director
Library Committee
RAD Board
Acting regional assets
Customers:
Potential regional assets
Suppliers

Electronic Information Network circuit. The eiNetwork circuit includes
representatives of ACLA, CFLAC, and CLP on the joint board in the core, ACLA member
libraries and support staff in the inner periphery, and various customers and suppliers in the outer
periphery (Table I.28).

Table I.28. Recurring actors in the EIN circuit.

Position

Core

Inner periphery

Consistent actors
ACLA
CFLAC
CLP
Joint board
ACLA libraries
Staff and support
461

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers

Civil society circuit. The civil society circuit includes boards, members, and officers at
the core, committees, discussion leaders, and funded entities in the inner periphery, and various
customers and suppliers in the outer periphery (Table I.29).

Table I.29. Recurring actors in the civil society circuit.

Position

Consistent actors

Core

Board of Directors
Lead facilitator
Members
Officers

Inner periphery

Committee chairs
Committees
Discussion leader
Funded entity

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers

Economic circuit. The economic circuit includes boards, consultants, and editors in the
core, news media outlets in the inner periphery, and customers and suppliers in the outer
periphery (Table I.30).
462

Table I.30. Recurring actors in the economic circuit.

Position

Consistent actors
Board
Consultants
Editors

Core
Inner periphery

News media outlets

Outer periphery

Customers
Suppliers

Unknown circuit. An unknown circuit is one where formative stages of development
have occurred, but its shape is not yet well defined and it is still too early to tell if it can maintain
itself. Each of the positions therefore do not yet have well-defined actors (Table I.31).

Table I.31. Recurring actors in the unknown circuit.

Position

Consistent actors

Core

Diffuse core

Inner periphery

Diffuse inner periphery

Outer periphery

Diffuse outer periphery

AUDIENCES

Table I.32. Types of audiences that receive broadcasts.

463

General scope of broadcast

Description of scope
Distribution area roughly coincides with county
lines

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

A general announcement to civil society groups in
the Pittsburgh area

Broadcast to civil society groups

Transmissions to county libraries

Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Transmissions to county offices within
Pennsylvania

Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

Announcements to district libraries in
Pennsylvania

Broadcast to Allegheny County
municipalities

Announcements to all municipalities in Allegheny
County
Transmissions to all residents of Pennsylvania

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents
Broadcast to national population

National-scale transmissions

Broadcast to private contractors

Calls for private contractors

Broadcast to national libraries

Announcements to libraries at a national scale

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

Announcements to all libraries in Pennsylvania

ISSUES

Table I.33. Issues included in the coding frame.

Issue
category
County
issues

Coding
key
number

Issue name

Issue definition

1

RAD legislation

Lobbying for RAD legislation, passing it in
the General Assembly, approval by Board of
Commissioners, implementation of RAD tax.

2

City-county
consolidation

Merger of city and county functions into a
single governmental unit.

3

Commission on the
Future of Libraries

Formation of the Commission, its mission
and duties.

464

Local
funding

Local library
organizations
- city
libraries

4

County department
funding

5

County library director

Funding to various departments and offices
in Allegheny County outside of library
funding.
Hiring of director, mission and duties.

6

Home rule

Lobbying or legislation for restructuring
Allegheny County governance or the
governance of municipalities within the
county.

7

RAD board

Appointments to the board, constitution of
the board, board powers.

8

Tax increase

Raising county taxes.

9

ACLA grant

Regional competitive grants supplied by
ACLA to agencies or libraries.

10

Compliance with
ACLA

General administrative requirements for
ACLA membership, membership agreement.

52

compliance with
ACLA - standards

Compliance specifically in regards to library
standards.

11

Compliance with RAD

12

Grants

13

local allocations for
libraries

Funding from municipal or school district
taxes to county libraries.

14

Local millage for
libraries

Specifically regarding a dedicated millage
for local libraries.

15

RAD funding

Money received from RAD as a regional
asset.

16

City library budget

Funding allocation by the city to CLP.

17

Librarian wages

Wages and salaries for librarians within
CLP.

18

North side Allegheny
library governance

Director and appointments to director
position at Carnegie Free Library of
Allegheny.

19

Pittsburgh cityAllegheny City library

Merger of Allegheny library in North Side
with CLP system.

Requirements for ACLA and libraries for
maintaining regional asset status.
Grant funding from foundations and
businesses.

465

merger

Local library
organizations
- county
libraries

National
funding

Regional
organization

20

Staffing

Staff positions and departments in CLP.

21

City library system
miscellaneous issues

Issues at CLP not otherwise stated.

22

Incorporation

Formation of a library, whether by
incorporating as a non-profit.

23

Local library
administration

Trustees or directors or governance structure
of a local library.

24

Local library formation

25

Internet

Grants for Internet use or related
technologies.

26

LSCA

Library Services and Construction Act.
Grants for planning and building of libraries.

27

National planning

Planning for libraries on a national scale.

28

New deal funding

Funding received for libraries during the
New Deal.

53

LSTA

Library Services and Technology Act.
Funding for services and technologies in
libraries.

30

ACLA formation and
governance

31

Computerization

Distribution and installation of computers in
libraries across the county.

32

County funding

Funding from the county budget to county
libraries.

33

Countywide system
formation and
unification

A vision or plan for integration and
cooperation of libraries county-wide.

34

Distribution formula

The means of distributing RAD funding by
ACLA to county libraries (not CLP).

35

Fax machines

Distribution and installation of fax machines
in libraries across the county.

36

Federated system

History of formation of a local library.

Incorporation of ACLA, restructuring,
governance structure.

Plans for a federated system of libraries
across the county.
466

37

Formation of county
library organizations

38

Library study

A study of libraries in the county.

39

Local library
coordination

Shared services or personnel between
libraries.

40

Reading centers in the
housing projects Knowledge
Connections

Formation, activities, funding, or governance
of Knowledge Connection sites.

41

Redrawing district
lines

Merging Pittsburgh district lines to coincide
with county lines.

42

43

State system

How library groups or associations emerged,
their functions and governance structures.

Three Rivers Free-Net

Development or maintenance of online
discussion board and email site hosted by
CLP in early 1990s.

Union Catalog

Development of infrastructure for sharing
bibliographic records online across the
county.
Funding, development, or governance of
infrastructure for sharing bibliographic
records, patron data, databases, and other
resources online across the county through a
secure network.

44

EIN

54

Delivery service

45

AccessPA

Funding and maintenance of inter-library
loan system across libraries in Pennsylvania.

46

Library
telecommunications
rates

Special phone rates for libraries as dial-up
access to online material became ubiquitous.

47

Local funding from
state

State allocations to local libraries.

48

PA state code and state
plan

49

State budget

Funding and maintenance of infrastructure
for shipping and sorting of shared physical
resources across the county libraries.

The state library code.
Allocations for libraries in PA as determined
by the Governor and General Assembly.

467

Other issues

29

Quality of formal
debate

50

Unknown

51

Miscellaneous

Reflection on the quality of discussion.
An unknown issue.
Issues not otherwise mentioned.

LEGITIMATION

Table I.34. Legitimation sub-categories and definitions.

Legitimation sub-category

Definition

Failure – Bypass representative public

Little or no discussion led up to a communicative
event.
Objections were raised regarding a
communicative event.

Failure – Objections
Success – Discussion and periphery
support
Success – Consensus
Unknown

Formative discussion was held about the content
of a communicative event.
Agreement is reached about the content of a
communicative event.
Legitimacy of a communicative event is
unknown.

IMPLEMENTATION

Table I.35. Implementation sub-categories and definitions.

Implementation sub-category
Failure

Definition
The content of a communicative event is not carried out.
468

Success
Unknown

The content of a communicative event is carried out.
Whether or not the content of a communicative event is
carried out is unknown.

469

APPENDIX J: CODING KEYS

ACTOR, AUDIENCE, AND CIRCUIT KEY

Table J.1. Actor, audience, and circuit key.

ID

Label

1

Civil Works Admin. Local Works Div.

2

Library agencies

3

US Congress

4

PA governor

5

Pennsylvania General Assembly

6

Pennsylvania state library

7

PA Secretary of Labor and Industry

8

voters of PA

9

constitution of PA

10

Allegheny County Housing Authority

11

Board of County Commissioners

12

Citizen Study Committee on Libraries

13

Commission on the Future of Libraries

14

County Controller

15

County court

16

County departments

17

Voters of Allegheny County

470

18

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

19

City of Allegheny

20

City of Pittsburgh

21

both Mayor and Council

22

Pgh. City Council

23

Pgh. Mayor

24

City courts

25

Unknown

26

County municipalities outside the city

27

Local municipal board

28

Multiple municipalities

29

School districts

30

School boards

31

Regional Asset District

32

ACLA

33

CLASP

34

LASH

35

SHLA

36

Allegheny County library director

37

CLP and Monessen district directors

38

CLP cabinet

39

CLP city libraries

40

CLP committee

41

CLP county services

42

CLP director

43

Bob Croneberger

44

Keith Doms

45

Ralph Munn
471

46

CLP district services

47

CLP services

48

EI Network

49

Friends groups

50

CLP Trustees

51

local libraries in Allegheny County

52

Local library trustees

53

local libraries in Westmoreland County

54

RAD lobbyists

55

Allegheny Conference on community development

56

Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

57

Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs

58

Allegheny League of Municipalities

59

Building Owners and Managers Association

60

Civic Club of Allegheny County

61

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County

62

Metropolitan Plan Commission

63

Metropolitan Study Commission

64

Pennsylvania Economy League

65

Pennsylvania Library Association

66

Civil society - other

67

Multiple civil society groups

68

Real Estate Board

69

Experts and consultants

70

library or citizens advisory council

71

Private civil society actor

72

Private corporation or foundation

73

Voluntary citizens group
472

74

Contractor

75

Mass media outlets

76

Private economic actor

77

Private business

78

Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups

79

Actor - Unknown

201

National circuit

202

State circuit

203

County circuit

204

Pittsburgh city circuit

205

ACLA circuit

206

Intra-library circuit

207

Local municipal circuit

208

Local school district circuit

209

Regional Asset District circuit

210

Electronic Information Network circuit

211

Civil society circuit

212

Economic circuit

213

Unknown circuit

80

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

81

Broadcast to civil society groups

82

Broadcast to County libraries

83

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

84

Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

85

Broadcast to Allegheny County Boroughs Association

86

Broadcast to Allegheny County municipalities

87

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents

88

Health and Welfare Federation
473

89

Broadcast - other

90

PA library Governor's Advisory Council

91

Anthony A. Martin

92

Donald C. Potter

93

Libraries outside Allegheny County

94

League of Women Voters

95

Broadcast to national libraries

96

Pennsylvania libraries

97

PA Department of Revenue

98

PA Public Utility Commission

99

Allegheny County Solicitor

100

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

101

Public Library Project

102

Urban Library Council

103

Broadcast to national population

104

Authority for Improvements in Municipalities (AIM)

105

Private contractors

106

PA Department of State

107

US supreme court

108

American Libraries Association

109

Buhl Foundation

110

Knowledge Connections

111

CLP advisory board

112

Mary Frances Cooper

113

21st century library study

114

ACLA and CLP directors

474

POWER KEY

Table J.2. Power key.

Power

Code

Administrative Power – Broadcast

ab

Administrative Power – Narrowcast

an

Communicative Power – Broadcast

cb

Communicative Power – Narrowcast

cn

Formal Decision

fd

Social Power – Economic

se

Social Power – Backroom deals

sb

CIRCUIT POSITION KEY

Table J.3. Circuit position key.

Position

Code

Core

co

Inner Periphery

ip

Outer Periphery

op

Diffuse Public

dp

ISSUE KEY

Table J.4. Issue key.

Code

Issue
475

1

RAD legislation

2

city county consolidation

3

commission on the future of libraries

4

county department funding

5

county library director

6

home rule

7

RAD board

8

tax increase

9

ACLA grant

10

compliance with ACLA

11

compliance with RAD

12

grants

13

local allocations for libraries

14

local millage for libraries

15

RAD funding

16

city library budget

17

librarian wages

18

north side Allegheny library governance

19

Pittsburgh city Allegheny city library merger

20

staffing

21

city library system miscellaneous issues

22

incorporation

23

local library administration

24

local library formation

25

Internet

26

LSCA

27

national planning

28

new deal funding
476

29

quality of formal debate

30

ACLA formation and governance

31

computerization

32

county funding

33

countywide system formation and unification

34

distribution formula

35

fax machines

36

federated system

37

formation of county library organizations

38

library study

39

local library coordination

40

reading centers in the housing projects knowledge connections

41

redrawing district lines

42

three rivers free net

43

union catalog

44

EIN

45

AccessPA

46

library telecommunications rates

47

local funding from state

48

PA state code and state plan

49

state budget

50

unknown

51

miscellaneous

52

compliance with ACLA - standards

53

LSTA

54

delivery service

477

LEGITIMATION KEY

Table J.5. Legitimation key.

Legitimation

Code

Failure – Bypass representative public

fb

Failure – Objections

fo

Success – Discussion and periphery support

sd

Success – Consensus

sc

Unknown

un

IMPLEMENTATION KEY

Table J.6. Implementation key.

Implementation

Code

Failure

fa

Success

su

Unknown

un

478

APPENDIX K: CODING MATRICES

COLUMN HEADING ABBREVIATIONS

No. – Source number. Numbers correspond to those in the source tables.
Pgs. –Total number of pages in the source.
Sgmt – Segment number.
Actr – Actor.
Aud – Audience.
Pwr – Power.
Actr Crc –Actor circuit.
Actr Pos – Actor position.
Aud Crc – Audience circuit.
Aud Pos – Audience position.
Yr – Year of communicative event.
Iss – Issue.
Leg – Legitimation.
Imp – Implementation.

479

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 1

Table K.1. Coding table for period 1.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr
1

2

1

39

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Is

Leg

Imp

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940 16

un

un

2

16

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1940

4

un

un

3

5

16

an

202

co

202

ip

1940

4

un

su

4

11

80

ab

203

co

203

dp

1940

8

un

un

1

40

50

cn

206

co

206

co

1931 23

un

su

2

20

45

fn

204

co

204

ip

1931 16

sd

su

3

45

21

cn

204

ip

204

co

1931 16

sc

su

3

18

1

67

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1940 51

un

un

4

1

1

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

2

11

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

su

3

60

67

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

un

5

11

1

60

23

cn

204

op

204

co

1939 19

sd

fa

6

12

1

60

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1937 19

sd

un

2

64

21

cn

204

op

204

co

1937 19

sd

un

3

60

21

cn

204

op

204

co

1937 16

sd

su

7

3

1

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1941 33

sd

fa

8

5

1

60

21

cn

204

co

204

co

1931 16

sd

un

2

60

60

fd

211

co

211

ip

1931 16

sc

su

3

60

60

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1931 16

sc

su

1

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1933 16

sd

un

2

59

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1933 16

sd

un

3

60

22

an

204

op

204

co

1933 17

sd

un

1

60

60

cb

211

ip

211

ip

1924 33

sd

un

9

10

2

6

480

11

2

1

60

21

cn

204

op

204

co

1927 19

sd

un

12

2

1

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1928 16

sd

un

13

6

1

60

60

fd

211

co

211

ip

1929 16

sc

su

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1929 16

sd

un

1

59

60

fd

211

op

211

co

1936 16

sc

su

2

60

60

fd

211

co

211

ip

1936 16

sc

su

3

60

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1936 19

sd

un

1

11

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

su

2

67

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

3

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1940 33

sd

su

4

67

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

1

45

50

cn

206

co

206

co

1929 33

un

un

2

45

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1929 16

sd

su

3

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1929 16

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1938 19

sd

un

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1938 19

sd

un

14

15

16

17

3

1

121

1

18

5

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1925 19

sd

un

19

2

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1930 33

sd

un

20

2

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1930 33

sd

un

21

1

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1938 19

sd

un

2

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1938 19

sd

un

22

2

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1928 33

sd

un

23

2

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1929 33

sd

un

24

2

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1931 33

sd

un

25

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940 33

sd

un

2

67

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

su

3

11

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940 33

sd

un

2

67

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

3

67

67

fd

211

co

211

ip

1940 33

sc

su

26

1

481

27

28

29

1

3

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940 33

sd

un

2

56

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940

8

un

un

2

11

80

cb

203

co

203

dp

1940

8

un

un

3

11

68

cn

211

op

211

co

1940

8

sd

un

1

5

5

cn

202

co

202

co

1925 48

sd

su

2

5

5

fd

202

co

202

co

1925 48

sc

su

3

5

4

cn

202

co

202

co

1925 48

sc

su

30

3

1

4

83

fd

202

co

202

dp

1925 48

sc

su

31

3

1

5

83

fd

202

co

202

dp

1929 48

sd

su

32

7

1

4

83

fd

202

co

202

dp

1931 47

sd

su

33

2

1

5

5

cn

202

co

202

dp

1925 48

sd

su

34

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1940 33

sd

un

2

56

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

1

20

36

bd

204

co

204

ip

1933 18

fb

su

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1933 19

sd

un

1

67

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sc

fa

2

11

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

su

3

60

67

fd

211

co

211

op

1940 33

sc

su

4

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

35

36

11

2

37

2

1

60

11

an

203

op

203

co

1939 33

sd

un

38

2

1

67

60

fd

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sc

su

2

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

fa

3

11

60

fd

203

co

203

op

1941 33

sd

fa

39

4

1

45

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1933 18

un

un

40

2

1

45

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1933 18

un

un

41

4

1

56

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

2

56

45

cn

206

op

206

co

1940 33

sd

un

1

56

67

cn

211

op

211

co

1938 33

sd

su

2

56

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1938 33

sd

un

42

2

482

43

1

1

66

29

cn

208

op

208

co

1937 33

sd

su

44

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1938 19

sd

un

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1938 19

sd

un

45

6

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1937 33

sd

un

46

189

1

56

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1938 33

sd

un

2

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1939 33

sd

un

3

56

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

un

4

57

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

fa

5

11

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1940 33

sd

su

6

60

60

fd

211

co

211

co

1940 33

sc

su

7

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sc

fa

8

60

56

cn

211

co

211

op

1941 33

fo

fa

9

11

60

fd

203

co

203

op

1941 33

fo

fa

1

62

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1929

2

sd

fa

2

5

62

fd

202

co

202

op

1928

2

sd

su

1

5

62

fd

202

co

202

op

1923

2

sd

su

2

5

18

fd

202

co

202

ip

1927

2

sd

su

3

71

5

fd

202

op

202

co

1928

2

un

un

4

17

16

fd

203

op

202

op

1929

2

un

un

47

48

1

2

49

1

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1938 19

un

un

50

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1938 19

sd

un

51

16

1

1

66

an

201

ip

201

ip

1935 28

un

su

52

8

1

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1928 33

sd

fa

53

2

1

17

5

fd

202

op

202

co

1929

2

sd

fa

2

5

4

fd

202

co

202

co

1923

2

sd

su

3

4

62

fd

202

co

202

op

1924

2

sd

su

4

62

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1925

2

sd

su

5

5

62

fd

202

co

202

op

1925

2

sd

su

6

8

9

fd

202

op

202

co

1928

2

sd

su

7

62

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1928

2

sd

su

483

54

55

1

4

8

5

62

fd

202

co

202

op

1928

2

sd

su

1

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1926 19

sd

fa

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1938 19

sd

fa

1

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1926 19

sd

fa

2

60

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1938 19

sd

fa

3

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1939 33

sd

fa

4

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

fa

5

11

60

fd

203

op

203

co

1940 33

sd

fa

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 2

Table K.2. Coding table for period 2.

No.

Pgs.

Sgmt

Actr

Aud

Pwr

Actr
Crc

Actr
Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

16

1

11

41

se

206

op

206

co

1956

33

sd

su

2

45

51

cb

206

co

206

co

1958

33

un

un

1

72

55

se

211

op

211

co

1950

33

sd

su

2

55

69

an

211

ip

211

op

1950

33

sd

su

3

69

55

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1950

33

sd

su

4

55

55

fd

211

ip

211

co

1950

33

sd

su

5

55

55

fd

211

co

211

co

1950

33

sd

su

6

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1950

33

sd

su

2

181

3

1

1

61

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

1955

33

sd

su

4

6

1

63

63

an

211

co

211

ip

1953

33

sd

su

2

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1952

33

sd

su

3

63

63

fd

211

co

211

ip

1953

33

sd

su

1

63

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1955

33

sd

un

2

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1951

33

sd

su

5

291

484

6

7

5

27

3

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1953

33

sd

su

4

63

63

fd

211

co

211

co

1955

33

sc

su

5

63

28

cn

207

op

207

op

1955

33

sd

su

6

72

63

se

211

op

211

co

1955

33

sd

su

1

11

41

se

206

op

206

co

1956

33

sd

su

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1955

16

sd

su

3

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1955

16

sd

su

4

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

su

1

19

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1956

16

sd

su

2

11

41

se

206

op

206

co

1955

33

sd

su

3

11

50

fd

203

co

203

co

1956

33

sd

su

4

20

41

fd

204

co

204

ip

1956

33

sd

su

5

45

41

an

206

co

206

ip

1956

33

un

su

6

20

15

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

19

sd

su

7

15

39

fd

203

co

203

op

1956

19

sd

su

8

70

39

cn

206

op

206

co

1956

18

sd

un

9

70

71

cb

206

op

206

op

1956

18

sd

un

10

61

11

cn

203

co

203

op

1955

33

sd

su

11

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1956

33

sd

su

12

11

45

cn

206

op

206

co

1956

33

sd

su

13

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1956

33

sd

su

14

11

41

se

206

op

206

co

1956

33

sd

su

8

25

1

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1957

16

un

su

9

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1956

32

sd

su

2

11

45

fd

203

co

203

ip

1956

32

sd

su

3

45

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1956

32

sd

su

1

77

39

cn

206

op

206

co

1947

39

sd

su

2

55

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1950

33

sd

fa

3

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1951

33

sd

su

4

4

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1951

38

sd

su

10

121

485

11

12

9

7

5

63

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1955

33

sd

fa

6

26

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1955

33

fo

fa

7

15

21

fd

203

co

203

op

1956

19

sd

su

8

20

15

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

19

sd

su

9

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

su

10

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1956

33

sd

su

11

90

4

cn

202

op

202

co

1960

48

sd

su

12

69

4

cn

202

op

202

co

1960

48

sd

su

1

60

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

un

2

5

80

fd

202

co

202

dp

1957

33

fo

fa

3

5

80

fd

202

co

202

dp

1955

33

fo

fa

1

5

14

an

202

co

202

ip

1956

51

un

su

2

14

15

cn

203

co

203

co

1956

51

un

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1956

32

sd

su

13

3

1

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1957

32

sd

su

14

2

1

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1955

32

un

un

15

1

1

75

76

cb

212

ip

212

op

1956

19

sd

su

2

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1956

33

sd

su

1

75

76

cb

212

ip

212

op

1955

33

sd

un

2

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

un

1

75

76

cb

212

ip

212

op

1956

19

sd

su

2

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1956

19

sd

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1956

19

sd

su

1

63

63

an

211

co

211

ip

1954

33

sd

un

2

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1950

33

sd

fa

1

61

61

cb

211

co

211

ip

1957

33

sd

su

2

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

33

sd

su

1

55

76

cn

211

co

211

op

1950

33

sd

su

2

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1950

33

sd

fa

3

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1953

33

sd

su

16

17

18

19

20

1

1

35

4

3

486

21

22

1

1

4

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1951

33

sd

fa

5

63

5

cb

202

op

202

co

1955

33

sd

un

6

61

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1955

33

sd

su

7

85

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1955

33

fo

su

1

45

63

cn

211

op

211

co

1953

38

sd

su

2

63

63

an

211

co

211

ip

1953

38

sd

su

3

63

63

fd

211

co

211

ip

1953

38

un

un

1

61

71

cb

211

co

211

op

1960

33

sd

un

2

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

su

23

2

1

60

71

cb

211

co

211

op

1954

19

sd

su

24

6

1

61

71

cb

211

co

211

op

1955

33

sd

su

2

47

61

cn

211

op

211

co

1955

33

sd

su

25

1

1

71

60

cn

211

op

211

co

1954

19

sd

su

26

3

1

61

61

cb

211

co

211

ip

1955

33

sd

su

2

61

61

ab

211

co

211

dp

1955

33

sd

su

3

61

61

fd

211

co

211

ip

1955

33

sd

su

4

61

61

fd

211

co

211

co

1955

33

sd

su

5

61

61

fd

211

co

211

co

1955

33

sc

su

6

61

61

an

211

co

211

ip

1955

33

sd

su

1

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1955

33

sd

su

2

61

61

an

211

co

211

co

1955

33

sd

su

1

61

61

cn

211

co

211

co

1955

33

sd

su

2

65

65

an

211

co

211

ip

1955

48

sd

un

3

65

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1955

48

sd

un

4

61

71

cn

211

co

211

op

1955

33

un

un

5

61

11

cn

203

co

211

op

1955

33

sd

su

1

63

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1955

33

sd

un

2

63

63

fd

211

co

211

ip

1955

33

sd

su

1

63

45

an

211

co

211

ip

1954

33

sd

su

2

45

63

cn

211

op

211

co

1954

33

sd

su

27

28

29

30

1

5

1

6

487

31

6

3

63

45

fd

211

co

211

op

1954

33

sd

su

1

63

63

cn

211

ip

211

co

1954

33

sd

su

2

63

63

an

211

co

211

ip

1954

33

sd

su

32

6

1

63

63

cn

211

ip

211

co

1953

33

sc

su

33

12

1

63

63

cn

211

ip

211

co

1954

33

sd

su

34

2

1

45

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1954

33

sd

su

2

45

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1954

33

sd

su

35

2

1

45

82

cb

206

co

206

dp

1957

33

un

su

36

2

1

45

82

cb

206

co

206

dp

1957

33

sd

un

37

5

1

45

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1958

48

un

un

2

45

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1958

33

un

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1957

33

un

un

2

45

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1957

33

un

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1956

33

un

su

2

11

41

se

203

co

203

op

1956

33

sd

su

3

45

21

cn

204

op

204

co

1956

33

sd

su

38

39

1

1

40

186

1

65

87

cb

211

ip

211

dp

1958

48

sd

un

41

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1954

33

fo

un

42

2

1

63

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1954

33

un

su

2

5

5

cn

202

co

202

co

1951

33

sd

su

3

5

63

fd

202

co

202

op

1951

33

sc

su

4

5

63

an

202

co

202

op

1955

33

sd

su

5

63

86

cb

202

op

202

dp

1955

33

sd

un

1

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

33

un

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1956

33

sd

su

3

71

61

cn

211

op

211

co

1956

24

un

un

4

61

88

cn

211

op

211

co

1956

24

sd

un

5

61

61

cn

211

co

211

co

1956

33

sd

su

6

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

33

sd

su

7

61

61

fd

211

co

211

co

1956

33

sd

su

43

2

488

44

45

46

6

189

2

1

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1956

33

sd

su

2

11

80

fd

206

co

206

ip

1956

33

sd

su

1

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1960

33

sd

un

2

11

45

an

203

co

203

ip

1960

33

sd

su

3

45

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1961

33

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1955

33

fo

un

2

85

80

fd

211

co

211

dp

1955

33

fo

un

47

3

1

63

63

an

211

co

211

ip

1953

33

un

su

48

29

1

45

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1961

33

sd

un

2

11

45

cn

206

op

206

co

1961

33

un

su

1

66

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1955

19

sd

su

2

20

22

cn

204

co

204

co

1952

19

sd

fa

3

71

22

cn

204

co

204

co

1952

19

fo

fa

4

66

66

cn

211

op

211

co

1954

19

sd

un

1

40

11

fd

203

ip

203

co

1956

33

sd

su

2

50

80

fd

211

co

211

dp

1956

33

sd

su

49

50

6

8

51

1

1

41

45

cn

206

ip

206

co

1960

33

un

un

52

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1956

19

sd

su

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1956

16

un

su

3

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1956

16

sd

su

4

45

39

an

206

co

206

ip

1956

23

un

su

5

20

39

an

204

co

204

ip

1955

18

fb

su

6

20

39

an

204

co

204

ip

1956

18

fo

un

7

67

22

cn

204

co

204

ip

1956

19

sd

su

53

10

1

65

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1958

48

sd

su

54

4

1

41

80

cb

206

ip

206

dp

1956

33

sd

su

55

4

1

15

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1956

19

sd

su

2

15

22

fd

203

co

203

op

1956

19

sd

su

3

20

15

cn

203

op

203

co

1956

19

sd

su

4

67

22

cn

204

op

204

co

1956

19

sc

su

489

56

2

1

61

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1955

33

sd

su

57

5

1

60

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1950

33

sd

un

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 3

Table K.3. Coding table for period 3.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr
1

2

3

5

13

5

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crd

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

26

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1962

24

un

un

2

46

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1963

24

un

un

1

67

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1962

24

un

un

2

46

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1963

24

un

un

1

5

84

fd

202

co

202

dp

1961

48

sd

su

2

5

6

an

202

co

202

ip

1961

48

un

su

3

6

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1961

48

un

su

4

69

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1961

48

un

un

4

4

1

6

5

cn

202

ip

202

co

1967

48

sd

un

5

28

1

50

50

cn

206

co

206

co

1962

21

un

un

2

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1962

16

un

un

3

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1962

16

un

un

4

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1962

32

un

un

5

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1962

32

un

un

6

5

46

se

202

co

202

ip

1962

47

un

un

7

5

84

fd

202

co

202

dp

1961

48

un

su

8

50

46

fd

206

co

206

ip

1962

48

sd

su

9

50

39

fd

206

co

206

ip

1962

17

sd

su

10

64

39

cn

206

op

206

co

1962

17

sd

su

11

50

21

cn

204

ip

204

co

1962

17

sd

fa

490

6

7

26

11

12

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1962

17

sd

fa

13

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

1962

48

un

su

14

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

1963

49

un

su

15

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1963

49

un

su

16

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

1962

48

un

su

1

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1961

16

un

su

2

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1961

16

un

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1961

32

un

su

4

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1961

32

un

su

5

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1961

13

un

su

6

5

84

fd

202

co

202

dp

1961

48

un

su

7

5

46

an

202

co

202

ip

1961

48

un

su

8

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1961

48

un

su

9

6

84

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1961

48

un

su

10

46

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1961

48

un

su

11

11

45

an

203

co

203

ip

1961

33

un

su

12

45

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1961

33

un

un

13

50

39

an

206

co

206

ip

1961

17

un

su

1

6

41

an

202

ip

202

ip

1963

48

un

su

2

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1963

47

un

un

3

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1963

47

un

su

4

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

1963

48

un

su

8

4

1

71

21

cn

204

co

204

co

1963

24

sd

su

9

2

1

20

39

an

204

ip

204

ip

1965

24

un

su

10

21

1

70

39

an

206

op

206

co

1970

21

sd

su

2

70

39

cn

206

op

206

co

1970

21

sd

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1970

32

un

su

4

2

41

se

201

ip

201

ip

1970

26

un

su

5

20

39

an

204

co

204

ip

1970

16

un

su

6

39

21

cn

204

ip

204

co

1970

16

sd

un

491

11

121

7

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1970

32

sd

su

8

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1970

32

sd

su

9

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1970

47

un

su

10

11

69

se

203

co

203

op

1970

38

un

su

11

11

82

cb

203

co

203

dp

1970

38

un

un

1

61

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1961

33

sd

un

2

11

45

an

203

co

203

ip

1961

38

un

su

3

45

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1961

33

sd

un

4

44

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1967

33

sd

su

5

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1969

33

sd

su

6

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1969

32

sd

su

7

6

41

se

201

ip

201

ip

1969

26

un

su

8

4

84

fd

202

co

202

dp

1961

48

un

su

12

2

1

6

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1966

48

sd

un

13

11

1

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

1962

24

un

su

2

46

51

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1962

24

un

su

3

46

51

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1964

23

un

su

4

46

82

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1965

23

un

su

5

46

81

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1965

24

sd

un

6

51

46

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1965

23

sd

su

14

1

1

38

44

cn

206

ip

206

co

1966

33

sd

su

15

2

1

89

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1967

48

sd

fa

16

2

1

41

71

cn

203

ip

203

op

1969

24

sd

fa

17

1

1

6

6

an

202

ip

202

ip

1966

48

un

su

18

3

1

65

65

cn

211

op

211

co

1968

48

sd

un

19

4

1

65

70

cn

211

ip

211

op

1968

48

fo

un

20

1

1

41

50

cn

206

ip

206

co

1967

38

un

un

21

1

1

30

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1966

13

un

su

2

46

29

cn

202

ip

202

op

1966

13

un

su

3

20

51

se

208

co

208

ip

1966

13

un

su

492

22

7

1

41

44

cn

206

ip

206

co

1968

33

sd

un

23

5

1

46

82

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1968

48

sd

un

24

6

1

65

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1968

48

sd

un

2

46

82

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1968

48

sd

su

1

65

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1968

38

un

su

2

46

82

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1968

38

sd

su

3

46

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1968

38

sd

un

4

52

51

an

206

co

206

co

1968

32

un

un

5

40

65

cn

211

op

211

ip

1968

38

sd

su

1

50

11

fd

206

co

206

op

1968

33

un

su

2

11

50

fd

203

co

203

op

1968

33

sd

su

3

44

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1968

26

un

su

4

6

41

an

202

ip

202

ip

1968

26

un

su

1

44

82

cb

203

ip

203

ip

1968

32

sd

su

2

11

41

fd

203

co

203

op

1968

32

sd

su

3

41

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1968

26

un

su

1

65

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1967

38

un

su

2

46

71

cn

202

ip

202

op

1967

38

un

su

1

65

46

cn

202

op

202

ip

1967

38

un

su

2

46

71

cn

202

ip

202

op

1967

38

un

su

1

71

41

cn

203

op

203

ip

1969

33

un

un

2

11

69

fd

203

co

203

op

1969

38

un

su

25

26

27

28

29

30

4

2

1

1

1

3

31

1

1

71

41

cn

203

op

203

ip

1969

33

un

su

32

1

1

46

46

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1968

38

sd

un

33

1

1

52

44

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1968

38

sd

un

34

1

1

71

46

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1967

38

sd

su

35

5

1

65

65

fd

211

ip

211

ip

1967

38

sd

su

2

46

65

cn

202

ip

202

co

1968

38

sd

su

1

65

65

fd

211

co

211

ip

1968

48

sd

su

2

65

65

cn

211

ip

211

co

1968

48

sd

su

36

5

493

37

107

1

44

29

cn

208

op

208

co

1963

24

sd

su

2

44

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1963

24

sd

su

3

26

46

fd

207

co

207

op

1963

24

sd

su

4

46

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1963

24

sd

su

5

67

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1965

24

sd

su

6

26

28

fd

207

co

207

co

1966

24

sd

su

38

27

1

69

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1967

48

un

un

39

57

1

6

69

cn

202

ip

202

op

1967

48

sd

su

2

69

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1967

48

un

un

1

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1966

38

sd

su

2

44

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1966

38

sd

un

1

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1966

38

sd

su

2

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1966

38

sc

su

1

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1964

32

fb

su

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1964

16

fo

su

3

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

1963

47

sd

su

40

41

42

7

5

8

43

1

1

46

42

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1967

48

un

un

44

30

1

69

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1967

48

un

un

45

3

1

44

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1963

24

sd

su

2

26

44

cn

206

op

206

co

1963

24

sd

su

1

72

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1964

24

sd

su

2

26

51

se

207

co

207

ip

1964

24

sd

su

3

6

51

se

202

ip

202

ip

1964

26

sd

su

4

51

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1964

26

sd

su

5

6

51

fd

202

ip

202

ip

1964

26

sd

su

46

2

494

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 4

Table K.4. Coding table for period 4.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr
1

2

3

64

1

122

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

51

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1977

48

sd

su

2

2

6

an

201

co

202

ip

1977

26

sd

su

3

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1977

48

sd

su

4

6

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1977

26

sd

su

1

66

66

cn

211

op

211

co

1973

33

sd

fa

2

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1973

33

fo

fa

1

3

95

fd

201

co

201

dp

1970

26

un

su

2

6

96

se

202

ip

202

dp

1970

26

un

su

3

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1970

26

un

su

4

3

1

18

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1978

6

un

un

5

53

1

17

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1974

6

fo

fa

2

17

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1978

6

fo

fa

3

5

83

fd

202

co

202

dp

1972

6

un

su

6

3

1

41

11

cn

203

co

203

ip

1971

33

sd

fa

7

21

1

11

69

an

203

co

203

op

1970

38

un

su

2

41

80

cb

206

ip

206

dp

1971

33

sd

un

8

3

1

92

41

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1978

92

fo

fa

9

2

1

71

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1975

33

sd

fa

71

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1975

33

fo

fa

1

91

39

cb

206

co

206

dp

1970

38

un

un

2

41

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1970

38

un

un

10

118

11

10

1

41

91

cn

206

ip

206

co

1976

33

sd

fa

12

91

1

11

80

fd

203

co

203

co

1972

6

sc

su

2

17

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1972

6

sd

su

3

78

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1973

6

sd

fa

495

4

69

69

fd

211

co

211

co

1973

6

sd

su

13

10

1

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1976

33

sd

fa

14

3

1

51

46

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1979

38

un

un

15

1

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1970

33

sd

un

16

2

1

51

46

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1979

38

fo

fa

17

1

1

92

93

cn

206

op

206

co

1971

33

un

fa

18

2

1

41

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1976

33

sd

un

19

1

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1970

33

sd

su

2

71

67

cn

211

op

211

co

1970

33

sd

su

20

1

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1971

33

fo

fa

21

1

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1970

33

fo

fa

22

1

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1971

33

sd

fa

23

4

1

92

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1971

33

fo

fa

24

1

1

92

93

cn

206

op

206

co

1971

33

un

su

25

1

1

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1971

32

un

un

2

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1971

32

un

un

3

11

41

an

203

op

203

ip

1971

33

sd

fa

26

2

1

65

96

cb

206

op

206

dp

1971

48

sd

un

27

1

1

92

93

cn

206

co

206

op

1971

33

un

fa

28

3

1

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1970

33

sd

un

2

41

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1970

33

sd

un

1

6

41

an

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

2

11

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

3

41

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

1

71

51

cn

206

co

206

co

1976

38

sd

su

2

11

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

3

11

69

fd

203

co

203

op

1976

38

sd

su

1

94

94

an

211

ip

211

ip

1977

38

un

su

2

11

69

fd

203

co

203

op

1977

38

sd

su

1

69

69

cn

203

op

203

op

1978

38

un

su

29

30

31

32

1

1

1

7

496

33

1

1

51

41

cn

203

op

203

ip

1970

38

sd

su

34

1

1

6

11

fd

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

2

6

11

se

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

1

50

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1976

32

sd

un

2

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1976

32

sd

un

3

67

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1976

32

sd

un

1

11

69

fd

202

ip

202

op

1977

38

sd

su

2

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

1977

47

un

su

3

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1977

48

un

su

35

36

1

2

37

2

1

6

11

an

202

ip

202

ip

1978

38

fb

su

38

2

1

6

11

an

202

ip

202

ip

1977

38

sd

su

39

1

1

6

11

an

202

ip

202

ip

1977

38

un

su

40

1

1

69

51

cb

206

op

206

co

1978

38

sd

un

2

51

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1978

38

sd

un

1

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1976

32

fo

su

2

6

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1976

33

sd

un

41

2

42

1

1

11

41

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

43

1

1

11

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

44

1

1

51

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1979

38

sd

un

45

2

1

51

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1979

38

sd

un

46

1

1

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1976

32

fo

fa

2

71

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1976

32

sd

fa

1

69

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1979

38

sd

un

2

52

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1979

38

sd

un

47

1

48

2

1

11

82

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1977

38

sd

su

49

2

1

78

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1976

33

sd

un

50

1

1

78

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1976

33

sd

un

51

12

1

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1978

48

un

su

2

6

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1975

48

sd

su

3

6

96

fd

202

ip

202

dp

1977

48

sd

su

497

4

6

96

se

202

ip

202

se

1977

48

sd

su

52

5

1

78

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1978

33

sd

un

53

120

1

69

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1970

33

un

fa

54

54

1

6

96

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1974

48

sd

un

55

10

1

11

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1976

26

sd

su

56

188

1

69

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1978

38

sd

un

57

2

1

66

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1973

33

sd

fa

58

1

1

69

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1978

38

sd

un

59

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1979

33

fo

un

60

14

1

6

96

se

202

ip

202

dp

1978

47

un

su

61

5

1

65

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1971

48

sd

un

2

71

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1971

33

sd

fa

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 5

Table K.5. Coding table for period 5.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr
1

2

7

9

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

39

21

cn

204

ip

204

co

1986

16

fo

un

2

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1986

32

fo

un

3

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1986

16

sd

su

4

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1986

32

sd

su

5

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1986

47

un

su

1

39

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1987

26

sd

su

2

39

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1987

12

sd

su

3

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

1987

33

sd

su

4

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1987

32

un

su

5

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1987

47

un

su

498

3

4

5

6

5

5

7

6

6

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1987

16

un

su

1

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1988

16

un

su

2

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1988

32

un

su

3

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1988

48

un

su

1

40

50

cn

206

co

206

co

1989

16

sd

un

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1989

16

un

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1989

32

un

su

4

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1989

47

un

su

1

14

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1991

33

sd

su

2

11

13

fd

203

co

203

ip

1991

33

sd

su

3

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1991

16

un

su

4

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1991

32

un

su

5

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1991

47

un

su

1

32

41

cn

206

op

206

co

1991

33

sd

su

2

101

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1992

49

sd

un

3

102

95

cb

211

co

211

dp

1992

27

un

un

4

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1992

16

fo

su

5

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1992

32

sd

su

6

11

13

fd

203

co

203

ip

1991

3

un

su

7

72

16

se

211

co

211

op

1991

5

sd

su

8

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1992

47

un

su

7

3

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1992

44

sd

su

8

3

1

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1992

31

sd

su

9

10

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1992

31

sd

su

2

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

10

1

1

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1992

31

sd

un

11

4

1

13

104

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

2

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

12

4

1

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1992

31

sd

su

13

2

1

69

39

an

211

co

211

ip

1993

42

un

su

499

14

2

1

13

80

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1993

35

sd

su

15

6

1

6

66

fd

202

ip

202

op

1992

48

sd

su

2

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

48

sd

un

1

13

80

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1993

31

un

su

2

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

46

sd

su

3

33

55

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

un

su

16

10

17

4

1

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1993

31

sd

su

18

93

1

14

80

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1991

37

sd

su

2

14

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1991

5

sd

su

3

14

82

cb

203

co

203

dp

1991

37

sd

su

19

1

1

46

82

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1989

51

un

su

20

13

1

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1989

33

sd

su

2

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1989

33

sd

su

1

39

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1990

51

sd

su

2

49

21

cn

204

op

204

co

1990

16

sd

su

3

49

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1990

32

sd

su

4

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

1990

16

sd

su

5

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1990

16

sd

su

6

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1990

32

sd

su

7

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1990

32

sd

su

21

27

22

1

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1991

37

sd

su

23

1

1

39

39

an

206

co

206

ip

1989

23

un

su

24

12

1

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1988

32

sd

su

2

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1988

32

sd

su

1

40

82

cb

206

co

206

dp

1990

33

sd

su

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1991

37

sd

su

3

11

13

fd

203

co

203

ip

1991

3

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1991

3

un

su

2

13

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1991

32

sd

un

1

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1991

37

sd

su

25

26

27

2

1

1

500

28

29

30

5

1

1

1

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1991

47

un

su

2

46

43

cn

206

ip

206

co

1991

33

un

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1990

33

sd

un

2

40

50

cn

206

co

206

co

1990

38

sd

un

3

50

40

fd

206

co

206

co

1988

38

sd

su

4

40

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1990

33

sd

un

1

75

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1990

32

sd

su

2

75

80

cb

212

co

212

dp

1990

32

sd

su

31

16

1

14

80

cb

203

co

203

dp

1990

33

un

su

32

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1991

32

sd

un

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1991

37

sd

su

3

14

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1991

32

sd

un

33

3

1

46

43

cn

206

ip

206

co

1989

33

un

un

34

44

1

6

4

cn

202

ip

202

co

1991

48

sd

un

35

1

1

52

51

an

206

co

206

co

1989

23

sd

su

36

9

1

34

34

cn

206

co

206

co

1990

37

sd

su

2

14

77

sb

212

op

212

co

1992

51

fb

su

3

14

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1991

3

sd

su

4

11

13

fd

203

co

203

ip

1991

3

sd

su

1

46

38

cn

206

ip

206

co

1991

37

un

su

2

14

34

cn

211

op

211

co

1991

33

sd

su

3

34

34

cb

211

co

211

co

1991

33

sd

su

37

16

38

4

1

46

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1991

38

un

un

39

3

1

46

38

cn

206

ip

206

co

1991

37

sd

su

2

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1991

37

sd

su

1

46

39

cn

206

ip

206

ip

1991

38

un

un

2

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1991

37

sd

su

1

46

43

cn

206

ip

206

co

1988

33

sd

su

2

11

41

an

203

co

203

ip

1988

33

sd

su

1

94

46

cn

206

op

206

ip

1990

33

sd

un

40

41

42

4

6

1

501

43

1

1

38

46

an

206

co

206

ip

1989

33

un

su

44

2

1

38

43

cn

206

co

206

co

1988

33

sd

un

45

8

1

11

41

fd

203

co

203

ip

1987

32

sd

su

2

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1987

32

sd

su

1

33

46

cn

206

op

206

ip

1991

37

sd

su

2

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1991

37

sd

su

1

14

80

cb

203

co

203

dp

1992

31

sd

su

2

11

51

se

203

co

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

46

47

2

2

48

1

1

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1991

47

sd

su

49

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1988

45

un

su

2

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1988

45

fo

su

3

6

96

se

202

ip

202

dp

1988

45

sd

su

4

51

96

fd

206

co

206

dp

1991

45

sd

su

1

51

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

13

sd

un

2

13

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1992

51

sd

un

50

1

51

105

1

14

11

cn

203

co

203

co

1990

33

sd

su

52

3

1

13

41

an

203

ip

203

ip

1992

39

un

su

53

2

1

72

11

fd

211

co

211

op

1991

5

sd

su

2

72

11

se

211

co

211

op

1991

5

sd

su

1

14

77

sb

212

op

212

co

1992

35

sd

su

2

51

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

39

sd

su

3

13

51

fd

203

ip

203

op

1992

39

sd

su

4

33

13

cn

203

op

203

op

1992

31

sd

un

5

6

6

fd

202

ip

202

ip

1992

48

sd

su

54

4

55

2

1

13

80

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1992

43

sd

su

56

3

1

13

13

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

57

4

1

13

104

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

31

sd

un

58

2

1

51

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

33

sd

su

2

13

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1992

33

sd

su

3

11

13

se

203

co

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

502

59

60

3

4

1

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1992

31

sd

su

2

33

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1992

45

fo

un

1

51

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

2

6

39

se

202

ip

202

ip

1992

26

sd

su

3

13

34

cn

211

op

211

co

1992

39

sd

un

4

13

10

fd

203

ip

203

ip

1992

40

fo

su

61

3

1

13

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1992

39

fo

un

62

2

1

13

39

cn

206

op

206

co

1991

31

sd

su

63

8

1

51

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1992

33

sd

un

2

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1991

31

sd

un

1

14

80

cb

203

co

203

dp

1991

33

sd

su

2

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1991

33

sd

su

64

1

65

8

1

100

100

cb

211

co

211

co

1991

47

sd

un

66

37

1

40

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1990

33

sd

un

67

10

1

11

13

se

203

co

203

ip

1992

31

sd

su

2

13

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1992

39

sd

un

1

72

13

se

211

co

211

op

1992

12

sd

su

2

13

72

cn

211

ip

211

co

1992

3

sd

su

3

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1992

39

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1990

16

fo

su

2

43

80

cb

204

ip

204

dp

1990

16

fo

su

68

69

13

1

70

5

1

43

40

cn

206

co

206

co

1989

38

sd

un

71

9

1

33

13

fd

211

co

211

op

1992

31

sd

su

2

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1992

31

sd

su

72

9

1

33

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1992

48

sd

un

73

15

1

39

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1992

44

sd

su

74

14

1

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1992

1

sd

su

503

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 6

Table K.6. Coding table for period 6.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr
1

2

3

4

4

1

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

13

41

an

203

ip

203

ip

1993

43

sd

su

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1993

16

sd

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1993

32

sd

su

4

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1993

47

sd

su

1

41

82

fd

203

ip

203

dp

1994

44

sd

su

2

31

39

an

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

3

5

80

fd

202

co

202

ip

1994

1

sd

su

4

41

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

5

41

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1994

44

sd

su

6

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1994

16

sd

su

7

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1994

41

sd

su

8

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1994

47

sd

su

1

20

80

fd

204

co

204

dp

1994

7

un

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1994

7

un

su

3

4

31

fd

202

co

202

ip

1994

7

un

su

4

11

1

64

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1993

1

sd

su

5

3

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

6

4

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

42

sd

su

7

4

1

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

37

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1994

37

sd

su

3

32

97

cn

202

op

202

ip

1994

37

sd

su

1

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

3

51

98

cn

202

op

202

ip

1994

46

sd

su

4

98

96

fd

202

ip

202

dp

1994

46

sd

su

8

5

504

9

10

5

15

5

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

6

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

7

13

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

1

7

13

se

202

ip

202

ip

1994

40

un

su

2

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

3

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1994

37

sd

su

1

13

98

cn

202

op

202

ip

1994

46

sd

su

2

13

80

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1994

46

sd

su

3

74

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

44

sd

su

11

2

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

12

4

1

33

33

cn

211

co

211

co

1994

37

sd

su

13

4

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

14

8

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

15

4

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

16

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

17

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

un

su

2

31

82

fd

209

co

209

dp

1994

15

sd

su

3

31

54

se

209

co

209

op

1994

15

un

un

4

31

81

cb

209

co

209

cb

1994

15

un

su

5

5

80

fd

202

co

202

cb

1993

1

sd

su

18

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

fo

su

19

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

20

4

1

5

80

fd

202

co

202

dp

1993

1

sd

su

21

1

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

22

3

1

33

82

fd

211

co

211

dp

1994

37

fb

su

23

2

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1993

37

sd

su

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1993

37

sd

su

3

33

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

31

sd

un

4

33

6

cn

202

op

202

ip

1993

48

sd

su

1

33

48

fd

210

op

210

co

1994

44

sd

su

24

1

505

25

2

1

51

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

37

sd

su

26

3

1

33

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

sd

su

2

64

33

cn

212

op

212

co

1993

1

sd

su

27

2

1

13

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1994

37

un

un

28

1

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

29

1

1

33

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

1994

15

sd

su

30

1

1

33

33

an

211

co

211

co

1994

37

un

un

31

1

1

33

82

ab

211

co

211

dp

1994

37

sd

su

32

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1994

1

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

31

82

fd

209

co

209

dp

1994

15

sd

su

1

13

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1993

24

sd

su

2

40

40

cn

206

op

206

co

1993

24

sd

su

1

13

74

cn

212

op

212

co

1994

24

un

un

2

13

74

cn

212

op

212

co

1994

44

un

su

1

14

13

an

203

ip

203

ip

1994

5

sd

su

2

13

13

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1994

15

un

un

3

71

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

33

34

35

36

3

2

3

2

37

2

1

13

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1994

5

un

su

38

2

1

13

82

fd

203

ip

203

dp

1994

44

sd

su

39

2

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

44

sd

su

40

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

2

97

80

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1994

1

sd

su

41

2

1

74

41

cn

206

op

206

co

1993

44

sd

su

42

1

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

43

19

1

46

82

fd

202

ip

202

dp

1993

41

fo

su

2

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

1

51

80

fd

206

co

206

dp

1994

37

sd

su

44

4

506

45

15

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

46

9

1

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

2

72

48

fd

211

co

211

ip

1994

44

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

fo

su

2

31

54

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

3

31

51

se

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

4

43

80

cb

209

ip

209

dp

1994

15

fo

un

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

3

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

47

48

1

2

49

1

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

50

1

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

51

1

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1994

15

sd

su

52

8

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

53

6

1

46

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

15

sd

su

54

4

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

55

3

1

74

33

fd

211

op

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

56

3

1

74

33

cn

211

op

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

57

3

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

58

1

1

74

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

59

14

1

39

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1993

1

sd

su

2

64

46

cn

206

op

206

co

1993

1

sd

su

60

1

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1994

32

sd

su

61

2

1

32

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1994

15

sd

su

62

1

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1994

15

sd

su

63

1

1

32

82

ab

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

64

3

1

32

82

ab

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1994

15

sd

su

507

65

4

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1994

15

sd

su

66

1

1

32

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1994

15

sd

su

67

1

1

31

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

2

33

82

ab

211

co

211

dp

1994

15

sd

su

68

8

1

51

98

cn

202

op

202

ip

1994

46

sd

su

69

1

1

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

70

6

1

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

71

2

1

51

51

fd

206

co

206

ip

1994

15

sd

su

72

1

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

73

1

1

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

1994

48

sd

su

2

37

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1994

41

un

su

1

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

33

un

un

2

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1994

44

sd

su

1

13

13

an

203

ip

203

ip

1994

33

un

su

2

74

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

44

sd

su

1

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

1

sd

su

2

13

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1993

1

fo

su

1

5

80

cb

202

co

202

dp

1993

1

fo

su

2

71

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1993

1

sd

fa

3

5

5

fd

202

co

202

co

1993

1

fo

su

74

75

76

77

2

1

1

3

78

3

1

14

13

an

203

co

203

ip

1994

3

sd

su

79

1

1

13

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

80

5

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

81

1

1

55

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

1

sd

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1994

1

sd

su

3

13

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1994

1

sd

su

1

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

1

33

33

an

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

82

83

3

1

508

2

33

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

37

sd

su

3

33

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

1994

15

sd

su

84

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

85

1

1

33

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1994

1

sd

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1994

1

sd

su

3

11

13

an

203

co

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

4

33

33

an

211

co

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

5

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

6

13

33

cn

211

op

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

7

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

8

33

33

an

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

86

1

1

33

33

fd

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

un

su

87

2

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

1

sd

su

88

3

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1994

13

fb

un

2

32

82

ab

205

co

206

dp

1994

13

fb

su

3

32

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1994

13

sd

su

1

5

23

cn

204

op

204

co

1994

1

sd

su

2

31

31

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sc

su

89

90

8

1

91

3

1

5

82

cb

202

co

202

dp

1994

1

sd

su

92

2

1

5

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1994

15

sd

su

93

3

1

5

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1993

15

sd

su

94

3

1

5

55

cn

211

op

21

co

1994

1

sd

su

95

1

1

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

96

15

1

20

39

an

204

co

204

ip

1993

1

fb

su

97

6

1

33

33

an

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

98

5

1

33

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1994

15

sd

su

2

51

33

cn

211

op

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

1

33

33

fd

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

99

3

509

100

5

1

33

33

fd

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

101

2

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

102

6

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

44

sd

su

103

2

1

64

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

un

su

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

ip

1993

1

sd

su

3

33

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

sd

su

104

1

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1994

15

sd

su

105

1

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

1

fo

su

106

2

1

46

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

13

fo

un

107

6

1

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1993

3

sd

su

2

33

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1993

3

sd

un

1

75

103

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

25

sd

fa

2

71

103

cb

206

co

206

dp

1994

25

sd

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

un

un

2

39

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

7

un

su

2

31

31

fd

209

co

209

co

1994

7

sd

su

1

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1994

44

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

44

sd

su

3

51

98

cn

202

op

202

ip

1994

46

sd

su

4

98

96

fd

202

ip

202

dp

1994

46

sd

su

5

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

6

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

1

74

82

cb

212

co

212

dp

1994

44

sd

su

2

13

82

ab

203

ip

203

dp

1993

31

sd

su

3

72

39

se

211

co

211

ip

1993

44

sd

su

1

13

13

fd

203

ip

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

2

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

37

sd

su

1

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1994

37

sd

su

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

1

1

1

5

14

2

2

510

115

2

1

13

98

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1994

46

sd

su

2

13

80

cb

202

ip

202

dp

1994

46

sd

su

3

74

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

44

sd

su

4

13

13

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1994

15

fo

su

116

10

1

33

72

cn

211

co

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

117

3

1

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1993

31

sd

su

2

13

33

fd

203

ip

203

op

1993

32

sc

su

1

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

44

sd

su

2

5

39

se

202

co

202

ip

1993

42

sd

su

3

6

11

an

202

ip

202

ip

1993

48

sd

un

1

13

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1993

44

sd

su

2

11

39

se

203

co

203

ip

1993

42

sd

su

1

39

80

cb

204

ip

204

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1994

16

sd

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1994

4

sd

su

4

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1994

47

sd

su

1

33

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

37

sd

su

2

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1994

37

sc

su

3

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

1

13

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

1

sd

su

2

33

74

cn

212

op

212

co

1994

44

sd

su

118

119

120

121

122

2

2

1

7

14

123

3

1

33

33

cn

211

co

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

124

5

1

33

82

fd

211

co

211

dp

1994

15

sc

su

125

2

1

72

13

se

211

co

211

ip

1994

3

sd

su

2

6

13

se

202

ip

202

ip

1994

3

sd

su

126

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

127

6

1

78

82

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1994

44

sd

su

2

13

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

128

18

1

5

80

fd

202

co

202

dp

1993

1

sd

su

129

5

1

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

511

130

10

1

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

131

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

fo

su

2

26

80

fd

207

co

207

dp

1994

1

fo

su

3

26

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1994

1

fo

su

132

10

1

55

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

1

sd

su

133

1

1

33

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

15

sd

su

134

1

1

33

33

fd

211

co

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

135

3

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

1

sd

su

136

8

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

137

3

1

33

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

138

2

1

32

82

se

205

co

205

ip

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

139

2

1

33

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

140

2

1

5

5

cn

202

co

202

co

1993

1

sd

su

2

5

80

cb

202

co

202

dp

1993

1

fb

fa

141

29

1

51

33

cn

211

ip

211

co

1994

15

sd

su

142

3

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

1

un

su

143

2

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

op

1994

15

un

su

144

5

1

55

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1994

1

sd

su

145

1

1

33

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

1993

33

sd

su

146

10

1

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

5

sd

su

2

33

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1993

5

sd

su

3

33

82

cb

211

co

211

dp

1993

44

sd

su

147

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

148

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

149

5

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1993

1

sd

su

2

5

5

fd

202

co

202

co

1993

1

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

1

sd

su

2

11

80

fd

203

co

203

dp

1994

1

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

fo

su

150

151

2

1

512

2

31

31

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

fo

su

3

31

31

se

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

fo

su

152

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

37

sd

su

153

8

1

99

80

cb

203

co

203

dp

1994

1

sd

su

154

2

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

155

2

1

33

33

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1994

15

sd

su

156

14

1

51

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

157

1

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

su

158

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1993

1

fb

su

2

71

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1993

1

sd

su

3

5

5

cn

202

co

202

co

1993

1

sd

su

159

1

1

11

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

160

5

1

43

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

161

3

1

33

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

162

11

1

33

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

31

sd

un

2

64

33

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

sd

su

1

33

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1993

5

sd

su

2

33

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1993

1

sd

su

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

163

164

3

1

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 7

Table K.7. Coding table for period 7.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actro Aud Pwr

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss Leg

Imp

1

1

1

46

51

an

202

ip

202

ip

1994

13

sd

su

2

19

1

41

80

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1995

44

sd

su

2

39

80

cb

204

ip

204

dp

1995

42

sd

su

513

3

31

39

se

209

co

209

ip

1995

15

sd

su

4

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

1995

16

sd

su

5

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1995

32

sd

su

6

6

46

se

202

ip

202

ip

1995

47

sd

su

3

28

1

41

48

an

206

co

206

ip

1996

44

sd

su

4

24

1

41

80

cb

203

ip

203

dp

1997

44

sd

su

5

283

1

69

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

33

sd

su

2

51

69

cn

211

op

211

co

1996

33

sd

su

6

6

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

33

sd

su

7

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

44

sd

su

8

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

15

fo

fa

2

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

1997

15

fo

fa

9

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

15

sd

un

10

5

1

32

51

an

205

op

205

ip

1997

10

sd

su

2

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1996

34

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

34

sd

su

3

32

93

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

34

sd

su

4

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

5

52

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

34

fo

fa

11

7

12

7

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

sd

su

13

5

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

15

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

34

sd

su

3

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1997

10

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

3

52

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

14

9

15

7

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

44

sd

su

16

6

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

17

5

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

514

18

6

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sc

su

19

5

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sc

su

2

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

fo

fa

20

7

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

21

7

1

52

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1996

34

fo

fa

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

33

sd

su

3

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

44

sd

su

4

32

32

se

205

co

205

ip

1996

34

sd

su

1

32

48

cn

210

ip

210

co

1996

44

sd

su

2

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1996

3

sd

su

3

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

4

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

10

un

su

1

32

31

fd

209

ip

209

co

1996

15

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

34

sd

su

3

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

44

sd

su

2

51

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

15

fo

fa

3

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1996

15

fo

fa

4

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

44

un

su

3

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

15

sd

su

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1996

34

fo

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1996

34

sd

su

3

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

sd

su

4

52

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

34

fo

fa

5

71

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

29

fo

fa

1

48

32

fd

210

co

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

44

un

su

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

10

11

10

7

3

6

7

515

29

30

31

32

5

1

5

4

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

2

52

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

1

32

32

fd

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

2

71

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

1

77

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

15

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

30

sc

su

33

4

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1996

30

un

su

34

4

1

32

82

fd

205

co

205

dp

1996

30

sd

su

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

30

sd

su

3

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

10

un

su

4

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

5

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1996

36

un

su

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

34

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

sd

un

3

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

6

51

an

202

ip

202

ip

1997

48

sd

su

2

6

51

se

202

ip

202

ip

1997

47

sd

su

3

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1997

44

sd

su

35

36

4

6

37

4

1

26

51

se

207

co

207

ip

1997

13

sd

su

38

4

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

1

72

48

se

203

op

203

ip

1994

44

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

39

7

40

8

1

32

13

se

205

co

205

ip

1996

9

sd

su

41

17

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

11

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1995

15

sd

su

3

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1995

15

sd

su

516

42

4

1

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1995

30

sd

su

43

2

1

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1994

44

sd

su

2

13

48

an

203

ip

203

ip

1994

44

sd

su

44

1

1

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

45

9

1

13

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1995

9

sd

su

2

32

13

se

205

co

205

ip

1995

9

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

fo

su

2

51

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

36

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

34

fo

un

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

34

fo

su

3

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

34

sd

su

46

47

48

1

1

1

49

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1996

15

un

un

50

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

fo

fa

51

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

32

sd

su

2

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

1997

32

sd

su

3

71

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1997

32

sd

su

4

49

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

1997

32

sd

su

5

31

48

se

209

co

209

ip

1997

44

sd

su

6

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1997

12

sd

su

52

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

21

sd

su

53

3

1

13

48

an

210

co

210

ip

1995

44

sd

su

54

4

1

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1995

15

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

34

fo

fa

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

15

sd

su

2

32

77

se

205

co

205

ip

1995

30

un

su

3

48

82

fd

210

co

210

dp

1995

44

sd

su

1

31

93

fd

209

co

209

op

1996

15

fo

fa

2

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

11

fo

fa

55

56

4

4

517

57

58

59

5

4

3

3

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

30

un

su

2

48

82

fd

210

co

210

dp

1995

44

sd

su

1

4

5

cn

202

co

202

co

1995

49

un

un

2

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

34

fo

fa

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

11

sd

su

2

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1995

44

fo

su

60

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

61

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

44

un

un

62

1

1

14

48

an

203

co

203

ip

1997

44

fo

su

63

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

21

fo

un

2

71

48

cn

210

op

210

op

1997

44

fo

su

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

34

sd

su

2

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1995

34

sd

su

3

32

51

se

205

co

205

ip

1995

34

sd

su

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1995

34

un

un

2

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1994

34

sd

su

1

48

51

fd

210

co

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

2

48

51

an

210

ip

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

3

48

48

cn

210

co

210

co

1996

44

sd

su

64

65

66

1

9

8

67

7

1

48

51

an

210

ip

210

ip

1996

44

un

su

68

7

1

32

48

fd

209

op

209

co

1996

44

fo

un

69

8

1

48

51

fd

210

co

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

70

9

1

48

51

an

210

co

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

71

8

1

48

51

an

210

co

210

ip

1996

44

sd

su

2

51

48

cn

210

ip

210

co

1996

44

fo

su

1

11

48

se

203

co

203

ip

1997

44

sd

su

2

51

48

cn

210

op

210

co

1997

44

sd

fa

3

48

51

fd

210

co

210

op

1997

44

sd

su

1

48

48

fd

210

co

210

co

1995

44

sd

su

72

73

14

1

518

74

1

1

48

48

an

210

co

210

co

1995

44

un

su

75

2

1

48

48

cn

210

op

210

co

1994

44

sd

su

76

3

1

32

48

se

205

co

205

ip

1996

44

sd

su

77

3

1

74

48

cn

210

op

210

co

1995

44

sd

su

78

2

1

48

48

cn

210

co

210

co

1995

44

sd

su

79

7

1

48

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

44

sd

su

80

1

1

48

48

fd

210

co

210

ip

1995

44

sd

su

2

48

105

cb

210

co

210

dp

1995

44

un

su

3

48

74

se

210

co

210

ip

1995

44

sd

su

4

48

48

cn

210

op

210

co

1995

44

sd

su

81

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

fo

fa

82

3

1

16

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1997

44

sd

su

83

1

1

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1995

44

sd

su

84

16

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

10

fo

su

2

52

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

fo

su

3

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

30

fo

su

85

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

15

sd

su

86

11

1

32

41

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

44

sd

su

87

5

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

2

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

88

19

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1995

34

sd

su

89

15

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

34

sd

fa

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1995

34

fo

fa

3

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1995

44

sd

su

4

32

72

cn

211

op

211

co

1995

44

sd

su

90

9

1

32

51

se

205

co

205

ip

1996

10

fb

su

91

13

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

30

sd

su

92

2

1

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1994

15

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1994

34

sd

su

1

46

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1995

30

sd

su

93

2

519

94

2

1

6

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

95

2

1

32

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1996

36

sd

su

2

52

51

fd

206

co

206

ip

1996

36

sd

su

96

8

1

46

39

an

206

ip

206

ip

1994

41

un

su

97

2

1

6

51

an

202

ip

202

ip

1995

15

sd

su

2

46

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1996

36

sd

su

98

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1995

34

sd

su

99

1

1

32

13

fd

205

co

205

ip

1995

12

sd

su

2

32

13

se

205

co

205

ip

1995

12

sd

su

100

13

1

46

38

cn

206

co

206

co

1997

36

sd

un

101

1

1

51

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

sd

su

102

1

1

32

31

fd

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

sd

su

103

1

1

32

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1997

36

sd

su

104

1

1

32

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1997

36

sd

su

105

1

1

32

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1997

36

sd

su

106

5

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

107

2

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1997

36

sd

un

108

1

1

51

51

fd

206

co

206

co

1997

30

sd

su

109

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

30

sd

su

110

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

30

sd

su

2

32

75

cn

212

op

212

co

1997

30

sd

su

1

74

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1994

34

sd

su

2

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

34

fo

su

111

3

112

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

30

fo

un

113

1

1

52

32

fd

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

114

3

1

43

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

33

sd

su

115

2

1

43

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

116

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

34

sd

su

117

3

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

34

sd

su

520

118

5

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

fo

un

119

2

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

34

sd

su

120

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

15

sd

su

121

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

15

sd

su

122

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

11

sd

su

123

1

1

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sd

su

124

1

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

36

fo

fa

125

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

11

sd

su

126

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

34

sd

su

127

1

1

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1996

30

sd

su

128

1

1

32

75

cn

212

op

212

co

1995

15

sd

su

129

4

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

un

130

3

1

64

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1994

34

sd

un

131

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

11

sd

su

132

1

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

133

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

134

3

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

135

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

136

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

137

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

138

1

1

32

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

30

fo

fa

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1997

36

sd

su

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1995

15

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1995

15

sd

su

3

31

32

an

209

ip

209

ip

1995

11

sd

su

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

139

140

141

3

1

1

521

142

1

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

143

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

sd

su

144

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

15

fo

un

145

1

1

51

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

36

fo

fa

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

30

sd

su

146

2

1

26

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

147

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

fo

fa

148

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

12

sd

su

149

1

1

51

32

fd

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

150

1

1

51

32

fd

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

151

1

1

13

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

152

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

30

fo

su

153

1

1

74

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

30

sd

su

154

4

1

74

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

2

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

fo

un

155

2

1

26

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

30

fo

un

156

5

1

71

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

30

fo

fa

157

1

1

52

51

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

fo

fa

158

4

1

52

51

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

fo

un

159

1

1

52

51

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

fo

fa

160

1

1

51

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

fo

fa

161

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

162

1

1

26

74

an

207

co

207

ip

1997

30

sd

un

2

74

27

cn

207

ip

207

co

1997

36

fo

un

163

5

1

51

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

36

fo

fa

164

2

1

55

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1994

15

sd

su

165

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1995

30

sd

su

166

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1995

15

sd

su

167

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

15

fo

su

168

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

15

sd

fa

522

2

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1995

15

fo

su

169

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

15

fo

fa

170

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

15

sd

fa

171

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

10

sd

su

172

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

173

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

174

1

1

26

51

an

207

co

207

ip

1995

11

fo

su

2

52

51

fd

206

co

206

ip

1995

36

sd

su

3

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1995

11

fo

su

175

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

un

176

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

15

sd

su

177

1

1

51

51

fd

206

co

206

ip

1997

15

sd

su

2

51

28

cn

207

ip

207

co

1997

15

sd

su

3

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

11

sd

su

178

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

15

sd

su

179

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

34

fo

un

180

2

1

52

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1996

30

fo

un

181

3

1

52

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1997

36

fo

fa

182

3

1

74

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1997

30

sd

su

183

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

fo

un

184

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1994

34

sd

su

185

1

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

fb

su

186

3

1

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

2

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

187

2

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

188

2

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

189

5

1

32

58

cn

211

op

211

co

1997

36

sd

un

190

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

30

sd

su

191

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

30

sd

su

192

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

11

sd

su

523

193

1

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

194

11

1

32

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1995

30

sd

su

195

1

1

32

28

cn

207

op

207

co

1997

36

sd

su

196

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

30

sd

su

197

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

ip

1997

34

sd

su

198

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

11

sd

su

199

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

sd

un

200

3

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

34

sd

su

201

3

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1997

34

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

34

sd

su

3

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

34

sd

su

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

36

sd

su

202

1

203

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

fo

un

204

4

1

32

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1997

36

sd

su

205

3

1

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1996

12

sd

su

206

1

1

32

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1997

36

sd

su

207

3

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

34

sd

un

208

1

1

13

16

cn

203

ip

203

ip

1995

44

sd

su

209

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1996

11

sd

su

210

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

15

sd

su

211

1

1

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

10

sd

su

212

3

1

13

11

cn

203

ip

203

co

1996

3

sd

un

213

1

1

32

27

cn

207

op

207

co

1996

13

sd

un

214

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

215

1

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

1996

30

sd

su

216

2

1

32

75

cn

212

op

212

co

1996

34

sd

su

217

1

1

32

75

cn

212

op

212

co

1997

36

fo

un

218

2

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

219

2

1

32

51

fd

205

ip

205

ip

1997

12

fo

fa

524

220

2

1

32

51

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1995

24

sd

su

221

1

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

12

sd

su

222

2

1

32

51

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

11

sd

su

223

3

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

224

1

1

17

51

cn

206

op

206

co

1997

36

sd

su

225

1

1

51

51

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

fo

un

226

1

1

31

51

fd

209

co

209

ip

1994

15

sc

su

2

23

5

cn

202

op

202

co

1994

15

sd

su

227

3

1

5

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1995

11

fo

un

228

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

fa

229

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1996

36

fo

fa

230

1

1

26

27

cn

207

ip

207

co

1997

36

un

un

231

3

1

52

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

15

sd

un

232

4

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

233

2

1

26

51

an

207

co

207

ip

1997

36

fo

un

234

1

1

16

13

se

203

ip

203

ip

1996

3

sd

su

235

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

23

sd

su

2

51

51

fd

206

co

206

co

1996

23

sd

su

236

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

237

2

1

52

48

cn

210

ip

210

co

1997

44

fo

un

238

2

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

10

sd

un

239

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

fo

un

240

17

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

241

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

242

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

243

1

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

fo

su

244

1

1

26

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

un

245

1

1

26

27

cn

207

ip

207

co

1997

36

sd

su

2

26

27

cn

207

ip

207

co

1997

36

sd

su

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

246

1

525

247

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

248

1

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

249

2

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

9

fo

un

250

1

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

251

4

1

71

51

cn

205

op

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

252

8

1

58

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1997

36

fo

su

253

19

1

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

254

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

1

fo

un

2

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

1995

15

sd

su

255

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

sd

su

256

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

15

sd

su

257

25

1

75

87

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

48

sd

su

258

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

15

sd

su

259

4

1

75

103

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

42

sd

su

260

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

fo

un

261

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

un

su

262

4

1

31

31

cn

209

co

209

co

1997

34

sd

su

263

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

264

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

34

sd

su

265

12

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

30

fo

fa

266

2

1

32

64

cn

211

op

211

co

1994

34

sd

su

267

5

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

34

fo

su

268

3

1

6

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

1996

36

sd

su

269

3

1

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1996

5

sd

su

270

5

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

271

3

1

6

51

an

202

ip

202

ip

1995

15

un

su

272

3

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1995

11

sd

su

273

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1995

34

sd

su

274

3

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1995

15

un

un

526

275

2

1

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1994

44

sd

su

276

4

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1997

30

sd

su

277

1

1

13

13

an

203

ip

203

ip

1996

3

sd

su

278

22

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

279

3

1

11

13

se

203

co

203

ip

1996

32

sd

su

280

4

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

281

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1996

36

sd

su

282

1

1

48

51

fd

210

co

210

ip

1995

44

sd

su

283

12

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

1995

38

sd

su

284

3

1

52

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

un

285

2

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1994

34

sd

su

286

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1995

34

sd

un

287

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

15

sd

su

288

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

fo

fa

289

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

fo

fa

290

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

1

sd

su

291

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

sd

su

292

2

1

31

80

cb

209

co

209

dp

1996

15

un

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

1996

11

sd

su

3

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

11

sd

su

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1996

36

sd

su

2

32

13

cn

203

op

203

ip

1996

5

sd

su

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

2

11

48

fd

203

co

203

ip

1996

44

sd

su

3

11

48

se

203

co

203

ip

1996

44

sd

su

293

294

3

2

295

2

1

13

48

an

203

ip

203

ip

1996

44

sd

su

296

3

1

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1996

15

sd

su

297

3

1

32

51

an

205

co

205

ip

1996

36

sd

su

298

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

11

fo

fa

299

4

1

32

106

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1997

30

un

su

527

300

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

fo

un

301

2

1

48

80

cb

210

co

210

dp

1997

44

sd

su

302

2

1

48

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1997

44

sd

su

303

2

1

72

48

se

211

co

211

ip

1997

44

sd

su

304

3

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1996

11

sd

su

305

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

306

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

307

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

308

2

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

1997

36

sd

su

309

1

1

32

80

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

310

1

1

32

80

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

44

sd

su

311

2

1

32

80

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

1997

36

sd

su

3

32

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1997

36

sd

su

312

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

313

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

314

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

315

1

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

316

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

36

sd

su

317

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

44

sd

su

318

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

44

sd

su

319

1

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1997

44

sd

su

320

4

1

32

82

cb

205

co

205

dp

1996

36

sd

su

321

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

fo

fa

322

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1997

36

sd

su

323

1

1

13

48

an

203

ip

203

ip

1995

44

sd

su

324

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1995

15

sd

su

325

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1994

15

fo

fa

326

1

1

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1996

15

sd

su

327

26

1

65

65

cn

211

ip

211

co

1997

48

sd

su

528

2

65

65

cn

211

ip

211

ip

1997

48

sd

su

3

65

65

fd

211

co

211

co

1997

48

sd

su

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 8

Table K.8. Coding table for period 8.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Acto Aud Pwr

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

2

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2011

33

sd

su

2

242

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2001

33

sd

su

3

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2001

33

sd

su

4

1

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2001

10

un

su

5

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2009

10

un

un

6

4

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1998

33

un

un

7

6

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1999

33

un

un

8

4

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

1999

30

un

un

9

4

1

32

82

cb

205

ip

205

dp

2000

33

un

un

10

1

1

48

48

an

210

co

210

ip

1999

44

sd

su

11

53

1

17

16

fd

203

co

203

co

1998

6

sd

su

12

59

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2008

33

sd

un

13

3

1

32

28

cn

207

op

207

co

2001

33

sd

su

14

1

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2005

11

sd

su

15

16

1

31

41

se

209

co

209

ip

2000

15

sd

su

2

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

2000

47

sd

su

3

11

41

se

203

co

203

ip

2000

32

sd

su

4

20

39

se

204

co

204

ip

2000

13

sd

su

16

31

1

39

39

cn

206

co

206

co

2010

23

sd

su

17

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2000

39

sd

su

529

18

85

1

74

39

cn

206

op

206

co

2009

23

sd

su

19

6

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

49

fo

fa

2

5

96

fd

202

co

202

dp

2009

49

sd

su

3

39

39

fd

206

co

206

ip

2009

23

un

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2011

13

sd

un

2

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

2011

16

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2003

49

fo

un

2

32

80

cb

205

co

205

dp

2003

49

fo

un

20

21

3

2

22

4

1

20

39

fd

204

co

204

ip

2011

16

sd

su

23

10

1

77

39

se

212

co

212

ip

2002

16

sd

su

24

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2011

10

sd

su

25

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

un

un

26

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1999

32

sd

un

27

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

33

sd

su

28

5

1

32

6

cn

202

ip

202

ip

1998

53

sd

su

29

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1999

32

sd

su

2

11

48

fd

203

co

203

ip

1999

32

sd

su

3

11

48

se

203

co

203

ip

1999

32

sd

su

30

6

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

33

sd

un

31

2

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

2000

33

un

su

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

2000

33

sd

su

32

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2000

33

sd

su

33

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2000

33

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2000

33

sd

un

34

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

33

sd

su

35

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

1998

33

sd

su

36

6

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

10

sd

un

37

15

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2007

10

un

un

38

1

1

109

72

cn

211

op

211

co

2000

44

sd

un

39

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2008

44

sd

su

530

40

1

1

41

48

an

206

co

206

ip

1998

44

sd

su

41

10

1

48

82

cb

210

co

210

dp

1999

44

sd

su

42

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2007

15

un

un

2

39

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2007

15

sd

un

43

2

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2003

34

un

un

44

19

1

5

96

fd

202

co

202

dp

2003

48

un

su

2

6

51

an

202

ip

202

ip

2003

49

un

un

45

7

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

10

fo

un

46

15

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2008

34

fo

fa

47

7

1

48

97

cn

202

op

202

ip

2002

44

sd

su

2

48

48

cn

210

op

210

co

2002

44

sd

su

48

2

1

71

27

cn

207

op

207

co

2005

24

fo

fa

49

1

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

2011

30

sd

su

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2011

30

sd

su

50

2

1

6

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

2005

48

un

su

51

9

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

10

sd

fa

52

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2004

34

fo

un

53

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2010

34

fo

fa

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2010

34

fo

su

54

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2004

34

sd

un

55

1

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2002

10

fo

un

56

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

2001

10

un

un

57

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

2001

38

sd

su

58

4

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2005

34

sd

su

59

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2003

34

sd

un

60

1

1

32

48

cn

210

co

210

co

1999

44

sd

un

61

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

1998

10

sd

su

62

1

1

48

14

cn

203

ip

203

co

1999

44

sd

su

63

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

15

sd

un

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2009

15

sd

un

531

64

65

66

67

68

69

2

2

2

2

1

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

un

un

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2009

34

sd

un

3

5

96

fd

202

co

202

dp

2009

49

fo

un

4

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2009

34

fo

un

5

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2009

34

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

15

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2010

33

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2003

49

un

un

2

5

96

fd

202

co

202

dp

2003

49

un

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2002

13

sd

su

2

100

100

cn

211

co

211

co

2002

13

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1999

44

un

un

2

49

11

cn

203

op

203

co

1999

44

fo

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

49

un

un

2

5

6

se

202

co

202

ip

2010

49

fo

un

70

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

23

sd

su

71

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2003

49

fo

un

2

5

6

se

202

co

202

ip

2003

49

fo

fa

3

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2003

49

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

fo

fa

2

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2009

34

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

fo

fa

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2009

34

sd

su

3

32

32

se

205

co

205

ip

2009

34

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2006

34

fo

un

2

78

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2006

34

fo

un

3

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2006

15

sd

un

4

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2006

15

un

su

5

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2006

34

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

34

sd

su

72

73

74

75

2

1

2

2

532

76

77

78

1

3

1

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2010

34

sd

un

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2010

34

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

34

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2010

34

fo

fa

3

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2010

34

sd

su

4

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2010

34

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2011

14

sd

su

2

49

22

cn

204

op

204

co

2011

14

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2007

15

sd

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2007

15

sd

su

3

39

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2007

15

sd

su

79

3

1

26

51

se

207

co

207

ip

2010

13

un

su

80

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

fo

un

2

26

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2009

34

fo

un

3

51

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2009

34

fo

un

4

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2009

34

fo

un

5

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2009

34

un

un

81

5

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

2001

13

sd

un

82

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

sd

un

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2009

15

sd

su

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2009

15

sd

su

4

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2009

34

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2007

15

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2007

15

sd

su

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2007

15

sd

su

83

1

84

1

1

74

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

23

sd

su

85

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2004

44

fo

un

2

107

95

fd

201

co

201

dp

2003

25

sd

su

3

108

3

cn

201

op

201

co

2003

25

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2005

23

fo

un

86

2

533

2

11

11

cn

203

co

203

co

2005

44

fo

un

87

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2004

10

un

un

88

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1999

15

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1999

15

sd

su

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

1999

15

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

15

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2010

15

sd

su

3

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2010

15

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

fo

fa

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2009

34

fo

fa

3

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2009

34

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1998

15

un

su

2

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

1998

15

sd

su

3

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

1998

15

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

15

un

un

2

31

39

se

209

co

209

ip

2010

15

sd

su

3

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2010

15

sd

su

4

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2010

15

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1998

34

fo

fa

2

52

31

cn

209

op

209

co

1998

34

fo

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

un

un

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2009

34

sd

su

3

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2009

34

sd

un

4

5

6

se

202

co

202

ip

2009

49

un

su

89

90

91

92

93

94

2

1

1

1

1

2

95

55

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2002

52

sd

fa

96

1

1

14

48

an

203

co

203

ip

1998

44

sd

su

2

48

48

an

206

co

206

ip

1998

44

sd

su

3

48

48

se

210

co

210

ip

1998

44

sd

su

97

2

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2000

39

sd

su

98

1

1

10

110

se

203

ip

203

ip

1999

40

sd

su

534

99

2

2

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

1999

40

sd

su

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2010

34

fo

un

2

6

32

fd

202

ip

202

ip

2010

49

fo

un

100

2

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2006

52

sd

su

101

16

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2002

52

sd

un

102

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2003

52

sd

fa

103

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2003

52

sd

fa

104

3

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2003

52

sd

fa

105

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2008

23

sd

un

106

1

1

32

32

fd

210

ip

210

ip

1998

44

sd

su

2

48

32

an

210

co

210

ip

1998

44

sd

su

107

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2001

38

sd

su

108

1

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2000

24

sd

fa

2

26

27

cn

207

co

207

co

2000

13

sd

fa

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2009

34

sd

su

2

31

32

fd

209

co

209

ip

2009

34

sd

su

3

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2009

34

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2003

52

un

un

109

110

2

6

CODING TABLE FOR PERIOD 9

Table K.9. Coding table for period 9.

No. Pgs. Sgmt Actr Aud Pwr

Actr Actr
Crc Pos

Aud
Crc

Aud
Pos

Yr

Iss

Leg

Imp

1

1

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2015

15

sd

su

2

27

1

39

41

fd

206

co

206

ip

2013

33

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2013

33

sd

su

3

113

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

2014

33

sd

un

535

3

4

5

6

2

2

3

1

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

52

sd

su

2

90

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2015

48

un

un

3

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2015

52

fo

un

4

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2015

15

sd

su

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

30

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

52

fo

un

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2013

38

un

su

2

113

113

an

211

co

211

co

2013

38

sd

su

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

30

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

ip

205

ip

2015

30

sd

su

7

1

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2015

52

un

su

8

4

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2014

38

sd

su

2

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

9

2

1

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

2014

38

sd

su

10

2

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

30

sd

su

11

1

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2013

38

sd

su

12

4

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2014

38

sd

su

2

6

32

se

202

ip

202

ip

2014

49

fo

su

3

26

51

fd

207

co

207

ip

2013

14

sd

su

4

71

113

cn

211

op

211

co

2014

38

sd

un

13

2

1

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

2014

38

sd

su

14

4

1

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

2

71

113

cn

211

op

211

ip

2014

38

sd

su

1

32

79

cn

213

co

213

co

2013

33

un

un

2

31

31

cn

209

co

209

co

2012

33

sd

su

3

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2012

33

sd

su

4

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

2013

47

sd

su

15

24

16

4

1

113

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

2014

38

sd

un

17

4

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2013

14

sd

su

2

26

51

fd

207

co

207

ip

2013

14

sd

su

536

18

1

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

sd

su

19

5

1

5

32

se

202

co

202

ip

2016

49

un

un

2

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2016

34

fo

un

3

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2016

34

un

un

20

2

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

su

21

5

1

5

32

se

202

co

202

ip

2016

49

sd

su

2

77

32

cn

205

op

205

ip

2016

23

sd

un

3

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2016

34

sd

su

4

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2016

34

sd

su

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

ip

2016

13

sd

su

2

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2016

15

sd

su

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

ip

2016

13

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

2016

30

fo

fa

22

23

9

17

24

4

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

ip

2016

23

sd

un

25

3

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2015

52

fo

su

2

31

32

sb

209

co

209

ip

2015

11

fb

su

3

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2015

11

fb

su

1

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2015

52

un

su

2

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2015

52

fo

fa

26

5

27

7

1

32

32

cn

209

ip

209

co

2015

52

un

un

28

1

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

sd

su

29

1

1

113

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

2014

38

sd

su

30

5

1

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

31

3

1

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

32

19

1

6

41

se

202

ip

202

ip

2015

54

sd

su

2

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2013

23

sd

su

3

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2012

38

fo

fa

4

32

32

se

205

co

205

ip

2015

34

sd

su

33

3

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

su

34

1

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2016

30

sd

su

537

35

14

1

32

31

cn

209

ip

209

co

2015

15

sd

su

2

6

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

2015

48

sd

su

3

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

2015

24

sd

su

4

41

51

an

206

ip

206

ip

2015

23

sd

su

36

18

1

97

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

2015

48

sd

su

37

4

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2015

52

fo

fa

38

2

1

113

113

cn

211

op

211

ip

2014

52

fo

fa

39

8

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

fa

40

2

1

32

51

an

205

ip

205

ip

2012

39

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2012

38

sd

su

1

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2012

33

fb

su

2

51

51

fd

206

co

206

ip

2013

39

sd

su

3

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

su

4

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2015

52

fo

su

5

111

50

cn

206

co

206

co

2015

23

sd

su

6

6

96

ab

202

ip

202

dp

2015

24

sd

su

41

20

42

5

1

113

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

2014

32

sd

fa

43

6

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2016

30

sd

su

44

4

1

48

48

an

210

co

210

ip

2015

44

sd

su

45

9

1

32

32

se

205

ip

205

ip

2015

15

un

su

2

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

un

46

3

1

52

51

an

206

co

206

ip

2015

23

sd

su

47

5

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2013

34

fb

fa

48

8

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

30

fo

su

2

32

32

sb

205

co

205

co

2014

34

fb

fa

49

7

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

30

sd

su

50

8

1

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2015

52

fo

su

51

5

1

51

29

cn

208

op

208

ip

2015

39

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2015

33

sd

su

3

32

32

an

205

ip

205

ip

2015

15

sd

su

538

52

10

1

32

32

cn

205

ip

205

co

2015

33

sd

su

53

6

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

54

6

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2013

38

sd

su

55

4

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2013

38

sd

su

56

1

1

31

31

cn

209

co

209

co

2012

30

sd

su

2

31

32

an

209

co

209

ip

2012

11

sd

su

57

40

1

112

113

an

211

co

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

58

38

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

59

3

1

113

80

cb

211

ip

211

dp

2014

38

un

su

60

37

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

61

4

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

62

5

1

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

ip

2014

38

sd

un

2

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

2

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2013

38

un

su

2

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2013

38

sd

un

1

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

38

sd

su

2

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

3

113

113

cn

211

op

211

ip

2014

38

sd

un

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

2

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

sd

un

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

2

113

113

cn

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

un

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

1

113

113

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

un

su

2

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

sd

un

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2014

38

sd

su

2

113

80

cb

211

co

211

dp

2014

38

un

un

3

52

51

cn

206

co

206

co

2014

38

un

un

63

64

65

66

67

7

5

9

8

17

68
69

70

6

9

539

4

31

39

se

209

co

209

ip

2014

15

sd

un

5

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2014

15

sd

un

6

26

51

fd

207

co

207

ip

2014

14

sd

un

71

4

1

113

27

cn

207

op

207

co

2014

38

sd

un

72

4

1

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2014

30

sd

su

2

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2014

15

fo

su

3

32

32

fd

205

co

205

co

2014

15

sd

fa

4

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2014

15

fb

su

5

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2014

15

sd

su

6

113

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2014

52

fo

su

73

3

1

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

2014

38

sd

su

74

1

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2014

38

un

un

75

69

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2012

38

un

un

76

2

1

26

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2014

38

fo

un

77

8

1

31

80

cb

209

co

209

dp

2014

15

sd

su

2

31

31

fd

209

co

209

ip

2014

15

sd

su

3

31

32

se

209

co

209

ip

2014

15

sd

su

78

2

1

31

31

cn

209

co

209

co

2011

30

sd

su

79

14

1

31

74

cn

212

op

212

co

2011

30

sd

su

2

74

31

cn

209

op

209

co

2011

30

sd

su

80

50

1

74

113

cn

211

op

211

co

2014

30

sd

su

81

2

1

74

32

cn

205

op

205

co

2012

30

sd

su

2

6

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

2012

48

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

co

2013

39

sd

su

2

32

32

cn

205

co

205

co

2013

39

sd

su

1

6

32

an

202

ip

202

ip

2012

48

sd

su

2

6

46

an

202

ip

202

ip

2012

48

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2015

30

sd

su

2

32

32

fd

205

co

205

ip

2015

30

sd

su

1

51

114

cn

213

co

213

ip

2013

33

sd

su

82

83

84

85

3

1

9

4

540

86

87

88

89

1

3

3

5

1

51

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

38

fo

un

2

113

51

an

211

co

211

ip

2014

38

fo

su

1

112

113

cn

211

op

211

co

2014

33

sd

un

2

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

33

sd

un

1

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

2

113

113

cn

211

op

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

1

74

113

cn

211

op

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

2

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

3

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

90

3

1

113

113

cn

211

co

211

co

2014

33

sd

un

91

5

1

113

113

cn

211

ip

211

co

2014

33

sd

su

92

1

1

51

80

cb

206

co

206

dp

2014

38

sd

su

93

5

1

75

80

cb

212

ip

212

dp

2014

14

fo

su

2

26

51

fd

207

co

207

ip

2014

14

fo

fa

3

26

51

fd

207

co

207

ip

2014

14

sd

su

1

32

32

an

205

co

205

ip

2014

34

un

un

94

4

541

APPENDIX L: DATA DISPLAYS BY PERIOD

PERIOD 1: 1924–1945

Events. A total of 121 communicative events were identified in period 1, including 2
events from 1923 that provide context for the case.

The communicative events remained

relatively constant from 1924 to 1939. Communication then surged in 1940 with N=40 events.
This was the year when civil society groups jointly petitioned the Commissioners for a county
library system (see section 4.1.2.1). Following the peak of activity in 1940, communicative
events dwindled. No communicative events occurred from 1942 to 1945 during the Second
World War (see Figure L.1).

542

45

40

40
30
25
20

0

0

0

0

1942

1943

1944

1945

4

1940

1939

4

1941

5

1938

1931

1930

1929

1928

1925

0

0

3

1937

0

1

1936

2

1935

2

7

1934

2

8

1933

2

1927

2

1924

5

8

1926

8

10

13

10

1932

15

1923

Number of events

35

Year

Figure L.1. Number of communicative events per year in period 1.

Issues. The most-discussed issue in period 1 was countywide system formation and
unification (N=52), followed by merger of the old Allegheny library with the city system
(N=19). The city library budget (N=16) and city-county consolidation (N=14) were also salient
issues during period 1 (see Figure L.2).

543

Issue name

Local library administration
New deal funding
Miscellaneous
Librarian wages
Local funding from state
County department funding
North Side Allegheny library governance
Tax increase
PA state code and state plan
City-county consolidation
City library budget
Pittsburgh city-Allegheny City library merger
Countywide system formation and unification

1
1
1
1
1
2
3
4
6
14
16
19
52
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Issue number

Figure L.2. Issue counts in period 1.

The issue of countywide system formation and unification was relatively consistent over
time, but it became especially prevalent in 1940 (see Figure L.3). The issue of the old Allegheny
library merger was also relatively constant over time, but it peaked in 1938. These findings are
consistent with the chronology developed in section 4.1. In 1938, civil society groups gathered
petitions for the merger of the old Allegheny library, but in 1939 the mayor failed to act on the
issue. This explains why the issue peaked in 1938 but disappeared afterward. In 1940, civil
society groups petitioned for a countywide system, but their proposals were rejected by the
County Commissioners in 1941. This explains the sharp rise in countywide system formation
and unification as an issue in 1940 and its rapid fall in 1941 and thereafter.

544

45
40

4
1

35

25
20

32

15

1944

1943

4

1942

2
1

1941

1
3

1940

1927

3

1939

1926

1

2
2
1

1938

1925

2

1
2

1937

1924

1

5

1936

1
1

4

10

1
3
1
2

1935

2

1
1
1

1934

2

3

1933

1
1

5

1
2

1932

2

1923

0

5

1928

5

2

1931

1

1930

10

1929

Number of issues

30

Year
City library budget

City-county consolidation

County department funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Librarian wages

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Miscellaneous

New Deal funding

North Side Allegheny library governance

PA state code and state plan

Pittsburgh city-Allegeny city library merger

Tax increase

Figure L.3. Issue counts per year in period 1.

Actors and audiences. The Civic Club of Allegheny County was the most prevalent
actor (N=46) in period 1, followed by the Pennsylvania General Assembly (N=12), the Board of

545

County Commissioners (N=11), and mass media outlets (N=11). Figure L.4 also shows that

Actor name

several other civil society, government, and private actors were also active during period 1.

Pennsylvania Economy League
Private civil society actor
County departments
CLP committee
Civil society - other
voters of PA
Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs
Civic Works Admin. Local Works Div.
City of Pittsburgh
Voters of Allegheny County
Building Owners and Managers Association
PA governor
Metropolitan Plan Commission
Ralph Munn
Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher…
Multiple civil society groups
Mass media outlets
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Civic Club of Allegheny County
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
5
8
8
11
11
12
46
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Actor count

Figure L.4. Actor counts in period 1.

Figure L.5 shows that the Civic Club of Allegheny County maintained a relatively
constant presence throughout period 1. In 1940, the Civic Club was tied with the Board of
County Commissioners for the most transmissions in a single year (N=9). That same year,
multiple civil society groups (N=8), mass media outlets (N=6), and the Allegheny County
Council of Parent-Teacher Associations (N=5) were also active.
546

45
40

1

35

8

Actor count

30

6

25

1

20

9

15

1944

2
2

1943

5

1942

3

1941

1
4

1940

1937

6

1939

1936

9

1938

1

2
1

1
1
1
2

1935

1934

1933

2
3
1
1

1932

2

1
1
1
4
1

1931

4

1930

1927

1929

1
1

1
1

1
1
2
1
3

2
2
1
1
4

1928

2

2

1925

0

1
1
1

1924

5

1923

5

1926

10

Year
Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs

Board of County Commissioners

Building Owners and Managers Association

City of Pittsburgh

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Civic Works Admin. Local Works Div.

Civil society-other

CLP committee

County departments

Mass media outlets

Metropolitan Plan Commission

Multiple civil society groups

PA governor

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Private civil society actor

Ralph Munn

Voters of Allegheny County

Voters of PA

Figure L.5. Actor counts by year in period 1.

Figure L.6 shows that the most prevalent audiences in period 1 were broadcasts to
Allegheny County residents (N=23), the Board of County Commissioners (N=21), the Civic
Club of Allegheny County (N=17), and Pittsburgh City Council (N=15).

547

Audience name

Allegheny library director
Constitution of PA
School districts
Pgh. Mayor
Multiple municipalities
Allegheny County Government Study Commission
Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher…
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Civil society - other
Real Estate Board
PA governor
Ralph Munn
County departments
Pennsylvania Economy League
CLP Trustees
Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties
Multiple civil society groups
both Mayor and Council
Metropolitan Plan Commission
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pgh. City Council
Civic Club of Allegheny County
Board of County Commissioners
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0

2
2
2
2
2
3
4
5
5
8
15
17
21
23
5

10

15

20

25

Audience count

Figure L.6. Audience counts in period 1.

Figure L.7 below shows that broadcasts to Allegheny County residents occurred
relatively consistently, in 1925 (N=1), 1928 (N=1), 1929 (N=1), 1930 (N=2), 1931 (N=1), 1937
(N=1), 1938 (N=6), and 1940 (N=10). Transmissions to the Civic Club and to City Council also
spread over several years. In contrast, transmissions to the County Commissioners clustered
around 1940. These findings suggest that the Civic Club and City Council were targets for the
issue of the library merger, and that this issue was a consistent and protracted one for civil
society groups. With respect to the issue of a unified library system, the County Commissioners
548

were targeted heavily in a single burst. While neither initiative—for the library merger or for a
unified county system—were implemented during period 1, the different patterns of audience
engagement suggest that audiences may be targeted differently according to the issue, the nature
of the audience, or other factors.

45

35

1
1
3
1

30

8

25
10

20

16

Year
Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

Allegheny library director

Board of County Commissioners

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Civil society-other

CLP Trustees

Constitution of PA

County departments

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Metropolitan Plan Commission

Multiple civil society groups

Multiple municipalities

PA governor

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pgh Mayor

Pgh. City Council

Ralph Munn

Real Estate Board

School districts

Figure L.7. Audience counts by year in period 1.

549

1945

1944

1943

1942

2
1
1

1941

1
3

1940

6

1939

1937

4
1
1
1

1938

1
1
1
2

1936

1931

1

1934

1930

1

1
2

6

1933

2

1
1
2
1
1
2

1932

2
2
1
1
2
1
1

1929

1
1

1928

1925

0

2

1
2
2
1
1
1

1927

1
1

5

1926

1
1

4
1
1
1
1

1924

10

1935

15

1923

Audience counts

40

Figure L.8 shows that the Civic Club targeted more audiences than any other actor. It
targeted the Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations (N=1), the County
Commissioners (N=10), both Mayor and City Council (N=3), broadcasts to Allegheny County
residents (N=9), itself (N=6), multiple civil society groups (N=2), Pennsylvania Economy
League (N=2), Pittsburgh City Council (N=12), and Pittsburgh Mayor (N=1). These findings
suggest that the Civic Club attempted to mobilize a coalition and it attempted to influence

Actor name

governmental decision-making bodies.

County departments

1

Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs

1

Pennsylvania Economy League

1

CLP committee

1

voters of PA

1

Private civil society actor

1

Civil society-other

1

Civic Works Admin. Local Works Div.

1

City of Pittsburgh

1 1

Building Owners and Managers Association

1 1

Voters of Allegheny County

1 1

Metropolitan Plan Commission

3

PA governor

2

Ralph Munn

1

1 1 1

Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

4

Multiple Civil Society Groups

2
1 1 1 1

5

Mass media outlets

1 1 1
11

Board of County Commissioners

2

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1 1 1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

8
4

1
0

1
2

3

10
5

3
10

9
15

6
20

25

2

2

30

12
35

1
40

Audience counts
Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

Allegheny library director

Board of County Commissioners

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to Allegheny County Residents

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Civil society-other

CLP Trustees

constitution of PA

County departments

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Metropolitan Plan Commission

Multiple Civil Society Groups

Multiple municipalities

PA governor

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pgh. City Council

Pgh. Mayor

Ralph Munn

Real Estate Board

School districts

Figure L.8. Actor and audience combinations in period 1.

550

45

50

Power. Figure L.9 shows that the most prominent types of power in period 1 were
communicative power-narrowcast (N=65), followed by formal decision (N=27) and
communicative power-broadcast (N=65).

These 3 types of power occurred consistently

Power

throughout period 1 (see Figure L.10).

Backroom deals

1

Administrative-broadcast

1

Administrative-narrowcast

4

Communicative-broadcast

23

Formal decision

27

Communicative-narrowcast

65
0

10

20

30

40

Count

Figure L.9. Power counts in period 1.

551

50

60

70

45
40

5

35

25

24

20
15

2
2

1937

1938

1939

1940

1941

1945

1
1

1944

3
1

1943

6

1942

1

4
1

1936

9

2
1

1935

1934

5
1
1

1933

2

7

1932

5
1

3
4
1

1931

1
1

4

1930

1925

2

1928

1924

0

1927

1
1

5

4
3
1

1926

2

3
4
1

1923

10

1929

Power counts

30

Year
Administrative broadcast
Backroom deals
Communicative narrowcast

Administrative narrowcast
Communicative broadcast
Formal decision

Figure L.10. Power counts by year in period 1.

Figure L.11 shows actor, audience, and power combinations in period 1. Communicative
narrowcasts were sent by several notable actors.

For example, Ralph Munn transmitted

communicative narrowcasts to the Civic Club, the Mayor and City Council, and library trustees;
the Civic Club transmitted communicative narrowcasts to other civil society groups, the Mayor
and Council, and the County Commissioners; and the Allegheny County Council of ParentTeacher Associations sent communicative narrowcasts to other civil society groups, local
libraries, Ralph Munn of CLP, municipalities, and the County Commissioners. Formal decisions
were transmitted between many actor-audience pairs.

Communicative broadcasts were

transmitted primarily by mass media outlets and the Civic Club to residents of Allegheny
County.
552

vot
ers
of
PA

constitution of PA

1

Voters
of
Alleghe
ny
County

County departments

1

voters of PA

Priv
ate
civil
soci
ety
act
or Ralph Munn

voters of Allegheny County

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

1

both Mayor and Council

1

CLP Trustees

1

Ralph Munn

Pgh. City Council

Civi
c
Wo
Met
rks
rop
Pen
Ad
olit
nsyl
min
an
vani
.
Cou Ma Pla
a
Loc Civil CLP nty ss n
Eco
al soci co dep me Co
no
Wo ety- mm art dia mm
PA my
rks oth itte me outl issi Multiple Civil governo Lea Pennsylvania General
Div. er e nts ets on Society Groups
gue
Assembly
r

Private civil society actor

Pennsylvania General Assembly

2

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

County departments

1

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

1

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

1

PA governor

1

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

Metropolitan Plan Commission

Pennsylvania Economy League
PA Governor

4

both Mayor and Council

1

Metropolitan Plan Commission

1

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Multiple Civil Society Groups

2

Broadcast to Allegheny County Residents

1

Multiple Civil Society Groups

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

1

Board of County Commissioners

Metropolitan Plan Commission

5

Pennsylvania General Assembly

3

Mass Media Outlets

Broadcast to Allegheny County Residents

County departments

Board of County Commissioners

CLP committee
Civil society-other

CLP Trustees

1

School districts

1

11
1

Civil society-other

1

Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations

1

Pgh. Mayor

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Civic works Admin. Local Works Div.

Pennsylvania Economy League

Alle
ghe
ny
Fed
erat
ion
Building
of
Owners
Wo
and
Allegheny County me Board of Manage
Council of Parent- n's County
rs
City of
Teacher
Clu Commission Associat Pittsbur
Associations
bs
ers
ion
gh

Board of County Commissioners

Allegheny Federation of Women's Clubs
Allegheny County Council of ParentTeachers Associations

Actor
Administrative narrowcast

1

both Mayor and Council

1
3

Civic Club of Allegheny County

1

1

4

Broadcast to Allegheny County Residents

9

Board of County Commissioners

1

Pgh. City Council

1

Allegheny library director

1

City of Pittsburgh

Building Owners and Managers Association

2

Multiple Civil Society Groups

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Administrative broadcast

1
2

Ralph Munn

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

1

Pgh. City Council

1

Real Estate Board

1

Broadcast to Allegheny County Residents

1

9
11

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

5

Board of County Commissioners

1

Multiple Civil Society Groups

1

Local libraries in Allegheny County

1

Ralph Munn

1

Multiple municipalities

1

Board of County Commissioners

Audience
Backroom deals

3

4
0

Communicative broadcast

5

Power count

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.11. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 1.

553

10

15

Formal decision

Figure L.12 visualizes the actor-power relationships in period 1 in network graph form.
The directions of the power transmissions are shown using curved edges that flow clockwise: the
source and target of a clockwise curve indicate the actor and audience of the transmission. This
graph shows how the Civic Club was both an active sender and receiver of multiple types of
power, including communicative narrowcasts, formal decisions, and communicative broadcasts.
The graph also shows that the Pennsylvania General Assembly was both a sender of formal
decisions and a receiver of them. The Board of County Commissioners was a target for
communicative narrowcasts, and the Allegheny County Council of Parent-Teacher Associations
issued communicative narrowcasts.

554

Figure L.12. Actor-audience-power graph for period 1.

Legitimation and implementation. The large majority of communicative events in
period 1 were legitimated, either by discussion and periphery support (N=88) or by consensus
(N=15).

Other communications failed to be legitimated either due to objections (N=2) or

because they bypassed a representative public (N=1). For some communications (N=15), the
legitimation status could not be determined (see Figure L.13). In terms of implementation, N=44
events were successful, N=20 events failed, and N=57 events were undetermined (see Figure
L.14).

555

1

Failure-objections

2

Type of legitimation

Failure-bypass representative public

Success-consensus

15

Unknown

15

Success-discussion and periphery support

88
0

20

40

60

80

100

Count

Type of implementation

Figure L.13. Legitimation counts in period 1.

Failure

20

Success

44

Unknown

57

0

10

20

30

40

Count

Figure L.14. Implementation counts in period 1.

556

50

60

Figure L.15 shows that of the N=88 communicative events that were successfully
legitimated through discussion or periphery support, N=27 transmissions were successfully
implemented, N=16 failed to be implemented, and the implementation of N=45 transmissions
could not be determined.

Of the N=15 events where consensus was reached, N=13 were

successfully implemented and N=2 failed. Some events that bypassed a representative public or
had unknown legitimation were still successfully implemented, but all transmissions that failed
legitimation due to objections also failed implementation.

Unknown

12

3

Legitimation

Success-discussion and periphery support

16

Success-consensus

13

2

Failure-objection

45

27

2

Failure-bypass representative public

1
0

10

20

30

40

Counts
Implementation

Unknown

Success

Failure

Figure L.15. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 1.

557

50

Legitimation and implementation combinations by year are shown in Figure L.16.
Successes in legitimation and implementation are relatively constant from the beginning of
period 1 with some implementation failures interspersed. Implementation failures become more
pronounced in the later years of period 1, from 1938 to 1940. These years correspond to the
chronology developed in Appendix F where the Mayor and County Commissioners failed to
implement issues despite their legitimation in the public sphere.

558

1924 1923
1925
1927 1926
1928

1
1

Success-discussion and periphery support

3

Success-consensus
Success-discussion and periphery support

4

1
2

Success-discussion and periphery support

Success-discussion and periphery support

1
1
1

Unknown

1

Success-consensus

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

2 3
2
2

1930

Success-discussion and periphery support
Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

3

Success-consensus
2
2
1

1932

Unknown
(blank)

1

1933

Failure-bypass representative public
Success-discussion and periphery support

4

1939

1938

1937

1936

1935 1934

Unknown

2

(blank)
1

Unknown

2

Success-consensus
Success-discussion and periphery support

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

2 3
1 2

Success-discussion and periphery support
Unknown

2
2
2

Success-discussion and periphery support

1940

4
5

Success-discussion and periphery support
1

Unknown

7

15

6

Failure-objection

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

2

1945 1944 1943 1942

1941

9

1

Success-consensus

(blank)
(blank)
(blank)
(blank)
0

Year

4

2

1931

1929

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

5

Legitimation

10

15

20

Counts
Implementation
Failure

Success

Unknown

Figure L.16. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 1.

559

Circuits. Figure L.17 shows the active circuits in period 1: civil society (N=32), county
(N=27), Pittsburgh city (N=23), state (N=21), economic (N=11), intra-library (N=4), local school
district (N=1), local municipal (N=1), and national (N=1). As shown in Figure L.18, the city
circuit is active leading up to and culminating in 1938 when the library merger is denied. The
county circuit is most active in 1940 when civil society groups petition for a unified library
system. The civil society circuit is active throughout the years in period 1. The state circuit is
active in the beginning years of period 1 when the issue of city-county consolidation is raised

Circuit

and the Metropolitan Plan Commission is formed.

National circuit

1

Local municipal circuit

1

Local school district circuit

1

Intra-library circuit

4

Economic circuit

11

State circuit

21

Pittsburgh city circuit

23

County circuit

27

Civil society circuit

32
0

5

10

15

20

Count

Figure L.17. Circuits in period 1.

560

25

30

35

45
40

1
1

35

6

Count

30
25
19
20
15
4

1945

1944

1943

1942

1928

3
1

1941

1927

3

1940

1926

3

13
1
3

1939

1925

1

4

1938

1924

2

1937

1
1
1

2
1
1
1

1936

1
1

1935

2

7

1934

1

1
1

1933

1
1

1
3
1
3

1931

2

1923

0

7

2
1
1
3

1930

5

5

1929

3

1932

10

Year

Civil society circuit
Intra-library circuit
National circuit

County circuit
Local municipal circuit
Pittsburgh city circuit

Economic circuit
Local school district circuit
State circuit

Figure L.18. Circuits by year in period 1.

Figure L.19 shows that the outer periphery is the most active actor position in period 1,
followed by the core and inner periphery. Figure L.20 shows that the most active audience
position in period 1 is core, then diffuse public, then inner periphery, then outer periphery.
Figure L.21 displays the actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in
period 1. Transmissions in the Pittsburgh city circuit typically travel from outer periphery to
core. Transmission in the civil society circuit travel a variety of pathways. The state and county
circuits also exhibit a variety of transmission pathways.

561

Actor position

Inner periphery

16

Core

41

Outer periphery

64

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Count

Figure L.19. Actor positions in period 1.

Audience position

Outer periphery

10

Inner periphery

11

Diffuse public

27

Core

73
0

10

20

30

40

50

Count

Figure L.20. Audience positions in period 1.

562

60

70

80

1923

Core

1924

Inn.
per. Core

Core

1

Outer periphery

1

Outer periphery

1

Inner periphery

1

Core
Core

1926
1927

1

Outer periphery

1

Core

1

Core
1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Outer periphery

Core

2

Core

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Inner periphery

1

Core

1

Outer periphery

1

Diffuse public

Core
1940
1941

Out.
Out.
per. Core per. Inn. per.

1

3

1

2

2

Circuits

2

Core

1

1

Diffuse public

1

1

Inner periphery

1

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Inner periphery

1

Civil society circuit
County circuit
Economic circuit
Intra-library circuit
Local municipal circuit
Local school district circuit
National circuit

Core

6

Inner periphery

1

Inner periphery

1

Core
1

Core

1

Diffuse public

State circuit

1

2

2

Diffuse public

4

Core

1

1

Core

1
1

1
2

Inner periphery

1

Outer periphery

1

Core

1

2
1

Diffuse public

6

Core

8

Outer periphery

1

Core

1
0

Audience
position

4

3

Diffuse public

Actor
position

Pittsburgh city circuit

2

Diffuse public

Core

Year

2

2

Inner periphery

Core

Core Out. per.

1929
1930
1931
1933
1935
1936
1937
1938

Out. Out. Inn.
Out. Inn. Out.
Inn. Out.
per. per. per. Core per. per. per. Core per. per. Core Inn. per.

1939

3

Diffuse public

Out.
per.

1928

Out.
Out. Out.
per. Core per. per.

1925

Core

16

1

2

5

10

15

20

25

30

Count

Figure L.21. Actor positions, audience positions, and circuits by year in period 1.

563

Figure L.22 shows a tessellation, a graphical representation of the circuits,
actors/audiences, and positions in period 1. The red nodes represent circuits, the gray nodes are
actors and audiences, and the edges are circuit positions. Actor/audience nodes connected to
circuit nodes via edges mean that those actor/audiences occupied one or more positions in that
circuit during period 1. The clockwise curvature of the edges indicates whether a gray node
occupied a position as an actor or as an audience in the circuit. Edges flow clockwise: an edge
flowing toward the red circuit node from a gray node means that the gray node is an actor, and
edges flowing away from the red circuit nodes mean that the connecting gray node is an
audience. In the figure, the size of a node indicates the total number of transmissions flowing to
or from that node. There are several prominent circuits that are visible: civil society, county,
state, and Pittsburgh city. As indicated by the edges connecting these circuits to actors and
audience nodes, many different actors and audiences occupy the positions in the circuits.

564

Figure L.22. Actor-circuit graph for period 1.

PERIOD 2: 1945–1961

Events. A total of N=166 communicative events were identified in period 2. The period
began with few events as the Second World War waned. There were three spikes in activity
during the period (see Figure L.23). The first spike corresponded to an Allegheny County library
survey sponsored by the Allegheny Conference on Community Development in 1950 and the
Metropolitan Study Commission in 1951.

Both included efforts to restructure Pittsburgh

libraries into an integrated, countywide unit. The next spike from 1953 to 1958 corresponded to
a combination of several major initiatives and changes. In terms of initiatives, there was the
publication of a Home Rule Charter and the Munn Plan by the Metropolitan Study Commission
in 1955, and there were efforts by the Library Planning Committee and other civil society groups
to extend library services outside the city through funding by the County Commissioners. These

565

initiatives led in part to several major changes in 1956: the merger of the old Allegheny library
with the city’s Carnegie Library system; the establishment of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
as the county library; and the passing of the Library Services Act at the federal level. Figure
L.23 shows in a quantitative way that 1956 was a major year in terms of communicative events.
The third spike occurred toward the end of period 2, in 1960 and 1961, as county civil society
groups continued to advocate for an expansion of services, and as the Martin plan was discussed
and ratified at the state level. These findings confirm the major events that were identified in the
description and chronology in section 4.1.2.

60

54
46

40
30

Year

Figure L.23. Number of communicative events per year in period 2.

566

3

1961

1960

1949

1959

1948

1958

1947

1957

1946

6

5
0

1956

0

8

1955

0

1953

1

9
3

1952

0

1951

0

1950

6

10
0

14

11

1954

20

1945

Number of events

50

Issues. By far the most prevalent issue in period 2 was countywide system formation and
unification with N=113 events (see Figure L.24). This issue was followed by Pittsburgh cityAllegheny city library merger (N=20), the PA state code and state plan (N=7), county funding
(N=6), and the city library budget (N=6). In 11 out of the 12 years of period 2 where
communicative events were identified, countywide system formation and unification was a
significant issue (see Figure L.25). It was a significant issue in all three spikes in activity in
period 2. The issue of the Pittsburgh city-Allegheny city library merger was also a prominent
issue in the second spike 1956 (N=14), and the issue of the Pennsylvania state code and state

Issue

plan contributed to the third spike in activity in 1960 (N=2).

Local library coordination

1

Local library administration

1

Local library formation

2

Miscellaneous

2

Library study

4

North Side Allegheny library governance

4

City library budget

6

County funding

6

PA state code and state plan

7

Pittsburgh city-Allegheny City library merger

20

Countywide system formation and unification

113
0

20

40

60

Count

Figure L.24. Issue counts in period 2.

567

80

100

120

60
50
40

3
2
2
1

30
39

20

25

3
2

1958

2
4

3

1961

6
1
1

1960

4
3

1959

1
2

1957

1953

11

1956

6

2
1

1952

1950

1949

1948

1947

1946

1945

0

1
5

1951

11
1

3

1955

3

10

1954

Issue counts

14

1
2
1

Year
City library budget

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Library study

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Miscellaneous

North Side Allegheny library governance

PA state code and state plan

Pittsburgh city-Allegheny City library merger

Figure L.25. Issue counts by year in period 2.

Actors and audiences. The most prominent actors in period 2 were the Library
Planning Committee of Allegheny county (N=29), Metropolitan Study Commission (N=21),
Board of County Commissioners (N=21), Ralph Munn (N=16), the City of Pittsburgh (N=13),
and Pennsylvania General Assembly (N=12). A number of other county, civil society, and
library actors were also active in period 2 (see Figure L.26). Figure L.27 shows the activity of
actors for each year in period 2. These findings can be interpreted together with the issues
identified in Figure L.25 and the description and chronology of period 2 laid out in section 4.1.2.

568

In 1950, the first peak of activity, Allegheny Conference on Community Development was the
most prominent actor (N=8). It mobilized around the issue of countywide system formation and
unification, and it prompted the General Assembly to implement a study commission. The
following year, the Pennsylvania General Assembly was the most prominent actor (N=5). It
formed the Metropolitan Study Commission. The years of 1953, 1954, and 1955 show a gradual
build-up of activity by the Metropolitan Study Commission with N=6, N=7, and N=8 events,
respectively. The Commission advocated for the issue of countywide system formation and
unification. The years 1955 and 1956 were the second peak in activity when the Library
Planning Committee of Allegheny County began to transmit impulses about countywide system
formation and unification.

In 1956, the County Commissioners (N=16) and the City of

Pittsburgh (N=8) were prominent actors because they made formal decisions about countywide
service extension and the merger of city libraries. In 1960, a constellation of several actors at
both the county and state level advocated for a change in system structure. Pennsylvania
libraries would welcome the Martin Plan in 1961, a plan that created library districts and
established state funding and oversight. While the passing of the Martin Plan does not fall
within period 2, formative events for the plan’s implementation occur in period 2.

569

Actor

County municipalities outside the city

1

CLP committee

1

CLP services

1

PA library Governor's Advisory Council

1

County Controller

1

PA governor

1

CLP Trustees

1

Private business

1

City of Allegheny

1

Multiple civil society groups

2

library or citizens advisory council

2

Private corporation or foundation

2

Experts and consultants

2

CLP county services

2

Civil society-other

2

Allegheny County Boroughs Association

2

Civic Club of Allegheny County

3

Private civil society actor

3

County court

4

Pennsylvania Library Association

4

Allegheny Conference on Community…

8

Mass media outlets

9

Pennsylvania General Assembly

12

City of Pittsburgh

13

Ralph Munn

16

Board of County Commissioners

21

Metropolitan Study Commission

21

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny…
0

29
5

10

15

20

Counts

Figure L.26. Actor counts during period 2.

570

25

30

35

60

50
1
2
2

Actor counts

40

8
2

30

20

20

4
1
1
2
5
6
2
4
1
1
1
1
8
1

1
1
1

10

8
0

1945

1946

1
1947

1948

1949

1950

1
2
5
1
1951

1
1
1
1952

6
1953

3
1
7
1
1
1
1954

1
1
1
1
3
2
2
1955

16

1956

3
1
1
1
1
1
1957

3
2
1958

1959

1
2
1
1
1
1960

2
1
1961

Year
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Board of County Commissioners
City of Pittsburgh
Civil society-other
CLP county services
CLP Trustees
County court
Experts and consultants
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
Metropolitan Study Commission
PA governor
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Private business
Private corporation or foundation

Allegheny County Boroughs Association
City of Allegheny
Civic Club of Allegheny County
CLP committee
CLP services
County Controller
County municipalities outside the city
library or citizens advisory council
Mass media outlets
Multiple civil society groups
PA library Governor's Advisory Council
Pennsylvania Library Association
Private civil society actor
Ralph Munn

Figure L.27. Actor counts by year in period 2.

Figure L.28 shows the audiences in period 2. The most prominent audience throughout
period 2 was broadcasts to Allegheny county residents (N=28), followed by Metropolitan Study
Commission (N=24), Board of County Commissioners (N=17), Library Planning Committee of
Allegheny County (N=13), CLP city libraries (N=13), and CLP county services (N=13).

571

Health and Welfare Federation

1

Civic Club of Allegheny County

1

Experts and consultants

1

County Controller

1

Multiple municipalities

1

Audience

Broadcast to Allegheny County…

1

Civil society-other

1

Pennsylvania Library Association

1

Local libraries in Allegheny County

1

CLP Trustees

1

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents

1

Pennsylvania state library

1

PA governor

2

both Mayor and Council

2

County court

4

Allegheny Conference on Community…
Private economic actor

4
4

Broadcast to County libraries

5

Private civil society actor

5

Pgh. City Council

6

Ralph Munn

7

Pennsylvania General Assembly

7

CLP county services

13

CLP city libraries

13

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny…

13

Board of County Commissioners

17

Metropolitan Study Commission

24

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

28
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Audience counts

Figure L.28. Audience counts in period 2.

Figure L.29 shows audiences by year in period 2.

The Allegheny Conference on

Community Development (N=4) and broadcasts to Allegheny County residents (N=4) were
prominent audiences in the first wave of activity in 1950. After it was established in 1951, the
Metropolitan Study Commission became a prominent audience in 1951 (N=5), 1952 (N=1), 1953

572

(N=9), 1954 (N=5), and 1955 (N=4), bridging the first wave of activity in 1950 and the second
wave of activity in 1955 and 1956. The Library Planning Committee was a prominent audience
in 1955 (N=9), as was the Board of County Commissioners (N=8). These findings are consistent
with the theory that the intra-organizational activities of the Library Planning Committee, their
targeting of the Board of County Commissioners, together with the findings of the Metropolitan
Study Commission and their publication by mass media outlets, caused the decision of the
County Commissioners in 1956 to contract with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh to extend
library services throughout the county. The establishment of a county library was one of the first
major system developments in the case. Another key event happened that same year when the
City of Pittsburgh approved the annexation of the old Allegheny library by the city’s Carnegie
system. Figure L.28 shows that City Council, the City of Pittsburgh, and the mayor were only
moderately-targeted audiences during period 2. Figure L.30 shows actor-audience combinations,
and it indicates that the city audiences were only paired with civil society groups in a minimal
way. The volume or amount of communicative events from civil society therefore does not
sufficiently explain why in 1956 the city decided to merge the libraries, especially after city
audiences were targeted significantly more in period 1 but without success. Munn (1970, p. 80)
credits the change to mayor David L. Lawrence in 1946 as a final explanation for the merger in
1956. This explanation seems plausible, and it suggests that not only quantitative activity of the
public sphere, but also qualitative characteristics of actors and audiences lead to developments in
library infrastructures.

573

60

1
2
1
1
1
5
1
4

40

30

2
2
1
3
3
1
4
1
1
10

9

7
8

2
5

1
1
1
2
2
1

1
1
1
2

1956

1957

1958

2
1
2
1

1
2

1961

1

11

1960

1953

2
1

2
1
5
1
1
2
2

1955

9

1952

1951

1949

1948

1946

1947

1

0

4

1
5

1950

1
1
1
4

10

8

1954

2
3

1959

20

1945

Counts of audience

50

Year
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
both Mayor and Council
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents
Civil society-other
CLP county services
County Controller
Experts and consultants
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
Metropolitan Study Commission
PA governor
Pennsylvania Library Association
Pgh. City Council
Private economic actor

Board of County Commissioners
Broadcast to Allegheny County municipalities
Broadcast to County libraries
Civic Club of Allegheny County
CLP city libraries
CLP Trustees
County court
Health and Welfare Federation
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Multiple municipalities
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania state library
Private civil society actor
Ralph Munn

Figure L.29. Audience counts by year in period 2.

574

Actor

County municipalities outside the city
CLP committee
CLP services
PA library Governor's Advisory Council
County Controller
PA governor
CLP Trustees
Private business
City of Allegheny
Multiple civil society groups
library or citizens advisory council
Private corporation or foundation
Experts and consultants
CLP county services
Civil society-other
Allegheny County Boroughs Association
Civic Club of Allegheny County
Private civil society actor
County court
Pennsylvania Library Association
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Mass media outlets
Pennsylvania General Assembly
City of Pittsburgh
Ralph Munn
Board of County Commissioners
Metropolitan Study Commission
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
11
11
11
11
11
2
11
11
11
11
2

1
1
11
11
3 111
6
3
2 1
8
1
8
1 3 1
4
1 2
4
111 2
5
11
1
11
12
1
4
11
3 1

0

5

10

4

15

2
11
20

3
25

Audience counts
Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Board of County Commissioners

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to Allegheny County municipalities

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents

Civic Club of Allegheny County

Civil society-other

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP Trustees

County Controller

County court

Experts and consultants

Health and Welfare Federation

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Metropolitan Study Commission

Multiple municipalities

PA governor

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Pgh. City Council

Private civil society actor

Private economic actor

Ralph Munn

Figure L.30. Actor and audience combinations in period 2.

575

30

Power. Figure L.31 shows the types of power identified in period 2. Communicative
narrowcast (N=56) was the most frequent type of power, followed by formal decision (N=43),
communicative broadcast (N=36), administrative narrowcast (N=17), social economic (N=13),
and administrative broadcast (N=1).

Figure L.23 shows that communicative narrowcast

appeared in every year where communicative events were identified, and it contributed in a
prominent way to each of the three waves where significant events occurred.

Because

communicative broadcasts contributed in significant ways to the first and second waves of
activity, first in 1950, then from 1954 to 1958, the diffuse public sphere had a leading role in key
developments during these times. Figure L.32 also shows in a quantitative way how social
economic power was a significant type of power in 1955 and 1956 when service extension and
the library merger occurred. These findings suggest that economic power may be a necessary
component for, or at least an indication of, infrastructural change. Figure L.33 shows that
economic power was transmitted in 4 instances: from private corporations or foundations to the
Metropolitan Study Commission (N=1), from private corporations or foundations to the
Allegheny Conference on Community Development (N=1), from the City of Pittsburgh to the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh (N=2), and from the Board of County Commissioners to the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh (N=9).

576

Administrative broadcast

1

Power types

Social economic

13

Administrative narrowcast

17

Communicative broadcast

36

Formal decision

43

Communicative narrowcast

56
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Power counts

Figure L.31. Power counts for period 2.

60
7

50

8

20

30
18
20

1
4

Year
Administrative broadcast
Communicative broadcast
Formal decision

Administrative narrowcast
Communicative narrowcast
Social economic

Figure L.32. Power counts by year in period 2.

577

4
1
1

3

1961

4

1960

1955

7

1959

5
1

1
2
1
4

1958

5
3

1957

10

1956

1
5

1954

1
2

4
2
3

1953

5
1

1952

1949

1948

1946

1947

1

0

1
2
2
5
1

1951

10

1950

16

1945

Power counts

4
40

PA
All
eg
lib
Co
he
rar
un
ny
y
ty
Co
M
Go
m
un
ult
ve
uni
ty
ipl
rn
cip
Bo
e
or'
alit
ro
librar civ
s
ies
ug
Privat y or il Cit
Co Ad
CL ou
hs
e citize so y Pri CL
un vis
P tsi
CLP
corpo ns cie of vat P PA ty or CL co de
As
Private Civic so Civil count Exper ration advis ty All e Tr go Co y P m th
civil
Club of cia societ y ts and or ory gr eg bu ust ve ntr Co ser mi e
society Alleghen tio y- servic consu found counc ou he sin ee rn oll un vic tte cit
actor y County n other es ltants ation il ps ny ess s or er cil es e y

County municipalities outside the city
CLP committee
CLP services
PA library Governor's Advisory Council
County Controller
PA governor
CLP Trustees
Private business
City of Allegheny
Multiple civil society groups

library or citizens advisory council

Private corporation or foundation

Experts and consultants
CLP county services

Civil society-other

Allegheny County Boroughs Association

Civic Club of Allegheny County

County
court

Private civil society actor

Mass Allegheny
Pennsylvani media Conference on Pennsylvani
City of
a General outlet Community
a Library
Pittsburgh Assembly
s
Development Association

County court

Pennsylvania Library Association

Allegheny Conference on Community
Develoopment

Mass media outlets

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Ralph Munn

City of Pittsburgh

Library
Planning
Board of
Committee of
County
Allegheny
Metropolitan Commission
County
Study Commission
ers

Ralph Munn

Board of County Commissioners

Metropolitan Study Commission

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny
County

Pennsylvania General Assembly
Board of County Commissioners
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
PA governor
County court
Metropolitan Study Commission
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
CLP city libraries
CLP city libraries
Pgh. City Council
Private civil society actor
CLP city libraries
Metropolitan Study Commission
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
PA governor
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Ralph Munn
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pgh. City Council
Civil society-other
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Private civil society actor
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Pgh. City Council
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
Civic Club of Allegheny County
Pgh. City Council
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
both Mayor and Council
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania Library Association
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents
Private economic actor
Experts and consultants
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Private economic actor
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Metropolitan Study Commission
County Controller
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pgh. City Council
County court
CLP county services
CLP city libraries
Metropolitan Study Commission
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP county services
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
both Mayor and Council
Board of County Commissioners
Ralph Munn
CLP Trustees
CLP county services
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Ralph Munn
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Multiple municipalities
Metropolitan Study Commission
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Broadcast to Allegheny County municipalities
Private civil society actor
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
Health and Welfare Federation
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1

1
1
1

6
7

2
3
2
2

2

4

2

4

4
2

2
5
1 1
1
3
1
5
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
3
0

1
9

3

2

2

4

4

11
5

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Figure L.33. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 2.

578

10

15

Figure L.34 shows the actors, audiences, and the types and directions of power
relationships they share.

The actor/audience nodes with the most connections are Library

Planning Committee of Allegheny County, the Board of County Commissioners, the
Metropolitan Study Commission, and Ralph Munn. Communicative broadcasts (blue cb edges)
are seen to travel to Allegheny County residents from a variety of government, library, civil
society, and economic actors. Formal decisions (light green fd edges) emanate primarily from
government actors such as the county court, Pennsylvania General Assembly, and Board of
County Commissioners.

Figure L.34. Actor-Audience-Power graph for period 2.

579

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.35 shows that the large majority of
communicative events were legitimated, either by discussion and periphery support (N=129) or
by consensus (N=5).

Some transmissions were unknown (N=22), and some failed due to

objections (N=9) or because they bypassed a representative public (N=1).

Legitimation types

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Success-consensus

5

Failure-objection

9

Unknown

22

Success-discussion and periphery support

129
0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

Counts

Figure L.35. Legitimation counts in period 2.

Figure L.36 shows that N=122 transmissions were implemented successfully, N=34 had
unknown implementation, and N=10 failed to be implemented. Most of the transmissions in
period 2 that were successfully legitimated were also successfully implemented (see Figure
L.37). Figure L.38 shows that the 3 waves of activity in period 2 also had noticeably-high rates
of successful legitimation and implementation.
580

Implementation types

Failure

10

Unknown

34

Success

122

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Counts

Figure L.36. Implementation counts in period 2.

10
12

Legitimation types

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

20

6

Success-consensus

5

Failure-objection

4
1
4

Failure-bypass representative public

103

1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation counts
Unknown

Success

Failure

Figure L.37. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 2.

581

120

582

1950 1949 1948 1947 1946 1945
1951
1952

(blank)
(blank)
Success-discussion and periphery support

1

(blank)
(blank)
Success-discussion and periphery support

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

14

Success-consensus

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

1
1

Failure-objection

1
1
1

1954

1953

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

6

Success-consensus

1

Unknown

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

2

Failure-objection

1

Unknown

2

1957

1956

1955

Success-discussion and periphery support

1958

9

Success-consensus

2

Failure-objection

12
2

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Unknown

1

26

7
3

Success-discussion and periphery support
Success-consensus

1

Failure-objection

1

Unknown

2
2

Success-discussion and periphery support

12

41

1
3

Unknown
1
1

Success-discussion and periphery support

1959
1960

10

1

Failure-objection

1961

3 7

(blank)
1

Unknown

23

Success-discussion and periphery support
Unknown

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

1
1

Year

0

Legitimation

20

40

60

Implementation counts
Implementation types

Unknown

Success

Failure

Figure L.38. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 2.

583

Circuits. Figure L.39 shows the most prominent circuit in period 2 was civil society
(N=59), followed by county (N=39), and state (N=23). These findings are consistent with the
interpretation that civil society groups effectively mobilized and targeted the county to extend
library services. Figure L.40 suggests a build-up of civil society activity from 1950 to 1955, at
which point civil society actors formed a coalesced public in the outer periphery of the county
circuit. Figure L.39 shows that other circuits in period 2 were intra-library (N=19), Pittsburgh
city (N=16), economic (N=9), and local municipal (N=1).

Local municipal circuit

1

Economic circuit

9

Circuits

Pittsburgh city circuit

16

Intra-library circuit

19

State circuit

23

County circuit

39

Civil society circuit

59
0

10

20

30

40

Circuit counts

Figure L.39. Circuit counts in period 2.

584

50

60

70

60
1
9

40

9

30

4
1
1
2

10
5

9

1
3
1

1958

2
1
2
1

1
2

1961

1
1
2
1
2
1

1960

5

1957

20

1959

24

1956

1
2

13

1954

1949

1948

1946

1945

1947

1

0

6

2
7

1953

11

1952

10

1951

1

1955

20

1950

Circuit counts

50

Year
Civil society circuit
Economic circuit
Local municipal circuit
State circuit

County circuit
Intra-library circuit
Pittsburgh city circuit

Figure L.40. Circuit counts by year in period 2.

Figure L.41 and Figure L.42 show the actor and audience positions in period 2. Figure
L.43 shows the positions and circuits by year. The findings displayed in Figure L.43 confirm an
extended mobilization of the civil society circuit at the start of period 1, followed by a targeting
of the core of the state, county, library, and city circuits by their outer peripheries in 1955 and
1956. Then, in 1956, administrative and formal decision power flowed back outward from the
cores of these circuits to their inner peripheries in 1956, creating a new infrastructure. Figure
L.44 shows an overall picture of the circuits, actor-audiences, and positions in period 2.

585

Actor positions

Inner periphery

21

Outer periphery

48

Core

97

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Counts

Figure L.41. Actor position counts in period 2.

Audience positions

Outer periphery

27

Diffuse public

35

Inner periphery

39

Core

65
0

10

30

20

40

50

Audience position counts

Figure L.42. Audience position counts in period 2.

586

60

70

(bla (bla Out. (bla (bla
nk) nk) per. nk) nk)
Inn. per.

19491948194719461945

(blank)
Core 1
(blank)
(blank)
Outer periphery

1

Inner periphery 1
Core 1

Out.
per.

1950

(blank)

Core 1

Core

Outer periphery

1

Diffuse public

5

Core
Core

1952

Core

1953

5

Core 1
Outer periphery

1

Core

2

Core 1
Core 1
Outer periphery

2

Inner periphery

5

Diffuse public 1

Out.
per. Inn. per.

Core

2

Core

3

Outer periphery

Core

1954

Outer periphery

Out. Inn.
per. per.

1951

Core 1

2

Inner periphery

3

Inn. per.

Diffuse public
Outer periphery

Out. per.

County circuit

1

Economic circuit
Intra-library circuit

Diffuse public 1
2

5

1 3

Diffuse public

5

1

Inn. per.
Out. per.

1956

2

Diffuse public

3 1

Core

2
1

Core

2

Core

5

Diffuse public 1

Core

Out. Inn.
per. per.

1957

5

2

3

7

1

5

2 2

Diffuse public 1
Core 1
Inner periphery 1 1 1
Diffuse public

2 1

Diffuse public 1
Core 1

Core

Diffuse public

2

Out. Inn. (bla
per. per. nk)

Core 1
Count of circuit
Core 1
Core 1 2
Outer periphery

1

Inner periphery 1

Out.
per.

Core

6
4

Inner periphery

Out. Inn.
per. per.

1958

State circuit

5

Outer periphery

Outer periphery

Local municipal circuit

5

Pittsburgh city circuit

Inner periphery

Core

1959

11

2 2 1

Outer periphery

1960

6

Outer periphery

Core

1961

Civil society circuit

Inner periphery 1

Core

Core

Circuit types

Diffuse public 1 1
Outer periphery

1955

3
1

Actor
Year
position

Core
Audience
position

2 1
0

10
Circuit counts

20

Figure L.43. Actor positions, audience positions, and circuits by year in period 2.

587

Figure L.44. Actor-Circuit graph for period 2.

PERIOD 3: 1961–1970

Events. A total of N=135 communicative events were identified in period 3. There were
two main waves of communicative activity during the period (see Figure L.45). The crest of the
first wave was at the start of the period in 1961 when the new state plan and state code were
implemented. The second wave begins in 1966 and peaks in 1968. During this time, a number
of issues related to a regional system were discussed, including the Martin re-survey.

588

25
20

Event counts

23

22
17

16

15

15

11

11
10

8

5
0

7
5

1961

1962

1963

1964

1965

1966

1967

1968

1969

1970

Year

Figure L.45. Communicative events by year in period 3.

Issues. Figure L.46 shows the issues raised in period 3. The most-discussed issue was
the Pennsylvania state code and state plan (N=32), followed by library studies (N=22), local
library formation (N=20), countywide system formation and unification (N=12), and county
funding (N=12). Figure L.47 shows that the Pennsylvania state code and state plan was the
largest issue in 1961 (N=11), that the issue was raised again in 1962 and 1963, and that it then
contributed to the wave of communicative activity in 1966, 1967, and 1968. Following the
implementation of the state plan in 1961 and the beginning of district services shortly thereafter,
there was an uptick in the issue of local library formation in 1962, 1963, 1964, and 1965. Local
library formation was not an issue at all in period 1, and it was only a minimal issue in period 2.
The advent of district services, however, and the responsibility of district libraries to offer
consulting services to local libraries, may explain the uptick: there was new audience created for
589

the issue. The issue of library study was apparent during the years of 1966, 1967, and 1968.
This is consistent with section 4.1.2 where it was found that the Martin re-survey was discussed
during this time. At the end of period 3, county funding and federal LSCA funding become
issues. As seen in section 4.1.2, it was beginning in 1967 that plans for a regional reference
center were adopted by the County Commissioners, which was then funded through the county
and LSCA.

State budget

2

City library system miscellaneous issues

3

Local library administration

3

Issues

local allocations for libraries

4

Librarian wages

5

Local funding from state

5

City library budget

7

LSCA

8

County funding

12

Countywide system formation and unification

12

Local library formation

20

Library study

22

PA state code and state plan

32
0

5

10

15

20

Issue counts

Figure L.46. Issue counts in period 3.

590

25

30

35

25

Issue counts

20

7
11

15

3
4

1
1
1

10

4

9

2

2
1
2

3

1961

1962

1963

2
0

3

2

7

2
1

1

4

5

2

3

7

3

2
1
1
1

3

1964

1965

7

4

2

1

1

1966

1967

3
3
1968

1
1
1
3

1
1
2
3
2

1

2

1969

1970

Year
City library budget

City library system miscellaneous issues

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Librarian wages

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library formation

LSCA

PA state code and state plan

State budget

Figure L.47. Issue counts by year in period 3.

Actors and audiences. Figure L.48 shows the actors in period 3. The most frequent
actor was the Pennsylvania state library (N=22).

This is consistent with description and

chronology in section 4.1.2 that characterized the period as the rise of district services, an
administrative responsibility of the state library under the new state library plan. Following the
state library, other major actors in period 3 were the Board of County Commissioners (N=18),
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh district services (N=18), the City of Pittsburgh (N=10), and

591

Pennsylvania Library Association (N=9). Pennsylvania Library Association was responsible for
initiating statewide discussions about the Martin re-survey.

CLP city libraries

1

Federal library agencies

1

CLP cabinet

1

Broadcast-other

1

Pennsylvania Economy League

1

CLP committee

1

PA governor

1

School boards

1

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny…

Actor

Private corporation or foundation

1
1

library or citizens advisory council

2

Local library trustees

2

Ralph Munn

2

Multiple civil society groups

2

Local libraries in Allegheny County

2

Experts and consultants

4

Private civil society actor

4

County municipalities outside the city

5

CLP county services

6

Pennsylvania General Assembly

6

CLP Trustees

6

Keith Doms

7

Pennsylvania Library Association

9

City of Pittsburgh

10

CLP district services

18

Board of County Commissioners

18

Pennsylvania state library

22
0

5

10

15

Actor counts

Figure L.48. Actor counts in period 3.

592

20

25

Figure L.49 shows that the Pennsylvania state library was active in most of the years of
period 3. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh was also consistently active. The City of Pittsburgh
was active in most years, reflecting its role as a funder of the city’s Carnegie Library system.
The Board of County Commissioners was also active in most years.

25

Actor counts

20
15
10
5
0

1

2

6

3
3
1
1
1
1

5
1
1
1
1
1
3

1
2

7

4

3

1
3

4
1961

1

2

2

3

1962

1963

1
2
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
2
1

1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

1964

1965

1966

3
1
3

2
2
1
6

3
1
1

2
1
2

2
1
1
3

1967

1968

1969

Year
Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast-other

City of Pittsburgh

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP committee

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

County municipalities outside the city

Experts and consultants

Federal library agencies

Keith Doms

library or citizens advisory council

Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local library trustees

Multiple civil society groups

PA governor

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Private civil society actor

Private corporation or foundation

Ralph Munn

School boards

Figure L.49. Actor counts by year in period 3.

593

1
2
1
1
1
1
4
1970

Figure L.50 shows the audiences in period 3.

The most prominent audience was

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh district services (N=22), followed by Carnegie Library of
Pittsburgh county services (N=20), Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh city libraries (N=15),
Pennsylvania state library (N=12), local libraries in Allegheny County (N=8), and Board of

Audience

County Commissioners (N=8).

CLP director

1

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

library or citizens advisory council

1

Broadcast to civil society groups

1

School districts

2

Ralph Munn

2

CLP Trustees

3

both Mayor and Council

3

Private civil society actor

3

Experts and consultants

4

Multiple municipalities

4

Keith Doms

4

Local municipal board

4

Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

5

Pennsylvania Library Association

6

Broadcast to County libraries

6

Board of County Commissioners

8

Local libraries in Allegheny County

8

Pennsylvania state library

12

CLP city libraries

15

CLP county services

20

CLP district services

22
0

5

10

15

Audience counts

Figure L.50. Audience counts in period 3.

594

20

25

Figure L.51 shows audiences by year in period 3. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh district
services was a dominant audience in 1962 (N=7), 1963 (N=4), 1967 (N=3), and 1968 (N=3).
CLP county services was a relatively strong audience in almost all years of period 3, especially
in 1969 and 1970 when the regional reference center began.. The Pennsylvania state library was
an active audience during the first two waves of activity. Local libraries became an active
audience in 1964, the year after district services began in Pittsburgh.

595

25

Audience counts

20
15

3
1
2
2

10

4

5
0

2

2

5

5
1
1

1
2

7

3
1

2

4

3
1961

1
2
1
1
1
1
2
2

4

1966

1967

1
1
4

1

3
1
1

1
1

1
1
1
1
1

1962

1963

1964

1965

5

2
1
2
1
3

2

1
1
1
1
3
1
1

1
1
3

2

1
1

4

5

3
1
1
1

1969

1970

1
1968

Year
Board of County Commissioners

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to civil society groups

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP director

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Experts and consultants

Keith Doms

library or citizens advisory council

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Multiple municipalities

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Private civil society actor

Ralph Munn

School districts

Figure L.51. Audience counts by year in period 3.

Figure L.52 shows actor/audience pairings.

Pennsylvania state library, the most

prominent actor in period 3, communicated with several audiences in period 3, including
broadcasts to Pennsylvania district libraries (N=1), Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh city libraries
(N=1), Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh district services (N=8), experts and consultants (N=2),
local libraries in Allegheny County (N=2), Pennsylvania General Assembly (N=1), and

596

Pennsylvania state library (N=2). The Board of County Commissioners communicated primarily
with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services (N=12). Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
district services communicated with a variety of audiences, including broadcasts to civil society
groups (N=1), broadcasts to county libraries (N=4), local libraries in Allegheny County (N=3),
and private civil society actors (N=2). The City of Pittsburgh communicated almost exclusively
with the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh city library system (N=9).

597

Actor

CLP city libraries
Federal library agencies
CLP cabinet
Broadcast-other
Pennsylvania Economy League
CLP committee
PA governor
School boards
Library Planning Committee of Allegheny County
Private corporation or foundation
library or citizens advisory council
Local library trustees
Ralph Munn
Multiple civil society groups
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Experts and consultants
Private civil society actor
County municipalities outside the city
CLP county services
Pennsylvania General Assembly
CLP Trustees
Keith Doms
Pennsylvania Library Association
City of Pittsburgh
CLP district services
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1 1
2
1 1
1 1
4
2

1

1
1 1 1
1 1 1
3
2
1 1 2 1
2 1 1 1
4
1
9
1
4
1
1 1
5
2
2

0

1
1
1
1 1
4
1
1 1
3
12

2
8

5

1 1 1 2 1
1 2
2
2
2

10

15

1
20

Audience counts
Board of County Commissioners

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to civil society groups

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP director

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Experts and consultants

Keith Doms

library or citizens advisory council

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Multiple municipalities

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Private civil society actor

Ralph Munn

School districts

Figure L.52. Actor and audience combinations in period 3.

598

2
25

Power. Figure L.53 shows the types of power exhibited in period 3. The most prevalent
power type was communicative narrowcast (N=64), followed by formal decision (N=23), social
economic (N=22), administrative narrowcast (N=18), communicative broadcast (N=7), and
administrative broadcast (N=1). Figure L.54 shows that communicative narrowcasts appeared in
all years in period 3, especially in 1967 (N=14) and 1968 (N=13).

Administrative broadcast

1

Power types

Communicative broadcast

7

Administrative narrowcast

18

Social economic

22

Formal decision

23

Communicative narrowcast

64
0

10

20

30

40

Power counts

Figure L.53. Power counts in period 3.

599

50

60

70

Power counts

25
20

3

15

7

10
5
0

6
5
1
1961

4
3

1

5

5
1

6

8

3

2

4
1
3

1962

1963

1964

1
1
2
2
1
1965

6

4
2

2
2
3

4
1
3
1
2

1968

1969

1970

14

3
1966

13

1967

Year
Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Figure L.54. Power counts by year in period 3.

Figure L.55 shows actor, audience, and power combinations in period 3. Communicative
narrowcast are spread over many actor-audience combinations. Formal decisions and social
economic power mostly flow from governmental bodies to libraries, including from the Board of
County Commissioners to Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services, from the City of
Pittsburgh to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh city library system, and from the Pennsylvania
General Assembly to Pennsylvania district libraries.

Figure L.56 is a visualization of the

actor/audiences and their power relationships. Two striking nodes whose appearance departs
from the graphs of previous periods are the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh district services and
the Pennsylvania state library. Civil society actors/audience are not as dominant in period 3 as
they had been in periods 1 and 2.

600

both Mayor and Council
CLP county services
Keith Doms
Pennsylvania state library
CLP city libraries
Pennsylvania Library Association
Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries
CLP district services
Board of County Commissioners
Local municipal board
CLP city libraries
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Local library trustees
Keith Doms
Ralph Munn
Board of County Commissioners
Multiple municipalities
Multiple civil society groups
CLP district services
Pennsylvania state library
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP district services
Pennsylvania state library
Experts and consultants
CLP district services
CLP county services
Private civil society actor
both Mayor and Council
Multiple municipalities
Local libraries in Allegheny County
County municipalities outside the city
Keith Doms
CLP district services
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania state library
Keith Doms
CLP county services
CLP Trustees
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
CLP district services
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries
CLP Trustees
CLP district services
CLP city libraries
CLP Trustees
both Mayor and Council
Board of County Commissioners
School districts
Pennsylvania state library
Multiple municipalities
Keith Doms
Local municipal board
Broadcast to County libraries
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania Library Association
library
or citizens advisory council
Pennsylvania Library Association
CLP district services
Local libraries in Allegheny County
City of Pittsburgh
CLP city libraries
School districts
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania Library Association
Multiple municipalities
Local municipal board
CLP district services
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP district services
CLP director
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to civil society groups
Ralph Munn
Experts and consultants
Board of County Commissioners
CLP Trustees
CLP county services
Broadcast to County libraries
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Experts and consultants
Pennsylvania state library
CLP district services
CLP county services
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Pennsylvania district libraries

Pennsylvania state
library

Board of
County
Commissioner
s

CLP district services

Pennsylv
City ania
of Library
Pittsb Associati
urgh
on

Keith Doms

Lib
rar
y
Pla
nn
lib Pri ing
Pe
rar va Co
nn
y te m
syl
or co mi
va
citi rp tte
Ex
ni
Fe
pe
ze or e
a
de
rts
ns ati of
Ec Br ral
an Local Multi
CL on oa lib CL
ad on All
d librari ple Ra
vis or eg Sc
P o dc CL rar P
Pennsylv
co es in civil lp Local or fo he ho PA co m ast P y cit
ania
County Private ns Alleg societ h librar y un ny ol go m y - ca ag y
municipaliti civil ult heny y M y co da Co bo ve mi Le ot bi en lib
General
Assembl CLP county es outside society an Count group un truste un tio un ar rn tte ag he ne cie rar
CLP Trustees
y
services
the city
actor ts y
s n es cil n ty ds or e ue r t s ies

CLP city libraries
Federal library agencies
CLP cabinet
Broadcast-other
Pennsylvania Economy League
CLP committee
PA governor
School boards
Library Planning committee of Allegheny County
Private corporation or foundation
library or citizens advisory council

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
1
2
1
1
1
1
11
1
1
1
1
2
1
11
3
1
1
11
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2 2
1
4
1
2 4 3
1
2
1
1
1
2
3
1
1
4
1
2
11
1
2 5
5
1
11
1
11
2
4
4
2 3
1
1
0

Actor

Audience

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

10
Power

Figure L.55. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 3.

601

20

Figure L.56. Actor-Power graph for period 3.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.57 shows the number and types of
legitimation in period 3. The predominant type was unknown (N=71), followed by successdiscussion and periphery support (N=60), failure-objections (N=2), failure-bypass representative
public (N=1), and success-consensus (N=1).

Figure L.58 shows the number and types of

implementation in period 3. The most frequent type of implementation was success (N=95),
followed by unknown (N=36) and failure (N=4). According to Figure L.59, most (N=43)
communications that were successfully legitimated were also successfully implemented. Some

602

(N=50) transmissions with unknown legitimation status were also implemented. Only N=4
communications that were legitimated were not implemented. The findings in Figure L.60
reflect how the great majority of communications were implemented in every year and regardless

Legitimation types

of legitimation status.

Success-consensus

1

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Failure-objections

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

60

Unknown

71
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Legitimation counts

Figure L.57. Legitimation counts in period 3.

603

70

80

Implementation types

Failure

4

Unknown

36

Success

95

0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation counts

Figure L.58. Implementation counts in period 3.

21

Legitimation types

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

14

4

Success-consensus

1

Failure-objections

1
1

Failure-bypass representative public

1
0

50

10

20

42

30

40

50

Implementation counts
Unknown

Success

Failure

Figure L.59. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 3.

604

60

1961
1962
1963

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

1 2

Unknown

4

Success-discussion and periphery support

1964
1965
1966

3

8
1

Success-discussion and periphery support

5

Failure-objections

1

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Unknown

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

2 1

Unknown

4

Success-discussion and periphery support

4

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

4
1

1968
1969

5
4

1
9

7

1

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

1

5

Success-discussion and periphery support
Failure-objections

1970

2

1

Unknown

3

1

1 2

Unknown

5

Success-discussion and periphery support

4
0

Year

3

5

Success-discussion and periphery support

Success-consensus

2

8

2

Unknown

Unknown

1967

17

Legitimation

1
1
5

10

15

20

Implementation counts
Implementation types
Failure
Success
Unknown

Figure L.60. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 3.

605

Circuits. Figure L.61 shows the numbers and types of circuits in period 3. The most
active circuit was state (N=59), followed by county (N=29), intra-library (N=14), Pittsburgh city
(N=12), local municipal (N=10), civil society (N=7), local school district (N=2), and national
(N=2). Figure L.62 shows circuit types and numbers by year in period 3. The state circuit was
dominant in almost every year, especially in 1961 when the new state plan was implemented and
in 1967 when the Martin re-survey was carried out by the state library. The county circuit was
active in the early years of period 3 but was overshadowed by the state circuit. The county
circuit was then re-activated in 1969 and 1970 when funding began for the regional reference
center.

National circuit

2

Local school district circuit

2

Circuit

Civil society circuit

7

Local municipal circuit

10

Pittsburgh city circuit

12

Intra-library circuit

14

County circuit

29

State circuit

59
0

10

20

30

40

Circuit counts

Figure L.61. Circuit counts in period 3.

606

50

60

70

25

Circuit counts

20
11

10
15
10
5
0

7
3
1

7
1
1

4

7

4

1

2

1961

1962

6

4
1
1
1

4

1

1
2
1

3
1
1

1963

1964

1965

3

1

1
2
1
2

4

12

4

1
1
1

5

6

5

1966

1967

1968

1969

1970

Year
County circuit
Local municipal circuit
National circuit
State circuit

Civil society circuit
Intra-library circuit
Local school district circuit
Pittsburgh city circuit

Figure L.62. Circuit counts by year in period 3.

Figure L.63 shows the actor positions in period 3: inner periphery (N=60), core (N=45),
and outer periphery (N=30). Figure L.64 shows audience positions: inner periphery (N=78),
core (N=34), outer periphery (N=12), and diffuse public (N=11). Figure L.65 shows actor and
audience position pairings over time. It can be seen that many transmission in the state circuit
occur within the inner periphery. Communications in the county circuit show more varied
combinations in terms of position. The various circuits in period 3, together with actor/audience
nodes and their positions, are visualized in Figure L.66.

607

Actor position

Outer periphery

30

Core

45

Inner periphery

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Actor position counts

Figure L.63. Actor positions in period 3.

Audience position

Diffuse public

11

Outer periphery

12

Core

34

Inner periphery

78
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Audience position counts

Figure L.64. Audience positions in period 3.

608

70

80

90

Out. per.
Inn. per.
Inn. per. Out. per.

Core

1961
1962

Core
Core

Inn. Out.
per. per.
Core

Inn. per.

1963
1964

Out.
Out.
Inn. Out.
per. Inn. per. per. Core per. per.

1965
1966

Out. per.

Inn. per.

Out.
per.
1967

Inner periphery 1
Core 1 1
Inner periphery

2

Diffuse public 1
Core

2

Inner periphery

4 1 3 2

Diffuse public

4

Inner periphery

2

Core 1
Inner periphery

4

Core 1
Inner periphery

2 2 3 1

Core 1
Core 1

5

Inner periphery

1

7

Outer periphery 1
Core 1
Core 1
Inner periphery

4

Inner periphery 1 1 1
Core 1
Inner periphery 1 1
Diffuse public

Circuits

2

Inner periphery 1

Civil society circuit

Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery

County circuit

2

Core

21

Inner periphery

21

Intra-library circuit
Local municipal circuit
Local school district circuit

Core 1

National circuit

Inner periphery

5

Outer periphery

Pittsburgh city circuit

3

State circuit

Inner periphery 1 3
Core 1 1 1
Inner periphery 1 2
Core 1 1

Inn. per.

1968

Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery 1
Diffuse public

5
3

Core 1 1 1

Core

Outer periphery

21

Inner periphery 1

Out.
Inn. per. per.

2

Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery 1
Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery

2

Core

2

Inner periphery 1 1
Core 1 1
Outer periphery 1

Core

1970

Core

Out.
Inn. per. per.

1969

Core 1
Inner periphery

Inner periphery

21

Diffuse public 1
Actor
Year Position

Audience
position

0

10

20

Circuit count

Figure L.65. Actor positions, audience positions, and circuits by year in period 3.

609

Figure L.66. Actor-Circuit graph for period 3.

PERIOD 4: 1970–1979

Events. A total of N=97 communicative events were identified in period 4. Figure L.67
shows the numbers of these events by year. As seen in Figure L.67, the period begins with
relatively high activity, the activity recedes during 1972, 1973, and 1974, spikes in 1976, then
gradually recedes again in 1977, 1978, and 1979.

610

25

23

Event count

20
15

14

14

14

12

10

7
5

5
0

3

1970

1971

1972

3

2

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

Year

Figure L.67. Communicative events by year in period 4.

Issues. Figure L.68 shows the types and numbers of issues identified in period 4. The
most-discussed issue in period 4 was countywide system formation and unification (N=30),
followed by library study (N=25), LSCA (N=14), Pennsylvania state code and state plan (N=10),
home rule (N=8), county funding (N=8), and local funding from state (N=2). There were
relatively few issues identified in period 4 (N=7) compared to previous periods, such as period 3
(N=13), period 2 (N=11), and period 1 (N=13). Figure L.69 shows the number of issues by year.
The period began with an emphasis on countywide system formation and unification. In the first
year of the period when the regional resource center was in operation, there was also a discussion
of its LSCA funding. That same year, in 1970, the Blasingame library study was discussed.
There was then a lull where home rule was discussed across the county. When that failed, a new
movement toward county system formation and unification was begun. LSCA funding was
sought after in 1976 to support a new library study. The county was also approached about
611

funding. The discussion about the library study, completed in 1978, continued until the end of
the period in 1979.

Issues

Local funding from state

2

County funding

8

Home rule

8

PA state code and state plan

10

LSCA

14

Library study

25

Countywide system formation and
unification

30
0

5

10

15

20

Issue counts

Figure L.68. Issue counts in period 4.

612

25

30

35

25

9

15

1
1

1974

1970

0

1
2

6

1
1

2
1

7

6

2
1

6
1

1979

3

1976

2

3

1975

2

7

5

1978

6

10

1973

5

4

1972

10

2

1977

2

3

1971

Issue counts

20

Year
County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Home rule

Library study

Local funding from state

LSCA

PA state code and state plan

Figure L.69. Issue counts by year in period 4.

Actors and audiences. Figure L.70 shows the actors of period 4. The most prevalent
actor was the Pennsylvania state library (N=19), followed by the Board of County
Commissioners (N=16), Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services (N=10), Donald C.
Potter (N=10), an associate director at Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, experts and consultants
(N=7), and local libraries in Allegheny County (N=7). Figure L.71 shows actors by year in
period 4. Donald C. Potter began as a prominent actor in 1970 and 1971, together with Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh county services. During this time, Potter initiated discussion about the
Blasingame study, published in 1970. The next 4 years, from 1972 to 1975, the issue of home
rule was raised by several actors, including civil society groups, Pennsylvania General
613

Assembly, and voters in Allegheny County. The issue ultimately failed. In 1976, a new library
study was initiated in the county, called Allegheny County Citizens Study Committee on
Libraries. It was funded by LSCA and sponsored by the county. The state library and the Board
of County Commissioners became prominent actors during this time, from 1976 to 1978. Local

Actors

libraries were a prevalent actor in 1979 when the study’s findings were discussed.

Local library trustees
Multiple civil society groups
Anthony A. Martin
Library agencies
League of Women Voters
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Allegheny County Government Study Commission
US Congress
CLP Trustees
Mass media outlets
Pennsylvania Library Association
Civil society-other
Voters of Allegheny County
Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups
Private civil society actor
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Experts and consultants
Donald C. Potter
CLP county services
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0

2

2
2
2

3

4

4

6

6

7
7

8

10
10

10

16
12

Actor counts

Figure L.70. Actor counts in period 4.

614

14

16

19
18

20

25

Actor counts

20

8

15

5

1
1
1
2
1
1
3

0

3
1
1970

10

2
2

3
1
2

4
8

6

1
1
2
1

5

1
1
1

1975

1976

2

1
1
1

1
1
1
2

1
1

1971

1972

1973

1974

3

1977

1
1
3
1
4
1
1
1978

1
1
4
1
1979

Year
Board of County Commissioners

Voters of Allegheny County

US Congress

Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups

Private civil society actor

Pennsylvania state library

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Multiple civil society groups

Mass media outlets

Local library trustees

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Library agencies

League of Women Voters

Experts and consultants

Donald C. Potter

CLP Trustees

CLP county services

Civil society-other

Anthony A. Martin

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

Figure L.71. Actor counts by year in period 4.

Figure L.72 shows the audiences in period 4. The most active audience in period 4 was
the Board of County Commissioners (N=21), followed by experts and consultants (N=12),
Pennsylvania state library (N=11), broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries (N=10), Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh county services (N=10), and local libraries in Allegheny County (N=9). These
audiences and their numbers are shown in Figure L.73. Local libraries are a noticeable audience
in 1970 and 1971 when the Blasingame study is discussed. In the early years of period 4, the
615

Board of County Commissioners are also targeted by proponents of a countywide system.
Allegheny County residents are targeted in 1972, 1973, and 1974 when home rule is discussed.
In 1976, the state library is a prominent audience when the state plan is under scrutiny and
Allegheny County groups apply for funding for a library study. That same year, the Board of
County Commissioners becomes an audience of the state library during the study. Experts and
consultants are targeted audiences in 1977, 1978, and 1979 when the county study is undertaken

Audience

and discussed.

League of Women Voters

1

Anthony A. Martin

1

Broadcast to national libraries

1

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

1

Civil society-other

1

Multiple civil society groups

1

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

CLP city libraries

1

CLP district services

2

Libraries outside Allegheny County

3

Broadcast to County libraries

4

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

7

Local libraries in Allegheny County

9

CLP county services

10

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

10

Pennsylvania state library

11

Experts and consultants

12

Board of County Commissioners

21
0

5

10

15

Audience counts

Figure L.72. Audience counts in period 4.

616

20

25

25
5

Audience counts

20
15
10
5
0

1
1
4

1
3
1
1
1
2
1
2
2

1
3

3
1
1
2

1
2

2
1
1
1

1
1

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

1

3
1
2
1

2
1

1

1
2

1
1
3
1
2
1
3

1975

1976

1977

1978

3
10

4

1
3
2
1
1979

Year
Anthony A. Martin

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

Civil society-other

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Experts and consultants

League of Women Voters

Libraries outside Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Multiple civil society groups

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania state library

Figure L.73. Audience counts by year in period 4.

Figure L.74 shows actor and audience combinations in period 4. The Pennsylvania state
library transmitted to the Board of County Commissioners, broadcasts to Pennsylvania libraries,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services, and itself. The Board of County Commissioners
transmitted to Allegheny County residents, county libraries, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

617

county services, experts and consultants, and Pennsylvania state library. The Board of County
Commissioners served as a prevalent audience for civil society groups during period 4.

618

Actor

Multiple civil society groups

1

Library agencies

1

Anthony A. Martin

1

Pennsylvania General Assembly

1

Local library trustees

1

League of Women Voters

1

CLP Trustees

1

Allegheny County Government Study Commission

1

US Congress

1

Mass media outlets

2

Civil society-other

1 1

Pennsylvania Library Association

1 1

Voters of Allegheny County

3

Some combination of City, County, and civil society…

2

Private civil society actor

2
3

Local libraries in Allegheny County

1

Experts and consultants

1 1 1
2

3

CLP county services

1

Donald C. Potter

1

Board of County Commissioners

1

3
2

2

5

1

3

2

1

6

1 1

6

Pennsylvania state library

4

6
0

2

4
9

4

6

8

10

12

Audience counts
Anthony A. Martin

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

Civil society-other

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Experts and consultants

League of Women Voters

Libraries outside Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Multiple civil society groups

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania state library

Figure L.74. Actor and audience combinations in period 4.

619

14

2

2

16

18

20

Power. Figure L.75 shows the numbers and types of power in period 4. The dominant
form of power was communicative narrowcast (N=53), followed by formal decision (N=14),
communicative broadcast (N=11), administrative narrowcast (N=9), social economic (N=6), and
administrative broadcast (N=4). Figure L.76 shows the types of power by year. Communicative
power is prevalent throughout period 4. Social economic power is seen in the beginning of the
period where the regional reference center was in operation, and toward the end when a library
study was funded. Formal decisions were made during the home rule movement and in order to
initiate the library study.

Administrative broadcast

4

Power types

Social economic

6

Administrative narrowcast

9

Communicative broadcast

11

Formal decision

14

Communicative narrowcast

53
0

10

20

30

Power counts

Figure L.75. Power counts in period 4.

620

40

50

60

25
1

Power counts

20
15
10
5
0

4

1
1
7

1

2
16

9

3
1
1

2
2

3

1970

1971

1972

3

1
1

2
1

7

1
3
1

1
1

3

1
1

2

1
1
1

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

4

6
1
1979

Year
Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Figure L.76. Power counts by year in period 4.

Figure L.77 shows actor, audience, and power combinations in period 4. Some of the
dominant transmitters of communicative power were private civil society actors, local libraries,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services, and Donald C. Potter. Pennsylvania General
Assembly, US Congress, voters of Allegheny County, experts and consultants, the Board of
County Commissioners, and Pennsylvania state library were formal deciders. The Board of
County Commissioners and the Pennsylvania state library were transmitters of social economic
power. The general structure of actor/audiences, their power relations, and the directions of
power are visualized in Figure L.78.

621

All
eg
he
ny
Co
unt
y
Some Vo
Go
Pe
Mu
combi ter
ver Lea
nn
ltip
nation s
nm
gu
syl
le
ent
e
va
civi
of of
City, All
Ma
Stu
of Loc nia An Lib l
Count eg Penns
ss
dy
Wo al Ge tho rar soc
y, and he ylvani
me
Co CL me libr ner ny y iet
Experts
civil ny a
Civil dia US m P n ary al A. ag y
and Local libraries
societ Co Library societ out Co mis Tru Vo tru Ass Ma en gro
consultan in Allegheny Private civil
y unt Associ y- let ngr sio ste ter ste em rti cie up
ts
County
society actor groups y ation other s ess n es s es bly n s s
Multiple civil society groups

Library agencies
Anthony A. Martin
Pennsylvania General Assembly

Local library trustees
League of Women Voters

CLP Trustees
Allegheny County Government Study Commission
US Congress
Mass media outlets
Civil society-other

Pennsylvania Library Association
Voters of Allegheny County

Some combination of city, county, and civil
society groups
Private civil society actor

Local libraries in Allegheny County

CLP county
services

Experts and consultants

Pennsylvania Board of County Donald C.
state library Commissioners Potter

CLP county services

Donald C. Potter

Board of County Commissioners

Pennsylvania state library

Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Pennsylvania counties
Experts and consultants
League of Women Voters
Broadcast to County libraries
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Broadcast to national libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Civil society-other
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Experts and consultants
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
Multiple civil society groups
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
Experts and consultants
CLP district services
CLP county services
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Experts and consultants
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Anthony A. Martin
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Libraries outside Allegheny County
CLP county services
Pennsylvania state library
Experts and consultants
CLP county services
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pennsylvania state library
CLP county services
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Board of County Commissioners

Actor

Audience

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
3
2
2
1
1
1
3
1
3
2
1
1
1

1
1
3

1
2
1
5
1
6
3
1
4
1

3
1

2

2

1

1
1
2
1

1
4
3

0

1
1

1
2

4
6
Power count

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Figure L.77. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 4.

622

1
1

3
8

10

Figure L.78. Actor-Power graph for period 4.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.79 shows the types and numbers of
legitimation in period 4. The predominant form of legitimation was success-discussion and
periphery support (N=61), followed by unknown legitimation (N=22), failure-objection (N=12),
failure-bypass representative public (N=1), and success-consensus (N=1). Figure L.80 shows the
types and numbers of implementation in period 4. Most implementation in period 4 was a
success (N=43), some events were unknown (N=30), and some were a failure (N=24). The
implementation success rate in period 4 was 44 percent, compared to 70 percent in period 3, 73
percent in period 2, and 36 percent in period 1. Figure L.81 supports the interpretation that
period 4 was a relatively unsuccessful period in terms of system development. Communicative
events that failed to be legitimated (N=13) largely failed to be implemented (N=10), but many

623

transmissions that were successfully legitimated (N=62) also failed to be implemented (N=11) or

Legitimation types

had unknown implementation outcomes (N=23).

Success-consensus

1

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Failure-objection

12

Unknown

22

Success-discussion and periphery support

61
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Legitimation counts

Figure L.79. Legitimation counts in period 4.

Implementation counts

Failure

24

Unknown

30

Success

43

0

10

20

30

Implementation counts

624

40

50

Figure L.80. Implementation counts in period 4.

Legitimation types

Unknown

3

6

13

Success-discussion and periphery support

23

11

Success-consensus

1

Failure-objection

1
1

Failure-bypass representative public

1
0

27

10

5

10

15

20

25

30

Implementation counts
Unknown

Success

Failure

Figure L.81. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 4.

Figure L.82 shows legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 4. In
every year, there was at least 1 transmission that was legitimated successfully, but as can be
seen, and as shown in Figure L.81, many successfully-legitimated transmissions had failed or
unknown implementation. Two years with high legitimation-to-implementation rates were 1976
(48 percent) and 1977 (71 percent). It seems that actors successfully implemented the library
study during these years.

625

1970
1971
1972
1977 1976 1975 1974 1973

Unknown 1 4
Success-discussion and periphery support

3

Failure-objection 1
Unknown 2 1 2
Success-discussion and periphery support
4
3
Failure-objection 2
Unknown 1
Success-discussion and periphery support 1
Success-consensus 1
Success-discussion and periphery support

3 1

Failure-objection 1
Success-discussion and periphery support 1
Failure-objection 1
Success-discussion and periphery support 1 1
Failure-objection 1
Success-discussion and periphery support

3
Failure-objection 1 1
Unknown
4

Success-discussion and periphery support

1978

11

3 1

Success-discussion and periphery support

5

Failure-objection

2

Failure-bypass representative public 1
Unknown 1
Success-discussion and periphery support

4
Failure-objection 1 1
0

Year

7

10

Unknown

1979

2
3

10

Legitimation types

20

30

Implementation counts

Implementation types
Failure

Success

Unknown

Figure L.82. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 4.

Circuits. Figure L.83 shows the circuits in period 4. The most prominent circuit was
county (N=34), followed by state (N=33), intra-library (N=16), civil society (N=10), national
(N=2), and economic (N=2). Circuit counts by year are shown in Figure L.84. The county
circuit maintained a relatively consistent presence throughout the years, especially in 1976. The
626

state circuit was also consistent throughout, but especially in 1976 and 1977. Intra-library circuit

Circuits

was active during the discussions of the Blasingame study in 1970 and 1971.

Economic circuit

2

National circuit

2

Civil society circuit

10

Intra-library circuit

16

State circuit

33

County circuit

34
0

5

10

15

20

25

Circuit counts

Figure L.83. Circuit counts in period 4.

627

30

35

40

25

Circuit counts

20

9

15
10
5
0

2
1

1

4

8

6

2
11

5

1
2

1971

1972

1
1970

3

1
1

2
1

1973

1974

1975

1976

1
5

1
1
1

2
1
1

2

3

1977

1978

1979

12

1
1

4

Year
Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Intra-library circuit

National circuit

State circuit

Figure L.84. Circuit counts by year in period 4.

Figure L.85 shows actor positions in period 4. The most frequent position was inner
periphery (N=41), followed by outer periphery (N=36) and core (N=20). Figure L.86 shows
audience positions in period 4.

The most frequent audience positions were core (N=38),

followed by inner periphery (N=31), diffuse public (N=22), and outer periphery (N=6). Actor
position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year are shown in Figure L.87. State
circuit communications were identified primarily within the inner periphery, reflecting
communications between the state library and district library about the library study. A variety
of combinations are apparent in the county circuit. Intra-library circuit communications often
travelled between the outer periphery and core. Civil society circuit transmissions were also

628

typically from the outer periphery to the core. The general structure of communication in period
4, including circuits, actor/audiences, and their positions, is visualized in Figure L.88.

Actor position

Core

20

Outer periphery

36

Inner periphery

41

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Actor position counts

Figure L.85. Actor position counts in period 4.

629

35

40

45

Audience position

Outer periphery

6

Diffuse public

22

Inner periphery

31

Core

38
0

10

20

30

Audience position counts

Figure L.86. Audience position counts in period 4.

630

40

Inn. per. Out. per.

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

Core

2

Outer periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

1

Inner periphery

1

1

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Outer periphery

1

5

Inner periphery

Core
Out. Inn.
Inn. Out.
Inn.
per. per. Out. per. Core per. Core per. per.
Inn. per.
Core
Inn. per.
Out.
Inn. per. per. Core Inn. per. Out. per.

Core

1977
1978
1979

3

2
1

3

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Core

1

2

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Diffuse public

1

Inner periphery

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

1

Core

5

Inner periphery

9

Diffuse public

1

Core

2

Outer periphery

Year

1

Core

Inn.
per.

Out. per.

Core

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976

Inner periphery

1

1

Inner periphery

2

Core

1

Outer periphery

1

Inner periphery

1

1

6

Diffuse public

4

Outer periphery

1

Inner periphery

1

Outer periphery

1

Core

2

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

1

Core

3

Inner periphery

1

2

Diffuse public
Audience
position

1

2

Diffuse public

Actor
position

2
1

1
0

2

4

6

8

10

Circuit counts

Civil society circuit

Circuits
County circuit

Economic circuit

Intra-library circuit

National circuit

State circuit

Figure L.87. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 4.

631

Figure L.88. Actor-Circuit graph for period 4.

PERIOD 5: 1980–1993

Events. A total of N=157 communicative events were identified in period 5. As seen in
Figure L.89, the period spans from 1980 to mid-1993, but no communicative events were
identified from 1980 to 1984. It is not clear why this was the case, but it may be related to the
economic downturn that occurred during that time.

632

60
49
44

40
30
20

0

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1993

0

1992

0

7

1991

0

12

1990

0

12

1989

0

1980

0

5

1987

10

8

1988

20

1986

Event counts

50

Year

Figure L.89. Communicative events by year in period 5.

Issues. Figure L.90 shows the issues of period 5. The most dominant issue was
countywide system formation and unification (N=26), followed by computerization (N=22),
county funding (N=19), city library budget (N=13), and formation of county library
organizations.

Two of the top issues—computerization and formation of county library

organizations—were new to this period. Figure L.91 shows the issues by year. Some of the
issues in the middle of the period included county funding, state funding, the city library budget,
and Access PA, a resource-sharing initiative that began in Allegheny County in 1988. As
activity increased in 1990 and 1991, the issues included the formation of county library
organizations, the county library director, and countywide system formation and unification.
This was the time when the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh published its study, Lucchino
published Quiet Crisis, and several new library groups were formed, including CLASP and
CFLAC. Computerization and local funding for libraries became major issues in 1992.
633

Issue

Library telecommunications rates
Union Catalog
National planning
local allocations for libraries
State budget
Three Rivers Free-Net
Reading centers in the housing projects-Knowledge…
LSCA
EIN
RAD legislation
Grants
Local library administration
Fax machines
County library director
Miscellaneous
AccessPA
Library study
PA state code and state plan
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Local library coordination
Local funding from state
Formation of county library organizations
City library budget
County funding
Computerization
Countywide system formation and unification
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
8
13
13
19
22
26
5

10

15

Issue counts

Figure L.90. Issue counts in period 5.

634

20

25

30

60

40

1
4
2

30

12

1
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
7

20

4
2

5

5
1
1

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
2

Year
(blank)

Union Catalog

Three Rivers Free-Net

State budget

Reading centers in the housing projects-Knowledge Connections

RAD legislation

PA state code and state plan

National planning

Miscellaneous

LSCA

Local library coordination

Local library administration

Local funding from state

local allocations for libraries

Library telecommunications rates

Library study

Grants

Formation of county library organizations

Fax machines

EIN

Countywide system formation and unification

County library director

County funding

Computerization

Commission on the Future of Libraries

City library budget

AccessPA

Figure L.91. Issue counts by year in period 5.

635

18

1993

5

4

1992

4
1
2

7

8

1991

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

1
1
1
1
3
1

1989

1
2
2

1
2
1
1

1988

10

1
1
3
3
1
3

1987

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
2
3
1

1990

Issue counts

50

Actors and audiences. Figure L.92 shows the actors of period 5. The predominant
actors were Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County, or CFLAC (N=25),
Board of County Commissioners (N=20), County Library Association Serving the People, or
CLASP (N=19), Pennsylvania state library (N=14), and County Controller (N=13), who at that
time was Frank Lucchino. Figure L.93 shows actors by year in period 5. The Board of County
Commissioners and the City of Pittsburgh were relatively stable actors from 1986 to 1992. All
aspects of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, including the city libraries, a CLP committee,
county services, and district services, were the most visible actors from 1986 to 1990. In 1991,
the dominant actors changed to Library Association of South Hills (LASH) and County Library
Association Serving the People (CLASP), two regional library associations. In 1991, 1992, and
1993, the Commission on the Future of Libraries in Allegheny County (CFLAC) became a
dominant actor. In 1991 and 1992, local libraries in Allegheny County became visible actors.

636

Actors

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Experts and consultants
CLP Trustees
Public Library Project
Local library trustees
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
League of Women Voters
Urban Library Project
Friends groups
CLP cabinet
Bob Croneberger
LASH
CLP county services
Private corporation or foundation
CLP committee
CLP city libraries
Local libraries in Allegheny County
City of Pittsburgh
Mass media outlets
CLP district services
County Controller
Pennsylvania state library
Board of County Commissioners
CLASP
Commission on the Future of Libraries

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
8
13
14
20
20
25
0

5

10

15

Actor counts

Figure L.92. Actor counts in period 5.

637

20

25

30

60
50
3
4
1
3
1
1

Actor counts

40
30

8

20
10
0

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3

1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

4
1
1
2
2
4
1
2
1
2

2
5
9

1
1
1
4
5
3

19
1

8
1
1
1
1
4
1
5
4
1
1
2
1
1
1
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993
2
2
1
3

Year
Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Board of County Commissioners

Bob Croneberger

City of Pittsburgh

CLASP

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP committee

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Commission on the Future of Libraries

County Controller

Experts and consultants

Friends groups

LASH

League of Women Voters

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local library trustees

Mass media outlets

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Private corporation or foundation

Public Library Project

Urban Library Project

(blank)

Figure L.93. Actor counts by year in period 5.

Figure L.94 shows the audiences of period 5. The most prevalent audience was Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh city libraries (N=20), followed by broadcast to Allegheny County residents
(N=19), Commission on the Future of Libraries (N=18), Board of County Commissioners
638

(N=15), Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh county services (N=15), and broadcast to county libraries
(N=14). Figure L.95 shows audiences by year. The Board of County Commissioners, CLP city
libraries, Broadcast to county libraries, CLP county services, were relatively frequent audiences
throughout the period where communicative events were identified.

Broadcasts to county

Audience

residents and broadcasts to county libraries increased from 1990 to 1991.

Allegheny Conference on Community…

1

Allegheny County Housing Authority

1

PA governor

1

Civil society-other

1

County departments

1

Broadcast to national libraries

1

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

1

CLP cabinet

2

CLP committee

2

Private business

2

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

2

both Mayor and Council

2

Authority for Improvements in…

2

Private corporation or foundation

2

CLP Trustees

2

Bob Croneberger

4

LASH

4

CLP district services

5

Pennsylvania state library

6

Local libraries in Allegheny County

6

CLASP

8

Broadcast to County libraries

14

CLP county services

15

Board of County Commissioners

15

Commission on the Future of Libraries

18

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

19

CLP city libraries

20
0

5

10

15

Audience counts

Figure L.94. Audience counts in period 5.

639

20

25

60

Audience count

50
1
1
1
2
1
5
1
2

40

30

6

20

10

0

1
1
1
3
2

1
1
1
1
1
1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

3
1
2
1
2
2
1
1988

1
1
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1989

2
3
1
5

1
1
1
2
2
1

5
1

7
1
4
1990

7
1991

1
2
4
5
1
13
2
3
4
1
1
5
3
1
2
1
1992

1
1
2
2
1
1993

Year
Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Allegheny County Housing Authority

Authority for Improvements in Municipalities (AIM)

Board of County Commissioners

Bob Croneberger

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

Civil society-other

CLASP

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP committee

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Commission on the Future of Libraries

County departments

LASH

Local libraries in Allegheny County

PA governor

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private corporation or foundation

Figure L.95. Audiences by year in period 5.

Actor-audience pairings are seen in Figure L.96. The Commission on the Future of
Libraries was an audience of local libraries in Allegheny County, CLASP, and the Board of

640

County Commissioners. CLASP, the CLP committee, and the Commission on the Future of
Libraries made broadcasts to county libraries.

641

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

1

Experts and consultants

1

CLP Trustees

1

Public Library Project

1

Local library trustees

1

Allegheny Conference on Community Development

1

League of Women Voters

1

Urban Library Project

1

Friends groups

11

CLP cabinet

11

Bob Croneberger

11

Actor

LASH

2

CLP county services

3

Private corporation or foundation
CLP committee
CLP city libraries
Local libraries in Allegheny County

2 11
111 2
111111
11

5

City of Pittsburgh
Mass media outlets

8
1

CLP district services

7
3

County Controller
Pennsylvania state library

1 2 11
5

4

11

8

Board of County Commissioners
CLASP
Commission on the Future of Libraries

11 2
2 11

13
1

5

1 2

6
5

2

3
5

0

11
6
10

1

5

2

3

1111

15

20

Audience counts
Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Allegheny County Housing Authority

Authority for Improvements in Municipalities (AIM)

Board of County Commissioners

Bob Croneberger

both Mayor and Council

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

Civil society-other

CLASP

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP committee

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Commission on the Future of Libraries

County departments

LASH

Local libraries in Allegheny County

PA governor

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private corporation or foundation

Figure L.96. Actor and audience combinations in period 5.

642

3

1
25

30

Power. Figure L.97 shows the number and types of power in period 5. Communicative
narrowcast (N=61) as the predominant form of power, followed by communicative broadcast
(N=30), social economic (N=29), formal decision (N=20), administrative narrowcast (N=9),
administrative broadcast (N=6), and social backroom deals (N=2). Figure L.98 shows the types
of power by year in period 5. Communicative narrowcasts grew steadily from 1986 to 1992.
Social economic was a steady form of power from 1986 to 1990, then increased in 1991 and
1992. Communicative broadcasts increased substantially in 1990 and 1991. Formal decisions
also increased in 1991 and 1992. Administrative narrowcasts and broadcasts had minimal
visibility during this period.

Social backroom deals

2

Power types

Administrative broadcast

6

Administrative narrowcast

9

Formal decision

20

Social economic

29

Communicative broadcast

30

Communicative narrowcast

61
0

10

20

30

40

Power counts

Figure L.97. Power counts in period 5.

643

50

60

70

60
50
2
5

9

30

8
8

12

5
1
4

2
3
1
1

1993

3
4
4
1

24

16

1992

4
1
3
2
2

1990

4
1
2
1

1987

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

1
2
2

1986

10

1989

2
2

1991

20

1988

Power counts

8
7

40

Year
Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social backroom deals

Social economic

Figure L.98. Power counts by year in period 5.

Figure L.99 shows actor, audience, and power combinations in period 5.

Social

economic power was transmitted to library audiences from private corporations or foundations,
the City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania state library, and the Board of County Commissioners.
Communicative narrowcasts are dispersed widely across almost all actor-audience pairings.
Formal decisions were made by several actors, including the Commission on the Future of
Libraries, Board of County Commissioners, CLASP, Pennsylvania state library, City of

644

Pittsburgh, private corporations or foundations, and CLP trustees. A visualization of actors,
audiences, and their power relationships can be seen in Figure L.100.

645

All
eg
he
ny
Co
nf
Pe
er
nn
en
syl
ce
va
on
ni
Le Co
a
Pu ag m
Ur Ex Cit
CL
bli ue m
ba pe ize
Cit
P
c
of un Lo n rts ns
y
co
Lib W ity cal Lib an for
of
un
rar CL o De lib rar d Be
Mass Pit
Local
Private ty
y P m vel rar y co tte
medi ts
libraries
corporat se
Bob Frien Pr Tr en op
y Pr ns r
a bu
in
ion or rvi CLP
Crone ds oj us Vo m tru oj ult Lib
outlet rg CLP district Alleghen
CLP
foundati ce cabin LA berge group ec te ter en AC ste ec an rar
s h
s t es s t LA es t ts ies
services
y County CLP city libraries committee
on
s et SH r

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Experts and consultants
Urban Library Project
Local library trustees
ACLA
Allegheny County Conference on Community Dvlpmnt
League of Women Voters
CLP trustees
Public Library Project
Friends groups

Bob Croneberger
LASH

CLP cabinet

CLP county services

Private corporation or foundation

CLP committee

CLP city libraries

Local libraries in Allegheny County

CLP district services

City of Pittsburgh

County
Controller

Mass media outlets

Pennsylvania
state library

County Controller

CLASP

Pennsylvania state library

Board of
County
Commiss
ioners

CLASP

Commission on the Future of
Libraries

Board of County Commissioners

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to national libraries
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP county services
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
CLP district services
CLP committee
Pennsylvania state library
both Mayor and Council
Board of County Commissioners
CLP committee
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
LASH
CLP district services
Bob Croneberger
Board of County Commissioners
County departments
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Board of County Commissioners
CLP Trustees
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Private corporation or foundation
Pennsylvania state library
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
both Mayor and Council
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pennsylvania state library
CLP city libraries
CLP cabinet
Broadcast to County libraries
Bob Croneberger
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Private business
LASH
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania state library
PA governor
CLP district services
CLP city libraries
Civil society-other
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Pennsylvania state library
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP district services
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
Private corporation or foundation
Local libraries in Allegheny County
LASH
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
CLP city libraries
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Authority for Improvements in Municipalities (AIM)
Allegheny County Housing Authority

Actor

Audience

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Formal decision

Social backroom deals

Social economic

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
1
1
3
1
1
1 1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2

1
1
1

5

3

2
4

1
1
1 1
1
1
1

2

1
1
1
1

1
0

8

2

1
5

3
2

4

3

3

2

7

1

3
2
2

5

4

1
1
1

6

7

3

5

1

5

10
Power count

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.99. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 5.

646

15

Figure L.100. Actor-Audience-Power graph for period 5.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.101 shows the types of legitimation in
period 5.

The most prevalent type is success-discussion and periphery support (N=115),

followed by unknown (N=32), failure-objection (N=9), and failure-bypass representative public
(N=1). Figure L.102 shows the types of implementation in period 5. Legitimation was either a
success (N=123) or unknown (N=34).

There were no instances found of implementation

failures. Figure L.103 shows that, overwhelmingly, events that were legitimated were also
implemented.

There were no instances found of events that were legitimated but not

implemented. Figure L.104 shows legitimation and implementation combinations by year in
period 5. In all years, most events were successfully legitimated and implemented.

647

Legitimation types

Failure-bypass representative public

1

Failure-objection

9

Unknown

32

Success-discussion and periphery support

115
0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

Legitimation counts

Implementation types

Figure L.101. Legitimation counts in period 5.

Unknown

34

Success

123

0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation counts

Figure L.102. Implementation counts in period 5.

648

120

140

5

Legitimation types

Unknown

27

Success-discussion and periphery
support

25

90
Unknown

4
5

Failure-objection

Failure-bypass representative
public

Success

1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation counts

Figure L.103. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 5.

649

1985 1984 1983 1982 1981 1980

(blank)
(blank)
(blank)
(blank)
(blank)
(blank)

1987

1986

Unknown 1
Success-discussion and periphery
support

2

Failure-objection

2

Unknown

3

Success-discussion and periphery
support

5

Unknown

4

1988

Success-discussion and periphery
support

6 1

Failure-objection 1

1989

Unknown

Success

6 1

Success-discussion and periphery
support

Unknown

32

Unknown 1

1990

Success-discussion and periphery
support
Failure-objection

12
2

Unknown

1991

5

7

3

Success-discussion and periphery
support
Unknown

28
21

1992

Success-discussion and periphery
support
Failure-objection

6

31

10

22

1993

Failure-bypass representative public 1
Unknown

3

Success-discussion and periphery
support

31
0

Year

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

Legitimation

Implementation counts

Figure L.104. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 5.

650

Circuits. Figure L.105 shows the circuits of period 5. The predominant circuit was
county (N=61), followed by civil society (N=28), intra-library (N=27), state (N=21), Pittsburgh
city (N=11), and economic (N=9). Figure L.106 shows these circuits by year. The county
circuit was active in every year, especially 1991 and 1992, at the same time the civil society
circuit was active. State and economic circuits were minimally active but consistent, as was the
Pittsburgh city circuit. The intra-library circuit was especially active from 1989 to 1991.

Economic circuit

9

Circuits

Pittsburgh city circuit

11

State circuit

21

Intra-library circuit

27

Civil society circuit

28

County circuit

61
0

10

20

30

40

Circuit counts

Figure L.105. Circuit counts for period 5.

651

50

60

70

60
50
6
1
8

30

3

1988

7

13

26

13

10

3
4

1993

1987

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

6
3

2
1
6
3

1990

3
1
3
1

10

1989

1
2
2

2
1
4
1
4

1986

4

1992

20

1991

Axis Title

40

7
1
3
2

Year
Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Intra-library circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

State circuit

Figure L.106. Circuits by year in period 5.

Figure L.107 shows actor positions in period 5. The most frequent position was core
(N=70), followed by inner periphery (N=54) and outer periphery (N=33). Figure L.108 shows
audience positions in period 5. The most frequent audience position was inner periphery (N=63),
followed by core (N=50), diffuse public (N=36), and outer periphery (N=8). Actor position,
audience position, and circuit combinations by year are shown in Figure L.109. The state circuit
was intermittently active, with most transmissions sent from or received by the inner periphery.
The city circuit was active from 1986 to 1990, then dwindled in activity from 1991 onward. The
county circuit is relatively active in all its positions throughout the period. Civil society becomes
active toward the end of the period, from 1991 to 1993. An overall visualization of the circuits,
together with actor/audience nodes and circuit positions, is shown in Figure L.110.

652

33

Inner periphery

54

Core

70

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Actor position counts

Figure L.107. Actor positions in period 5.

Outer periphery

Audience position

Actor position

Outer periphery

8

Diffuse public

36

Core

50

Inner periphery

63
0

10

20

30

40

50

Audience position counts

Figure L.108. Audience positions in period 5.

653

60

70

80

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

(blank)
(blank)
Inner periphery

1 1
1 1

Inner periphery
Core
Inner periphery
Inner periphery

Inn. per.

Inner periphery

1988

1

Core

Core

1985

(blank) (blank) (blank) (blank) (blank) (blank)

(blank)

Out.
per.

Inn. per.

(blank)

Inn.
per.

1986

(blank)

Core

1987

(blank)

1
3
3

Diffuse public

1 1

Core

1 1

Core

Inner periphery
Diffuse public

3

Core

2

Diffuse public

1

1989

Inn. per.

1

1 1

Core

Inner periphery

2

Out. per.
Inn.
per.

Core
Inner periphery

Diffuse public

1

1

Inner periphery

Core

1

1

2 1

3
1

Core

3

Circuits

1

Inner periphery

Core

1990

Civil society circuit
2 1

Diffuse public

Inner periphery
Core

Inn. per.

Inner periphery

1 1

1

1991

4
3

1

Core

1

3
5

1

4

Core

Out. per.

1
3

Diffuse public

Outer periphery

1992

Pittsburgh city circuit

1 2

Inner periphery

Inn. per.

Intra-library circuit

3

1 1

Diffuse public
Core

2 1

5

4

1

Inner periphery

8

Core

3

Outer periphery

1 1

Inner periphery

3

4

Out.
per.
Inn.
per.

Diffuse public

Core

Inner periphery

Actor
Year position

Diffuse public
Audience
position

3

1

2

Inner periphery

Core

3

6

Core

Diffuse public

3

2

4

Diffuse public

Outer periphery

Core

Economic circuit

1 2

Outer periphery

1993

County circuit

2

State circuit
Core

Out. per.

2

1

2 1
2
3
1
1
0

5

10

15

Circuit count

Figure L.109. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 5.

654

Figure L.110. Actor-Circuit graph for period 5.

PERIOD 6: 1993–1994

Events. A total of N=284 communicative events were identified in period 6. The period
is a little over a year long, from June 1993 when the Pennsylvania Economy League approached
CLASP about the proposed Regional Asset District legislation, to October 1994 when ACLA
became a contractual regional asset and was awarded 5 million dollars from the Regional Asset
District board. Despite the comparatively short duration of time, a significant volume of activity
occurred during period 6, the activity was focused on a common theme, and several new actors
and issues appeared. From 1993 to 1994, communicative events increased dramatically, from
N=62 to N=222 (see Figure L.111).
655

250

222

Event count

200
150
100
62
50
0

1993

1994

Year

Figure L.111. Communicative events in period 6.

Issues. Figure L.112 shows the issues of period 6. The most prevalent issue was RAD
funding (N=115), followed by RAD legislation (N=58), Electronic Information Network, or EIN
(N=31), formation of county library organizations (N=19), and library telecommunications rates
(N=9). RAD funding and RAD legislation are new issues as of period 6. The issues of
formation of county library organizations, library telecommunications rates, and EIN increased
since period 5.

656

Issues

Reading centers in the housing projects-…
Union Catalog
County department funding
Internet
City library budget
Local library formation
PA state code and state plan
Three Rivers Free-Net
Redrawing district lines
Local funding from state
Countywide system formation and unification
County funding
Local allocations for libraries
Computerization
RAD board
County library director
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Library telecommunications rates
Formation of county library organizations
EIN
RAD legislation
RAD funding
0

1
1
1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
9
19
31
58
115
20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Issue counts

Figure L.112. Issues in period 6.

Figure L.113 shows issues by year in period 6. RAD legislation is a significant issue in
both years. In late 1993, RAD legislation was passed in the Pennsylvania General Assembly,
and in early 1994, the legislation was approved by the Allegheny County Commissioners. In
1994, RAD funding became the major issue. The prevalence of this issue reflects how arts and
cultural groups like ACLA prepared to petition for RAD funding. Other significant issues in
1994 were the RAD board, library telecommunications rates, formation of county library
organizations, and EIN. These issues confirm the description and chronology in section 0 where

657

it was found that EIN, the RAD legislation, ACLA, and civil society groups like the
Pennsylvania Economy League became a new means for unifying libraries in Pittsburgh.

658

250

1
2
1

Union Catalog
Three Rivers Free-Net

28
200

Redrawing district lines
Reading centers in the housing
projects-Knowledge Connections
RAD legislation
RAD funding
RAD board
PA state code and state plan
Local library formation
Local funding from state

150

Local allocations for libraries

113

Library telecommunications rates

Issue

Internet
Formation of county library
organizations
EIN
Countywide system formation and
unification
100

County library director
County funding
County department funding

5
1
1
2
4
1
2
1

9

Computerization
Commission on the Future of
Libraries
City library budget

2
50
17

30

0

2
2
2
1
2

25

6
1
3
2
4
2
1
1993

2
2
1
1
3
2
1994

Year

Figure L.113. Issues by year in period 6.

659

Actors and audiences. Figure L.114 shows the actors in period 6. The most frequent
actor was CLASP (N=65), followed by ACLA (N=47), Commission on the Future of Libraries
(N=34), mass media outlets (N=19), Regional Asset District (N=18), and Pennsylvania General
Assembly (N=16). Figure L.115 shows actors by year. CLASP was a dominant actor in both
years. ACLA emerged only in 1994. Commission on the Future of Libraries was active in both
years, but more so in 1994. Contractor and local libraries in Allegheny County emerged as
visible actors in 1994 as library groups prepared for RAD hearings. The Regional Asset District
became active in 1994 after legislation was passed at the state and county levels.

660

Actor

PA governor
PA Department of Revenue
Some combination of City, County, and civil society…
Allegheny County Solicitor
CLP committee
PA Secretary of Labor and Industry
CLP and Monessen district directors
County Controller
Bob Croneberger
PA Public Utility Commission
County municipalities outside the city
CLP city libraries
CLP district services
CLP county services
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Private corporation or foundation
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania Economy League
City of Pittsburgh
Pennsylvania state library
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Board of County Commissioners
Contractor
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Regional Asset District
Mass media outlets
Commission on the Future of Libraries
ACLA
CLASP
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
6

10

10
11
12

16
18
19

20

34

30

40

Actor counts

Figure L.114. Actors in period 6.

661

47
50

65
60

70

250

1

18

3
2
4

200

5
1
2
1
1
17

Some combination of City, County, and
civil society groups
Regional Asset District
Private corporation or foundation
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania Economy League
PA Secretary of Labor and Industry
PA Public Utility Commission

10
2
2
150

11

PA governor
PA Department of Revenue
Mass media outlets
Local libraries in Allegheny County

Axis Title

27

County municipalities outside the city
County Controller

1
3
2
1
100

Contractor
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP district services
CLP county services

43

CLP committee
CLP city libraries
CLP and Monessen district directors

1
2
2
50

11

3
2

CLASP

9

City of Pittsburgh

1
3

Bob Croneberger

5
2
1

Board of County Commissioners

7

Allegheny County Solicitor

2
1
1
47

ACLA

22

0

Allegheny Conference on Community
Development

2
2
1
1993

1994

Axis Title

Figure L.115. Actors by year in period 6.

662

Figure L.116 shows the audiences of period 6.

The most frequent audience was

broadcast to Allegheny County residents (N=49), followed by CLASP (N=41), broadcast to
county libraries (N=36), Regional Asset District (N=34), Commission on the Future of Libraries
(N=22), and ACLA (N=19). Figure L.117 shows audiences by year in period 6. Many of the
audiences in 1993 were also audiences in 1994, but the volume of transmission to those
audiences increased in 1994. Broadcast to Allegheny County residents were visible in both
years, but they increased in 1994. Regional Asset District became a new audience in 1994.

663

Pgh. Mayor

1

CLP committee

1

PA Department of Revenue

1

Audience

Allegheny Conference on Community…

1

Broadcast to civil society groups

1

Multiple municipalities

1

Pennsylvania state library

2

RAD lobbyists

2

Broadcast to national population

2

eiNetwork

3

Contractor

3

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

3

CLP district services

4

Pennsylvania Economy League

4

CLP county services

5

PA Public Utility Commission

5

CLP city libraries

8

Local libraries in Allegheny County

8

Board of County Commissioners

8

Pennsylvania General Assembly

9

Private corporation or foundation

11

ACLA

19

Commission on the Future of Libraries

22

Regional Asset District

34

Broadcast to County libraries

36

CLASP

41

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

49
0

10

20

30

40

Audience counts

Figure L.116. Audiences in period 6.

664

50

60

250

Regional Asset District
RAD lobbyists
Private corporation or foundation
Pgh. Mayor
34
200

Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania General Assembly

2
8
1
1
2
5
1
1
6
3
3
150
20

Audience count

2
2
3

Pennsylvania Economy League
PA Public Utility Commission
PA Department of Revenue
Multiple municipalities
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Contractor
Commission on the Future of Libraries

33

CLP district services
CLP county services

100
3
2

CLP committee
CLP city libraries

25

1
3
1
7
50

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Broadcast to national population

4
2
2
2
3
1
5

40

Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to civil society groups
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

8

0

CLASP

11

4
1

Board of County Commissioners

9

19

Allegheny Conference on Community
Development
ACLA

4
1993

1994

Year

Figure L.117. Audience by year in period 6.

665

Figure L.118 shows actor and audience pairings in period 6. CLASP, the most frequent
actor, transmitted to several audiences, including itself (N=25), broadcast to county libraries
(N=13), Regional Asset District (N=5), and Commission on the Future of Libraries (N=5).
ACLA, the successor of CLASP and also a dominant actor in period 6, transmitted to Regional
Asset District (N=18), broadcast to county libraries (N=9), and itself (N=8). Mass media outlets
were almost exclusive broadcasters to Allegheny County residents (N=18).

666

Actor

PA governor
PA Department of Revenue
Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups
Allegheny County Solicitor
CLP committee
PA Secretary of Labor and Industry
CLP and Monessen district directors
County Controller
Bob Croneberger
PA Public Utility Commission
County municipalities outside the city
CLP city libraries
CLP district services
CLP county services
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Private corporation or foundation
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania Economy League
City of Pittsburgh
Pennsylvania state library
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Board of County Commissioners
Contractor
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Regional Asset District
Mass media outlets
Commission on the Future of Libraries
ACLA
CLASP

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
11
2
11
111
111
111
2 11
11 2
121
3 11
1 4
11 3 1
12 3 1 3
5 1 3 11
4 1 3 1 3
1 6 11 2 4 1
6 1 2 111 2 4
18
1
12
7
5 1 4 212
7
8
5
9
1 2 11 2
4 3
13
0

10

20

2
18
25

30

5 111 3 1 3
40

50

Audience counts
ACLA

Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to civil society groups

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national population

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

CLASP

CLP city libraries

CLP committee

CLP county services

CLP district services

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Contractor

eiNetwork

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Multiple municipalities

PA Department of Revenue

PA Public Utility Commission

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania state library

Pgh. Mayor

Private corporation or foundation

RAD lobbyists

Regional Asset District

Figure L.118. Actor and audience combinations in period 6.

667

60

5
70

Power. Figure L.119 shows the types of power in period 6. The most prevalent form of
power was communicative narrowcast (N=126), followed by communicative broadcast (N=60),
formal decision (N=50), social economic (N=21), administrative narrowcast (N=18), and
administrative broadcast (N=9). These types of power are shown by year in Figure L.120. All
forms of power were present in both years, and all forms substantially increased in frequency
from 1993 to 1994.

Administrative broadcast

9

Power types

Administrative narrowcast

18

Social economic

21

Formal decision

50

Communicative broadcast

60

Communicative narrowcast

126
0

20

40

60

80

Power counts

Figure L.119. Power in period 6.

668

100

120

140

250

15
200
40

150

Power counts

Social economic
Formal decision
99

Communicative narrowcast
Communicative broadcast
Administrative narrowcast

100

Administrative broadcast

6
50

10

45

27

15

15
0

8

3
1
1993

1994

Year

Figure L.120. Power by year in period 6.

669

Actor, audience, and power combinations are shown in Figure L.121 CLASP, the most
frequent actor, transmitted communicative narrowcasts to a several state, library, civil society,
and county audiences, as well as to itself. It also transmitted formal decision and administrative
narrowcast power to itself. Both CLASP and ACLA transmitted communicative broadcasts to
Allegheny County residents and libraries.

ACLA had a significant number (N=18) of

communicative broadcasts to the Regional Asset District.

A complete picture of the

actors/audiences in period 6, their power relationships, and the directions of power is shown in
Figure L.122.

670

PA CL
Se
P
cr
an
et
d
PA
ar
M PA
Pu
y
on De
bli
of
es All pa
c
Count
La
se eg rt
Alleghen
Uti
y
bo
n he m
y
lit Co muni
r CL dis ny en
Confere
y un cipalit
an P tri Co t
Private
nce on
Co ty ies
PA d co ct un of
City Pennsylv corporat Private Commun
m Co outsi Bob go In m dir ty Re
Board of
Local libraries Pennsylvani of
ania
ion or
civil
ity
CLP
CLP
mi ntr de Crone ve du mi ec Sol ve
County
in Allegheny
a state Pittsb Econom foundati society Develop district county CLP city ssi oll the berge rn str tte toricit nu
Contractor Commissioners
County
library urgh y League on
actor
ment services services libraries on er city
r or y e s or e

PA Department of Revenue
Allegheny County Solicitor
CLP and Monessen district directors
CLP committee
PA Secretary of Labor and Industry
PA governor
Bob Croneberger

County municipalities outside the city
County controller

PA Public Utility Commission
CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Allegheny Conference on Community
Development
Private civil society actor

Private corporation or foundation

Pennsylvania Economy League

City of Pittsburgh

Pennsylvania state library

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Board of County Commissioners

Pennsylvania
General Assembly

Contractor

Mass
medi
a
Commission on the Future of outlet
Libraries
s Regional Asset District

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Regional Asset District

Mass media outlets

ACLA

Commission on the Future of Libraries

CLASP

ACLA

CLASP

Actor

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pennsylvania state library
CLP committee
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Regional Asset District
Regional Asset District
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Regional Asset District
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Private corporation or foundation
Broadcast to County libraries
Board of County Commissioners
Pennsylvania Economy League
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to County libraries
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLASP
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Regional Asset District
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Broadcast to national population
eiNetwork
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP city libraries
Pennsylvania General Assembly
CLP district services
CLASP
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP district services
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Board of County Commissioners
PA Public Utility Commission
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLASP
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
ACLA
Pgh. Mayor
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Regional Asset District
RAD lobbyists
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP city libraries
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to civil society groups
ACLA
Broadcast to national population
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Regional Asset District
Private corporation or foundation
PA Public Utility Commission
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Contractor
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Regional Asset District
Pennsylvania General Assembly
PA Department of Revenue
Multiple municipalities
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Private corporation or foundation
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania Economy League
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Contractor
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLASP
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Audience

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
11
1
1
1
1
3
1 3
1
1
3
1
1
3
1
3
11
1
1
1
3
1
5
3
1
2 1
1
4
1
2 2
2
1
1
2 4
1
3 1
11
1
1
1
2
1
2 3 1
1
2

18

7

2
1
2
1 2 1
1
4 1
2 4 1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
1

3

5
5

5
5

1
2

3

5
5
2
3
4

0

18

9

5

9

10

11

2

15

20

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social economic

25

30

Figure L.121. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 6.

671

Figure L.122. Actor-audience-power graph for period 6.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.123 shows the numbers and types of
legitimation in period 6. The predominant type was success-discussion and periphery support
(N=236), followed by unknown (N=22), failure-objection (N=16), failure-bypass representative
public (N=6), and success-consensus.

Transmission were overwhelmingly successfully

legitimated in period 6. Figure L.124 shows the numbers and types of implementation in period
6. Most implementation was successful (N=265), a few were unknown (N=14), and a few failed
(N=5). Figure L.125 shows that of the N=284 total transmissions in period 6, N=232 that were
legitimated successfully were also successfully implemented. This high success rate that was

672

seen in both years is shown in Figure L.126 where legitimation and implementation pairings are
organized by year.

Legitimation types

Unknown

22

Success-discussion and periphery support

236

Success-consensus

4

Failure-objection

16

Failure-bypass representative public

6
0

50

100

150

200

Legitimation counts

Figure L.123. Legitimation in period 6.

673

250

Implementation types

Unknown

14

Success

265

Failure

5

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Implementation counts

Figure L.124. Implementation in period 6.

7
15

Legitimation types

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery
support

4
4

Success-consensus

4
2

Failure-objection

228
Unknown
Success
14

Failure

1
4
1

Failure-bypass representative
public
0

50

100

150

200

250

Implementation counts

Figure L.125. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 6.

674

Unknown 2

1993

Success-discussion and periphery support 1

46

4

Success-consensus 1
Failure-objection 5
Failure-bypass representative public 12
Unknown

13 7

1994

Success-discussion and periphery support 3

182

Success-consensus 3
Failure-objection

92

Failure-bypass representative public 21
Year

0

50

Success

Implementation
Unknown

Legitimation
Failure

100

150

200

Figure L.126. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 6.

Circuits. Figure L.127 shows the circuits in period 6. The most prevalent circuit was
civil society (N=77), followed by Regional Asset District (N=47), county (N=47), state (N=39),
ACLA (N=29), economic (N=24), intra-library (N=11), Pittsburgh city (N=7), local municipal
(N=2), and Electronic Information Network (N=1). Figure L.128 shows these circuits by year.
It can be seen that civil society, county, economic, intra-library, Pittsburgh, and state circuits
were active in both years, but traffic increased in 1994. ACLA and Regional Asset District
circuits appeared for the first time in 1994.

675

Electronic Information Network circuit

1

Local municipal circuit

2

Pittsburgh city circuit

7

Circuits

Intra-library circuit

11

Economic circuit

24

ACLA circuit

29

State circuit

39

County circuit

47

Regional Asset District circuit

47

Civil society circuit

77
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Circuit counts

Figure L.127. Circuits in period 6.

676

70

80

90

250

22
200
State circuit
47

Regional Asset District circuit
Pittsburgh city circuit

Circuit count

150

5
2
6
1

Local municipal circuit

21

Intra-library circuit

35

100

Electronic Information
Network circuit
Economic circuit
County circuit

50

54

17

ACLA circuit

2
5
3
12
29

23
0

Civil society circuit

1993

1994

Year

Figure L.128. Circuits by year in period 6.

Figure L.129 shows actor positions in period 6. The most frequent position was core
(N=110), followed by outer periphery (N=103) and inner periphery (N=71). Figure L.130 shows
audience positions in period 6. The most frequent was core (N=112), followed by diffuse public
677

(N=89), inner periphery (N=80), and outer periphery (N=3). Actor position, audience position,
and circuit combinations are shown by year in Figure L.131. Civil society circuit was active in
both years and transmissions followed a variety of pathways. When the Regional Asset District
circuit appeared in 1994, most transmissions were sent from outer periphery to core. In the
ACLA circuit, most transmissions were sent from the core. A general view of all the circuits and
actor/audiences in period 6, along with their positions and the directions of power transmissions,
is shown in Figure L.132.

Actor positions

Outer periphery

103

Inner periphery

71

Core

110

0

20

40

60

80

Actor position counts

Figure L.129. Actor positions in period 6.

678

100

120

Audience positions

Outer periphery

3

Inner periphery

80

Diffuse public

89

Core

112
0

20

40

60

80

Audience position counts

Figure L.130. Audience positions in period 6.

679

100

120

Outer
Inner periphery periphery

1993

Inner periphery

21

Core

9

Inner periphery 11 2
Diffuse public 1 3 2 1

Core
Outer
Inner periphery periphery

1994

2 2 21

Diffuse public

8

Core

2 4

Inner periphery

3

Core

4

Inner periphery
Diffuse public

2

Core

10
16

3 3 1 2 11

5

6

28

2

6
17

11 6

2
4

4

Diffuse public

4 12

13

Core
Audience
position

5

4 11

Inner periphery

Actor
position

5

9

Outer periphery

Core

3

Outer periphery 1

Inner periphery

Year

31 5

7
9

8
0

11

10

2
6 1 3 11 3 1

1
20

30

40

50

60

70

Circuit counts
Circuits

ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Figure L.131. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 6.

680

Figure L.132. Actor-circuit graph for period 6.

PERIOD 7: 1994–1997

Events. A total of N=455 events were identified in period 7. The number of events grew
steadily from October 1994 to December 1997 (see Figure L.133).

681

186

200
180
147

160

Events

140
120

92

100
80
60
40

30

20
0

1994

1995

1996

1997

Year

Figure L.133. Communicative events by year in period 7.

Issues. Figure L.134 shows the issues in period 7. The predominant issue was federated
system (N=136), followed by RAD funding (N=68), EIN (N=66), distribution formula (N=55),
compliance with RAD (N=35), and ACLA formation and governance (N=34). The issues of
period 7 are shown by year in Figure L.135. RAD funding was a major issue in all the years of
period 7. Federated system became a major issue in 1996, then discourse about that issue
increased in 1997. EIN was an issue in all four years, as was the distribution formula. ACLA
formation and governance became an issue in 1995, then grew as an issue in 1996 and 1997.

682

Issue

Local library formation
Quality of formal debate
City library budget
State budget
Library study
Redrawing district lines
Local funding from state
City library system miscellaneous issues
Local library administration
RAD legislation
County library director
Three Rivers Free-Net
local allocations for libraries
Commission on the Future of Libraries
ACLA grant
Countywide system formation and unification
PA state code and state plan
County funding
Grants
Compliance with ACLA
ACLA formation and governance
Compliance with RAD
Distribution formula
EIN
RAD funding
Federated system

1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
6
7
9
34
35
55
66
68
136
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160

Issue counts

Figure L.134. Issues in period 7.

683

200
1

180

19
5
1
4

160

Issue counts

140

14
1
2
1

120
90

45

100
2
1
80

23

20

1
1
2
1

60

19
40
20
0

1
12
1
6
10

16
1
13
1
2
6

1994

1995

19

21

4
2
1
17

10
4
5
4
2
1

5
4
1
10
1996

18
1997

Year
ACLA formation and governance

ACLA grant

City library budget

City library system miscellaneous issues

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Compliance with ACLA

Compliance with RAD

County funding

County library director

Countywide system formation and unification

Distribution formula

EIN

Federated system

Grants

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library formation

PA state code and state plan

Quality of formal debate

RAD funding

RAD legislation

Redrawing district lines

State budget

Three Rivers Free-Net

Figure L.135. Issues by year in period 7.

684

Actors and audiences. Figure L.136 shows the actors of period 7. The predominant
actor was ACLA (N=178), followed by Regional Asset District (N=54), local libraries in
Allegheny county (N=48), mass media outlets (N=39), local library trustees (N=31), and
eiNetwork (N=23). These actors are shown by year in Figure L.137. ACLA was a frequent
actor in all four years, but it activity increased as the period progressed. EiNetwork was also a
visible actor in all four years, especially 1995 and 1996. Local libraries in Allegheny County
increased in activity as the years progressed. Regional Asset District maintained a consistent
presence throughout the period.

685

Actor

Experts and consultants
Allegheny League of Municipalities
CLP city libraries
Friends groups
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania Economy League
Private business
PA governor
City of Pittsburgh
Allegheny Conference on Community…
Voters of Allegheny County
County Controller
Pgh. Mayor
Bob Croneberger
County departments
CLP county services
Pennsylvania Library Association
CLP district services
Board of County Commissioners
Private civil society actor
Pennsylvania state library
Private corporation or foundation
Contractor
Commission on the Future of Libraries
County municipalities outside the city
eiNetwork
Local library trustees
Mass media outlets
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Regional Asset District
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
5
6
6
7
8
8
9
10

0

23
31
39
48
54
178
50

100

Actor count

Figure L.136. Actors in period 7.

686

150

200

200
1

180

16
2
5
3
3

160

17
140

19
1
3

Actor counts

120
100
14

80

3
3
1
14
1
6
10
1
2
4
1
1
1

60
40
5
3
1
5
1
2
1
2
1
7

20
0

13

17

26

15
1
8
1
2
4
1
1
3

1
3
9
1
3
1
1
2
1

68

76

27

1994

1995

1996

1997

Year
ACLA

Allegheny Conference on Community Development

Allegheny League of Municipalities

Board of County Commissioners

Bob Croneberger

City of Pittsburgh

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Contractor

County Controller

County departments

County municipalities outside the city

eiNetwork

Experts and consultants

Friends groups

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local library trustees

Mass media outlets

PA governor

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Pgh. Mayor

Private business

Private civil society actor

Private corporation or foundation

Regional Asset District

Voters of Allegheny County

Figure L.137. Actors by year in period 7.

687

Figure L.138 shows the audiences in period 7. The most prevalent audience was ACLA
(N=188), followed by local libraries in Allegheny County (N=62), broadcast to Allegheny
County residents (N=49), Regional Asset District (N=48), eiNetwork (N=33), broadcast to
county libraries (N=15), and Commission on the Future of Libraries (N=13). Audiences are
shown by year in Figure L.139. ACLA was a major audience in all years, especially 1996 and
1997. Broadcast to Allegheny County residents, eiNetwork, local libraries in Allegheny County,
and Regional Asset District were also significant audiences throughout the period. Actor and
audience combinations are shown in Figure L.140. ACLA communicated most within the
organization, with local libraries in Allegheny County, and with the Regional Asset District.
Local libraries and the Regional Asset District reciprocated by communicating frequently with
ACLA.

688

Audience

Allegheny League of Municipalities
Experts and consultants
County departments
Pennsylvania Economy League
Private contractors
PA Department of State
Broadcast to national population
CLP district services
CLP cabinet
Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents
Private business
Libraries outside Allegheny County
Private corporation or foundation
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania state library
Contractor
CLP city libraries
Pennsylvania Library Association
Multiple municipalities
CLP county services
Board of County Commissioners
Mass media outlets
Local municipal board
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Broadcast to County libraries
eiNetwork
Regional Asset District
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Local libraries in Allegheny County
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
6
13
15
33
48
49
62
188
0

50

100

150

Audience counts

Figure L.138. Audiences in period 7.

689

200

200
180

20
2
3
1
3
2
5

160

Audience counts

140

18
1
17
2
1
9
9
4
4
1

120
100
7
1
1
1
13

80

11
1
3
1
2
1
2
16

60
40
3
1
1
2
5
1
6
9

20
0

80

30
8
1
2
1
9
23
3
1

71

28

1994

1995

1996

1997

Year
ACLA

Allegheny League of Municipalities

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national population

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Contractor

County departments

eiNetwork

Experts and consultants

Libraries outside Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Mass media outlets

Multiple municipalities

PA Department of State

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private contractors

Private corporation or foundation

Regional Asset District

Figure L.139. Audiences by year in period 7.

690

Experts and consultants 1
Allegheny League of Municipalities 1
CLP city libraries 1
Friends groups 1
Pennsylvania General Assembly 1
Pennsylvania Economy League 1
Private business 1
PA governor 1
City of Pittsburgh 1
Allegheny Conference on Community Development 1
Voters of Allegheny County 1

Actor

County Controller 1
Pgh. Mayor 1
Bob Croneberger 11
County departments 11
CLP county services 21
Pennsylvania Library Association 3
CLP district services 11111
Board of County Commissioners 213
Private civil society actor 21111
Pennsylvania state library 214
Private corporation or foundation

8
Contractor 41111
Commission on the Future of Libraries 21114
County municipalities outside the city 3133
eiNetwork 11217 8 111
Local library trustees
21 16 3
Mass media outlets

37

11

Local libraries in Allegheny County

34

121415

Regional Asset District

48

ACLA

111111
65

0

20

40

115 13 1 9 31
60

80

100

33
120

24211211

32

140

160

Audience count
ACLA

Allegheny League of Municipalities

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to County libraries

Broadcast to national population

Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents

CLP cabinet

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

Commission on the Future of Libraries

Contractor

County departments

eiNetwork

Experts and consultants

Libraries outside Allegheny County

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Mass media outlets

Multiple municipalities

PA Department of State

Pennsylvania Economy League

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania Library Association

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private contractors

Private corporation or foundation

Regional Asset District

Figure L.140. Actor and audience combinations in period 7.

691

180

200

Power. Figure L.141 shows the numbers and types of power in period 7. The most
frequent type of power was communicative narrowcast (N=209), followed by administrative
narrowcast (N=84), communicative broadcast (N=64), formal decision (N=62), and social
economic (N=36). Figure L.142 shows the types of power by year. All types of power were
present in all years.

Communicative narrowcast grew in frequency throughout the period.

Formal decision and administrative narrowcast grew from 1994 to 1996, then declined slightly in
1997. Communicative broadcasts grew from 1994 to 1995, wavered in 1996, then increased
again in 1997. Social economic increased in frequency from 1994 to 1995, declined in 1996, and
remained the same from 1996 to 1997. Figure L.143 shows the actor, audience, and power
combinations in period 7.

ACLA was characterized by communicative narrowcasts,

administrative narrowcasts, and formal decisions within its own organization.

ACLA also

transmitted broadcasts to Allegheny County libraries, administrative narrowcasts to local
libraries in Allegheny County, and communicative narrowcasts to the Regional Asset District.
The Regional Asset District communicated with ACLA through administrative narrowcast,
formal decision, and social economic power. Local libraries in Allegheny County targeted
ACLA with communicative narrowcasts.

Mass media outlets transmitted communicative

broadcasts to Allegheny County residents, and local library trustees transmitted communicative
narrowcasts to ACLA. A general, overall picture of the actors, audiences, types of power, and
their directions can be seen in Figure L.144. ACLA, local libraries in Allegheny County,
eiNetwork, and Regional Asset district are larger nodes with more connections.

692

Power types

Social economic

36

Formal decision

62

Communicative broadcast

64

Administrative narrowcast

84

Communicative narrowcast

209
0

50

100

150

200

Power count

Figure L.141. Power in period 7.

200
180
160

Power counts

140

96

120

71

100
80

29

60

15
12
18

40
20
0

13
5
3
6
3
1994

8
27
7

18
1995

33

34

29

1996

1997

Year
Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.142. Power by year in period 7.

693

8
20

250

All
eg
he
ny
Co
nf
er
Pri
Pe
en
Pe
All
va
nn
ce
nn Pe
eg
te
syl
on
syl nn
he
co
va
Vo Co
va syl
ny
rp
ni
ter m
ni va
Le Ex
or
a ni
a
s m
ag pe
ati
Lib
of un Cit
Ec a
ue rts
on
rar
Co All ity y
Pri on Ge CL of an
or
y
un eg De of
va o ne Fri P M d
fo
As CLP Count
Pg ty he vel Pit PA te m ral en cit un co
un Pennsylv
Board of
so count y Bob h. Co ny op ts go bu y As ds y ici ns
da ania
County
cia y depar Crone M ntr Co m bu ve sin Le se gr lib pa ult
tio state
Private civil Commiss CLP district tio servic tmen berge ay oll un en rg rn es ag m ou rar liti an
Contractor n library society actor ioners
services
n es
ts
r or er ty t h or s ue bly ps ies es ts

Experts and consultants
Allegheny League of Municipalities
CLP city libraries
Friends groups
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Pennsylvania Economy League
Private business
PA governor
City of Pittsburgh
Allegheny Conference on Community Development
Voters of Allegheny County
County Controller
Pgh. Mayor
Bob Croneberger

County departments

CLP county services

Pennsylvania Library Association

CLP District Services

Board of County Commissioners

Private civil society actor

Pennsylvania State Library

Private corporation or foundation

County
municipaliti Commission
es outside on the Future
the city
of Libraries

Contractor

Commission on the Future of Libraries

eiNetwork

County municipalities outside the city

Local
library
trustees

eiNetwork

Mass
media
outlets

Local library trustees

Local libraries in
Allegheny County

Mass media outlets

Regional Asset
District

Local libraries in Allegheny County

ACLA

Regional Asset District

ACLA

ACLA
ACLA
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Regional Asset District
ACLA
ACLA
Pennsylvania General Assembly
CLP city libraries
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Pennsylvania General Assembly
Regional Asset District
ACLA
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Board of County Commissioners
eiNetwork
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Pennsylvania Library Association
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP city libraries
CLP cabinet
ACLA
eiNetwork
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Board of County Commissioners
ACLA
Local libraries in Allegheny County
CLP district services
ACLA
eiNetwork
Regional Asset District
Local municipal board
eiNetwork
Commission on the Future of Libraries
ACLA
eiNetwork
County departments
Commission on the Future of Libraries
Board of County Commissioners
ACLA
Local municipal board
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Contractor
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Private corporation or foundation
Private contractors
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Contractor
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
ACLA
Broadcast to Pennsylvania residents
Broadcast to national population
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Regional Asset District
Multiple municipalities
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Experts and consultants
eiNetwork
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Libraries outside Allegheny County
eiNetwork
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Regional Asset District
Private corporation or foundation
Private business
Pennsylvania state library
Pennsylvania Economy League
PA Department of State
Multiple municipalities
Mass media outlets
Local municipal board
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Libraries outside Allegheny County
eiNetwork
Commission on the Future of Libraries
CLP county services
Broadcast to County libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Board of County Commissioners
Allegheny League of Municipalities
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
12
1
1
1
1
1
12
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
31
1
11
8
1
1
1
1
4
4
1
1
1
2
3
21
1
3
1
1
1
44
124
1
2
1
1
3
24
1
1 20
1
1
37
5
1
31
1
2
1
2 32
1
1
1
1
1
1
29
12 7
2 30
1
1
2
1
1
2
4
2
19 7 25
1
111
135
1
12 1
5
1
1
14 16 1 34
0

Actor
Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Audience
Formal decision

Social economic

50
Power counts

100

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.143. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 7.

694

Figure L.144. Actor-audience-power graph for period 7.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.145 shows the types of legitimation in
period 7. The most prevalent type of legitimation was success-discussion or periphery support
(N=337), followed by failure-objection (N=90), unknown (N=22), success-consensus (N=4), and
failure-bypass representative public (N=2). Figure L.146 shows the types of implementation in
period 7. The most prevalent type of implementation was success (N=358), followed by failure
(N=49) and unknown (N=48). Legitimation and implementation combinations are shown in
Figure L.147. Overall, period 7 was a period of successful legitimation and implementation: of
the N=341 events that were successfully legitimated, N=321 were also successfully
implemented. Figure L.148 shows legitimation and implementation combinations by year in

695

period 7. The figure illustrates how, in each year, more events were successfully legitimated and
implemented.

2

Success-consensus

4

Legitimation types

Failure-bypass representative public

Unknown

22

Failure-objection

90

Success-discussion and periphery support

337
0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400

Legitimation counts

Implementation types

Figure L.145. Legitimation in period 7.

Unknown

48

Failure

49

Success

358

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Implementation counts

Figure L.146. Implementation in period 7.

696

350

400

Legitimation

Failure-bypass representative
public

2

Success-consensus

4
6
16

Unknown

Unknown
Success

26
19
45

Failure-objection

16
4

Success-discussion and periphery
support
0

Failure
317

50 100 150 200 250 300 350

Implementation counts

Figure L.147. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 7.

697

1994

Unknown 1
Success-discussion and periphery support

22

2

Success-consensus 1
Failure-objection 112

1995

Unknown

53

Success-discussion and periphery support 3
Failure-objection

61
9 73

Unknown

81

Success-discussion and periphery support

1996

1

5

106

Success-consensus 3
Failure-objection

12 6 5

Failure-bypass representative public 1

1997

Unknown 22
Success-discussion and periphery support 1
Failure-objection

128
23

5

8

16

Failure-bypass representative public 1
Year

Legitimation

0

50

100
Implementation

150

Implementation types
Failure
Success
Unknown

Figure L.148. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 7.

Circuits. Figure L.149 shows the circuits in period 7. The predominant circuit was
ACLA (N=198), followed by Regional Asset District (N=102), economic (N=43), Electronic
Information Network (N=28), county (N=26), civil society (N=16), intra-library (N=15), local
municipal (N=13), state (N=12), and Pittsburgh city (N=2). Figure L.150 shows circuits by year
in period 7. The ACLA circuit increased in activity over the years. Regional Asset District also
698

increased in frequency from 1994 to 1996, then decreased slightly in 1997. Local municipal
circuit had a relatively substantial increase in traffic in 1997.

Circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

2

State circuit

12

Local municipal circuit

13

Intra-library circuit

15

Civil society circuit

16

County circuit

26

Electronic Information Network circuit

28

Economic circuit

43

Regional Asset District circuit

102

ACLA circuit

198
0

50

100

150

Circuit counts

Figure L.149. Circuits in period 7.

699

200

250

200
180

5

160

35
1

Circuit count

140

38

120

1
4
10
4
12
1

100
4
80

21

60

2
1
2
12
15
4
4

40
20
0

2
8
1
5
3
4
6

76

11
8
5
19
7
7

89

27

1994

1995

1996

1997

Year
ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Figure L.150. Circuits by year in period 7.

Figure L.151 shows the actor positions in period 7. The most frequent position was inner
periphery (N=196), followed by core (N=190) and outer periphery (N=69). Figure L.152 shows
the audience positions in period 7. The most frequent audience position was core (N=200),
followed by inner periphery (N=185), diffuse public (N=67), and outer periphery (N=3). Figure
L.153 shows the actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 7.
The primary pathways in the Regional Asset District circuit were from outer periphery and inner
700

periphery to core, and from core to inner periphery. The ACLA circuit, which increased in
traffic over time, had a variety of pathways. A general view of the circuits, actor/audiences,
positions, and power directions can be seen in Figure L.154. The ACLA circuit and ACLA as an
organization are the two dominant nodes in the tessellation.

Actor position

Outer periphery

69

Core

190

Inner periphery

196

0

50

100

150

Actor position counts

Figure L.151. Actor positions in period 7.

701

200

250

Audience position

Outer periphery

3

Diffuse public

67

Inner periphery

185

Core

200
0

50

100

150

200

Audience position counts

Figure L.152. Audience positions in period 7.

702

250

Out. per.

2

Core 1 2 111
Inner periphery 111

Inn. per.

1994

Inner periphery

Diffuse public

5

Core 1 2

Core

Inner periphery

5

Out.
per.

Core

3

Core

3 11 2 11

Inner periphery 1 2 1 3

Inn. per.

1995

2

Diffuse public 1

Diffuse public 1

14

Core

6

Core

Inner periphery

12

3 1 4 111

13

Out. per.

Diffuse public 1 3
Core

4

Inner periphery

5

Core

3 1

9

Inner periphery

Inn. per.

1996

1

6

1111 3

5

Diffuse public

3 21

3

Core

23

12

22

3

16

Outer periphery 1

Core

Inner periphery
Diffuse public

2

17

13

11

Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery

2

Core

9

12 21 4

Inner periphery

Inn. per.

Out. per.

Core

1997

5

4 1

Diffuse public

10

Core

3

19

11

1

17

20

111

6
5

5

12

Core

Outer periphery 1
Inner periphery
Diffuse public

13

2 3 1 3

14

121

2 111

Core
0
Year Actor
position

15

10

20

Audience
position

30

40

50

60

Circuit counts

ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

Pittsburgh city circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Figure L.153. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 7.

703

Figure L.154. Actor-circuit graph for period 7.

PERIOD 8: 1998–2011

Events. A total of N=188 communicative events were identified in period 8 (Figure
L.155). The events are continuous throughout the 14 years of the period. They begin with N=16
events in 1998, drop to N=8 events in 2002, increase to N=17 events in 2003, drop to under 10
events from 2004 to 2008, increase dramatically to N=38 events in 2009, then fall to N=35
events in 2010 and N=9 events in 2011.

704

38

40
35

Event counts

30

25

25
20

16

17

15

15

17
14
9

8

10

6

2005

2006

4

5
0

6

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

9
4

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Year

Figure L.155. Communicative events in period 8.

Issues. Figure L.156 shows the issues in period 8.

The predominant issue was

distribution formula (N=47), followed by RAD funding (N=29), EIN (N=18), countywide
system formation and unification (N=18), state budget (N=15), and compliance with ACLA
(N=11). Figure L.157 shows issues by year in period 8. Countywide system formation and
unification and EIN were significant issues at the start of the period, from 1998 to 2001. RAD
funding was raised in as a significant issue in several years, including 1998, 199, 2000, 2006,
2007, 2009, and 2010.

The distribution formula was a minor issue in several years, but

dominated discourse in 2009 and 2010. The state budget was a major issue in 2003, then again
in 2009 and 2010.

705

Issue

Local funding from state
Compliance with RAD
Home rule
LSTA
Library study
Internet
Local library coordination
Local library formation
Reading centers in the housing projects-…
Local millage for libraries
PA state code and state plan
ACLA formation and governance
City library budget
County funding
local allocations for libraries
Local library administration
Compliance with ACLA-standards
Compliance with ACLA
State budget
Countywide system formation and…
EIN
RAD funding
Distribution formula
0

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3

5

7
7
7

10

11

15

18
18

20

29
30

Issue counts

Figure L.156. Issues in period 8.

706

47
40

50

40
4

35

4
30

3

3

20
8

2
1

8
1

1
1
1
1

1

1

2

2011

4

1
2
1

2
1
1
1
2

2010

2

2
1
1

10

2009

5

2

1
1
1
1
1
1

2008

1

2000

1998

1

1999

2
1

0

6

4

1
2

2
1

2007

2

2

2006

5

1

6

26

8

2005

6

6

1
2

2004

10

1
1
2
1
2
1

3

1
1

2003

3

2002

15

2

2001

Issue count

25

3

Year
ACLA formation and governance

City library budget

Compliance with ACLA

Compliance with ACLA-standards

Compliance with RAD

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Distribution formula

EIN

Home rule

Internet

Library study

local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Local millage for libraries

LSTA

PA state code and state plan

RAD funding

Reading centers in the housing projects-Knowledge Connections

State budget

Figure L.157. Issues by year in period 8.

Actors and audiences. Figure L.158 shows the actors in period 8. The most prevalent
actor was ACLA (N=71), followed by mass media outlets (N=42), Regional Asset District
(N=23), eiNetwork (N=8), and Pennsylvania General Assembly (N=7). Actors are shown by
707

year in Figure L.159. ACLA was an actor in all years of the period. The Regional Asset District

Actor

and mass media outlets were also active in most years.

American Libraries Association
County Controller
Voters of Allegheny County
Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups
Buhl Foundation
Private civil society actor
Local library trustees
CLP county services
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Allegheny County Housing Authority
US Supreme Court
Private business
Friends groups
County municipalities outside the city
City of Pittsburgh
Contractor
Pennsylvania state library
Board of County Commissioners
CLP city libraries
Pennsylvania General Assembly
eiNetwork
Regional Asset District
Mass media outlets
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
7
8
23
42
71
0

10

20

30

40

50

Actor counts

Figure L.158. Actors in period 8.

708

60

70

80

40
35

7

30

3

11

1
1

12

1
1

2
1
2

5

4

2011

1
1
1
3

3
2
2

1
1
2

2009

1
1
1
1
1
1

2008

3

1
3

2007

8

1
1
2
1
2

2006

0

6

1
1
1
2

2005

2
1
3

13

3
1

2004

6

1

2003

1
3

1
1
3

2002

5

1
1
3
1
1
1
1

2001

5

2

2000

10

1
1
2
1
3
1
1

1999

15

8

2010

20

1998

Actor counts

25

8

Year
ACLA

Allegheny County Housing Authority

American Libraries Association

Board of County Commissioners

Buhl Foundation

City of Pittsburgh

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

Contractor

County Controller

County municipalities outside the city

eiNetwork

Friends groups

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local library trustees

Mass media outlets

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private civil society actor

Regional Asset District

Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups

US Supreme Court

Voters of Allegheny County

Figure L.159. Actors by year in period 8.

Figure L.160 shows the audiences in period 8. The most frequent audience was ACLA
(N=84), followed by broadcast to Allegheny County residents (N=44), Regional Asset District
(N=11), eiNetwork (N=9), and CLP city libraries. Audiences are shown by year in Figure L.161.
709

ACLA was an audience throughout all the years in period 8. Broadcasts to Allegheny County
residents and Regional Asset District appeared as audiences in most years. EiNetwork was a
significant audience in the first 2 years of the period, and Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh city
library system was a visible audience in the last 3 years. Figure L.162 shows actor-audience
combinations in period 8. ACLA communicated mostly within its own organization, to the
Regional Asset District, and broadcasted to county libraries. Mass media outlets broadcasted to

Audience

Allegheny County residents. The Regional Asset District communicated to ACLA

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Broadcast to national libraries
PA Department of Revenue
Knowledge Connections
Multiple municipalities
Pgh. City Council
County departments
US Congress
County Controller
Private corporation or foundation
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Local municipal board
Board of County Commissioners
CLP county services
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
Pennsylvania state library
Broadcast to county libraries
CLP city libraries
eiNetwork
Regional Asset District
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
4
5
8
9
11
44
84
0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Audience counts

Figure L.160. Audiences in period 8.

710

40
3
1
2
2

35

25

12

20

3

4

Year
ACLA

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to county libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

County Controller

County departments

eiNetwork

Knowledge Connections

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Multiple municipalities

PA Department of Revenue

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Pgh. City Council

Private corporation or foundation

Regional Asset District

US Congress

Figure L.161. Audiences by year in period 8.

711

1
2
2

2011

4

1
3

2010

3

2009

0

6

1
1

2008

5

12

1
1
1
3

2007

1
2

1
3

18

3

2006

5

4

2005

5

13

1
1
1
1
1
3

2004

1
1
2

1

1
1
1
2
8

2003

4

1
1
1
1
2
1

2002

1
3

2001

5

4

1
1
3
1
1
3

2000

10

1

2
1

1999

15

1998

Audience counts

30

Axis Title

American Libraries Association
County Controller
Voters of Allegheny County
Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Some combination of City, County, and civil society groups
Buhl Foundation
Private civil society actor
Local library trustees
CLP county services
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Allegheny County Housing Authority
US Supreme Court
Private business
Friends groups
County municipalities outside the city
City of Pittsburgh
Contractor
Pennsylvania state library
Board of County Commissioners
CLP city libraries
Pennsylvania General Assembly
eiNetwork
Regional Asset District
Mass media outlets
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
111
3
211
211
112
22
4 3
111 4 1
21

11
42
55

0

10

20

1 4 111 8

30

40

Axis Title
ACLA

Board of County Commissioners

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to county libraries

Broadcast to national libraries

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

County Controller

County departments

eiNetwork

Knowledge Connections

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Multiple municipalities

PA Department of Revenue

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries

Pennsylvania state library

Pgh. City Council

Private corporation or foundation

Regional Asset District

US Congress

Figure L.162. Actor and audience combinations in period 8.

712

50

60

70

80

Power. Figure L.163 shows the numbers and types of power in period 8. The most
frequent type of power was communicative narrowcast (N=61), followed by communicative
broadcast (N=49), formal decision (N=30), administrative narrowcast (N=25), and social
economic (N=23).

Figure L.164 shows the numbers and types of power by year.

Communicative narrowcasts were transmitted in every year, especially 2001 and 2009.
Administrative narrowcasts, social economic power, and communicative broadcasts were
transmitted in almost every year. Formal decision was most transmitted in 2009 and 2010.

Social economic

23

Power types

Administrative narrowcast

25

Formal decision

30

Communicative broadcast

49

Communicative narrowcast

61
0

10

20

30

40

Power counts

Figure L.163. Power in period 8.

713

50

60

70

40
5

35
30

5
20

1

3

3
1

3
1

3
1

2

2011

2

3
1
2
3

2010

1

6

12

2009

4

1
1
2
1
1

2008

4

2
1
3

4

1
1
3

2007

1998

0

8

1

2006

5

5

7
3

6

2005

5

10

2004

3

4

2003

4

10

1
3

2002

10

3
2
3

2001

2
2

2000

15

1999

Power counts

11
25

8

Year
Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Formal decision

Social economic

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.164. Power by year in period 8.

Figure L.165 shows the actor, audience, and power combinations in period 8. The lead
actor, ACLA, transmitted communicative narrowcasts, administrative narrowcasts, and formal
decisions within its own organization. It also transmitted communicative narrowcasts to the
Regional Asset District and communicative broadcasts to county libraries.

The second

predominant actor, mass media outlets, transmitted communicative broadcasts to Allegheny
County residents.

The third predominant actor, Regional Asset District, transmitted

predominantly administrative narrowcasts, formal decisions, and social economic power to
ACLA. A general view of the actors, audiences, and power transmissions of period 8 is shown
in Figure L.166.
714

So
me
co
mbi
nati Pen
on nsy
Alle
of lva
ghe Loc
City nia
Am
ny al
, Citi
eric
Cou libr
Cou zen Vot
an
nty arie
Loc Priv
nty, s ers
Libr
Pennsyl
US Ho s in CLP al ate Buhand for of
arie
City
Priv Sup usi Alle cou libr civil l civil Bet AlleCou s
vania
Genera
Board of
of County
ate re ng ghe nty ary soci Fou soci ter ghe nty Ass
l CLP city County Pennsylvan
Pitt municipaliti
bus me Aut ny ser tru ety nda ety Libr ny Con oci
sbu es outside Friends ine Cou hor Cou vic ste act tio gro arieCou trol atio
Assemb librarie Commissio ia state
library Contractor rgh the city groups ss rt ity nty es es or n ups s nty ler n
ly
s
ners

American Libraries Association

US Congress 1

County Controller

eiNetwork 1

Voters of Allegheny County

County departments 1

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries
Combination of city, county, and civil society

Pennsylvania Citizens for Better Libraries 1

Buhl Foundation

Private corporation or foundation 1

Private civil society actor
Local library trustees
CLP county services

Regional Asset District 1

ACLA 1
Local municipal board 1
eiNetwork 1

Local librarians in Allegheny County

ACLA 1

Allegheny County Housing Authority

Knowledge Connections 1

US Supreme Court

Broadcast to national libraries 1
CLP city libraries 1

Private business

Friends groups

County municipalities outside the city

Pgh. City Council 1
Board of County Commissioners 1
Local municipal board 1
Local libraries in Allegheny County 1
ACLA 1

City of Pittsburgh
Contractor

CLP city libraries 21
CLP city libraries 1
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents 1
ACLA 2
Local libraries in Allegheny County 1

Pennsylvania state library

CLP county services 1
ACLA 11
eiNetwork 11

Board of County Commissioners

CLP county services 1
Board of County Commissioners 1
Regional Asset District 2

CLP city libraries

Pennsylvania General Assembly

CLP city libraries 11
Pennsylvania state library

3

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

4

eiNetwork

PA Department of Revenue 1
eiNetwork 211

eiNetwork

County Controller 1
Broadcast to county libraries 1

Ma
ss
me
dia Regional
out Asset
lets District

ACLA 1
CLP county services 1

Regional Asset District

Mass media outlets

CLP city libraries 1
ACLA 2 10
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

9
42

Regional Asset District

8

ACLA

Pennsylvania state library 1
Multiple municipalities 1
eiNetwork 1

ACLA

Broadcast to county libraries

4

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents 1
ACLA
Actor

Audience

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Formal decision

Social economic

16
0

10

29
20

30 40 50
Power counts

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.165. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 8.

715

9 1
60

Figure L.166. Actor-power graph for period 8.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.167 shows the numbers and types of
legitimation in period 8. The most prominent form of legitimation was success-discussion or
periphery support (N=119), followed by failure-objections (N=39) and unknown (N=30). Figure
L.168 shows the types of legitimation in period 8. The most prevalent form of implementation
was success (N=101), followed by unknown (N=63) and failure (N=24). Figure L.169 shows
legitimation and implementation combinations. Of the N=119 events that were successfully
legitimated, N=91 (76.5 percent) were successfully implemented.

Of the N=39 that failed

legitimation, N=17 (43.6 percent) also failed implementation. Figure L.170 shows legitimation
and implementation combinations by year in period 8. The figure shows that most events were
successfully legitimated and implemented. The years 2003 and 2004 were exceptions to this

716

pattern, where most events were either unknown or failed implementation regardless of
legitimation.

Legitimation types

Unknown

30

Failure-objections

39

Success-discussion and periphery support

119

0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

Legitimation counts

Figure L.167. Legitimation in period 8.

717

Implementation types

Failure

24

Unknown

63

Success

101

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Implementation counts

Figure L.168. Implementation in period 8.

Legitimation types

Unknown

8

Failure-objections

22

17 2 20

Success-discussion and periphery support

7
0

91
20

40

60

21
80

100 120 140

Implementation counts
Failure

Success

Unknown

Figure L.169. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 8.

718

1998

Unknown

11

Success-discussion and periphery support

12

Failure-objections

2

1999

Unknown
Success-discussion and periphery support

2000

Failure-objections
Unknown

2001
2002

11

11
2

1

Failure-objections

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

1

Failure-objections

1

Unknown

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

2004

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

1

Failure-objections

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

5

1 2
1
2 1

Failure-objections

2

Unknown

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

6

2010

1

1 2

Failure-objections

1

Unknown

1

6

Success-discussion and periphery support

12
6

1 2

Success-discussion and periphery support

14
3

Success-discussion and periphery support
Legitimation
Failure

5

8

Failure-objections

2011

3

2

Failure-objections

Year

2 1

1

Success-discussion and periphery support

Unknown

1

2

Success-discussion and periphery support

Success-discussion and periphery support

3

5

2

Unknown

Unknown

2

7

3

Failure-objections

Failure-objections

9

11

Success-discussion and periphery support

Unknown

2

1

Success-discussion and periphery support
Unknown

2003

3

1

3

8
0

Success

1

1
5
10
15
Implementation count

20

Unknown

Figure L.170. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 8.

719

Circuits. Figure L.171 shows the circuits in period 8. The most active circuit was
ACLA (N=64), followed by economic (N=44), Regional Asset District (N=34), state (N=13),
and county (N=9). Figure L.172 shows circuits by year in period 8. ACLA was an active circuit
in all years of the period. Economic, state, and Regional Asset District circuits appeared in most

Circuit

other years.

Civil society circuit

2

National circuit

2

Pittsburh city circuit

4

Local municipal circuit

4

Intra-library circuit

5

Electronic Information Network circuit

7

County circuit

9

State circuit

13

Regional Asset District circuit

34

Economic circuit

44

ACLA circuit

64
0

10

20

30

40

Circuit count

Figure L.171. Circuits in period 8.

720

50

60

70

40
3

35

30

10

2

20

7

1
1
1
1
1
1

2
1

1

3

3

3

8

5
3
1

11
1
3

3
2

4

4

2011

2

9

2010

3

6

3

2009

5

1
1
2
1

2008

2

13

2007

2

1
1

2006

3

3

2

1
1

1
2

2005

5

2

4

1

2004

1
1
1
1

2003

3

2002

0

3

2001

5

2

2000

10

12

1

1999

15

1998

Circuit count

25

Year
ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

National circuit

Pittsburh city circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Figure L.172. Circuits by year in period 8.

Figure L.173 shows the actor positions in period 8. The most inhabited position was core
(N=103), followed by inner periphery (N=71) and outer periphery (N=14). Figure L.174 shows
the audience positions in period 8. The most occupied audience position was inner periphery
(N=70), followed by core (N=64) and diffuse public (N=54). Figure L.175 shows actor position,
721

audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 8. In the ACLA circuit, much of
the activity originated from the core. In the Regional Asset District circuit, communications
were sent between the core and other positions. Figure L.176 shows an overall visualization of
the circuits, actors/audiences, and their positions in period 8.

Actor positions

Outer periphery

14

Inner periphery

71

Core

103

0

20

40

60

80

Actor position counts

Figure L.173. Actor positions in period 8.

722

100

120

Audience positions

Diffuse public

54

Core

64

Inner periphery

70

0

10

20

30

40

50

Audience position counts

Figure L.174. Audience positions in period 8.

723

60

70

80

Out.
Inn. per. per.
Core

2011
2010

Inn. per.
Out.
Inn. per. per. Core

1
1

Diffuse public

2

Inner periphery

2

Core

1

Inner periphery

1
8

Core

1

Inner periphery

3

Core

1

1

Core

1

1
2

Inner periphery

5

Diffuse public

2008
2007
2006

Core

Out. Cor
Out. Cor
Cor Inn. Out.
Inn. per. per. e Inn. per. per. e Inn. per. e per. per.

2005

Inn. per.

2004

1

Diffuse public

1
3
3

Inner periphery

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

2

2

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

Inner periphery

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1
3

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

3

Core

Core

1

1

Core

1
2

Diffuse public

1

1
1

Inn. per. Out. per.

2002

Inn. per.

1

Core

1

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Core

2

Core

1

Inner periphery
Inner periphery

1

Core

9

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

Inner periphery

1

3
1

1

Core

5

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

2

Core

Core
Inn. per.

1
1

2

5

1

Inner periphery

Core

2
4

Inner periphery

2

1

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

1

1

Core

1

1

Out.
per.

1

2

Core

Audience
position

7

3

Core

Diffuse public

Out. Cor Inn.
per. e per.
Inn. Out.
per. per. Core

2001

Out.
Inn. per. per. Core

2000

Out.
per. Core
1999

1

2

Core

Actor
position

1

3

Core

1998

8

12

Core

Inner periphery

Year

1

Diffuse public

Core

2003

2

Diffuse public

Core

2009

Core
Inner periphery

2

1
2
2

2

0

1

5

10

15

Circuit counts

ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

County circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

National circuit

Pittsburh city circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Figure L.175. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 8.

724

Figure L.176. Actor-circuit graph for period 8.

PERIOD 9: 2011–2016

Events. A total of N=170 communicative events were identified in period 9 (see Figure
L.177). The period began in October 2011 when the RAD board commissioned an audit of
ACLA. The period began with N=3 events in 2011, increased to N=75 events in 2014 as the
countywide library study was underway, then dropped to N=14 events by 2016.

725

75

80
70

Event count

60
45

50
40
30

20

20
10
0

14

13
3
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Year

Figure L.177. Communicative events by year in period 9.

Issues. Figure L.178 shows the issues in period 9. The predominant issue was library
study (N=54), followed by countywide system formation and unification (N=19), ACLA
formation and governance (N=18), compliance with ACLA-standards (N=18), and RAD funding
(N=15). Figure L.179 shows the issues by year in period 9. Library study was a significant issue
in 2012, 2013, and 2014. ACLA formation and governance was a notable issue in all years
except 2013. Compliance with ACLA-standards was a major issue in 2015. Countywide system
formation and unification was an issue from 2012 to 2015.

726

Issue

EIN
Local funding from state
Delivery services
County funding
Local allocations for libraries
Local library formation
State budget
Compliance with RAD
Local library coordination
Local library administration
PA state code and state plan
Local millage for libraries
Distribution formula
RAD funding
Compliance with ACLA-standards
ACLA formation and governance
Countywide system formation and…
Library study
0

1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3

5
6
6
7
8

10

15
18
18
19
20

54
30

Issue count

Figure L.178. Issues in period 9.

727

40

50

60

80
1
70

9
4

60

Issue count

50
40

44

30
20

10

3

3
1
3
3
1
2

3
3
1
1
7
1
4

1
2
2

8

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

10
0

5
3
2
1
3
1
1
1
2
2

2

16

2
1
2
2
4
3
2016

Year
ACLA formation and governance

Compliance with ACLA-standards

Compliance with RAD

County funding

Countywide system formation and unification

Delivery services

Distribution formula

EIN

Library study

Local allocations for libraries

Local funding from state

Local library administration

Local library coordination

Local library formation

Local millage for libraries

PA state code and state plan

RAD funding

State budget

Figure L.179. Issues by year in period 9.

Actors and audiences. Figure L.180 shows the actors in period 9. The most frequent
actor was ACLA (N=56), followed by 21st century library study (N=46), Regional Asset District
(N=17), contractor (N=9), local libraries in Allegheny County (N=8), and Pennsylvania state
728

library (N=8). Figure L.181 shows the actors by year in period 9. ACLA was an actor from
2012 to 2016, but it overshadowed all other actors in 2015. The 21st century library study was a
major actor in 2013 and 2014. Regional Asset District was identified as an actor in all years
except 2013. Contractor was visible in all years except 2015. Pennsylvania state library was

Actor

identified as an actor in 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015.

CLP advisory board

1

CLP county services

1

eiNetwork

1

PA library Governor's Advisory Council

1

Private business

1

CLP city libraries

1

PA Department of Revenue

1

Local library trustees

2

Mary Frances Cooper

2

Pennsylvania General Assembly

2

Private civil society actor

2

Mass media outlets

5

County municipalities outside the city

6

Pennsylvania state library

8

Local libraries in Allegheny County

8

Contractor

9

Regional Asset District

17

21st century library study

46

ACLA

56
0

10

20

30

40

Actor counts

Figure L.180. Actors in period 9.

729

50

60

80

6

70

2
1
4
2
1

60

5
4

Actor count

50

2
7

2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

40

30

20

10

41

1
1
2
2
1
1

6

33
1
1
2
2

7

3
0

2
1

3
1

5

2011

2012

2013

8
2014

2015

2016

Year
21st century library study

ACLA

CLP advisory board

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

Contractor

County municipalities outside the city

eiNetwork

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local library trustees

Mary Frances Cooper

Mass media outlets

PA Department of Revenue

PA library Governor's Advisory Council

Pennsylvania General Assembly

Pennsylvania state library

Private business

Private civil society actor

Regional Asset District

Figure L.181. Actors by year in period 9.

730

Figure L.182 shows the audiences of period 9. The most prominent audience was ACLA
(N=78), followed by 21st century library study (N=44), broadcast to Allegheny County residents
(N=16), local libraries in Allegheny County (N=12), and Regional Asset District (N=7).
Audiences are shown by year in Figure L.183. ACLA was a major audience in all years except
2011. The 21st century library study was a significant audience in 2013 and 2014. Broadcast to
Allegheny County residents was a major audience in 2014. Local libraries in Allegheny County
were identified as audiences in 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015. Actor and audience combinations
are shown in Figure L.184.

ACLA communicated primarily within its own organization.

Regional Asset District, contractors, and Pennsylvania state library also communicated with
ACLA in significant ways. Broadcasts were transmitted to Allegheny County residents by 21st
century library study, contractors, and mass media outlets. Transmissions were made to the 21st
century library study from within the group and from contractors, local libraries in Allegheny
County, private civil society actors, and Mary Frances Cooper, the director of Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh.

731

Audience

Contractor
CLP city libraries
CLP Trustees
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
CLP district services
ACLA and CLP directors
Actor/audience unknown
School districts
eiNetwork
Local municipal board
CLP county services
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
21st century library study
ACLA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
12
16
44
78
0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Audience count

Figure L.182. Audiences in period 9.

732

80

70

1
1
5
1

60

15

Audience counts

50
13

1
2
3
1
1
1
1

40

30

20
2
1
1

10

0

9

2
1
2011

2012

39

3
2
1
1
1

35

7

14

5
2013

2014

2015

2016

Year
21st century library study

ACLA

ACLA and CLP directors

Actor/audience unknown

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Contractor

eiNetwork

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Regional Asset District

School districts

Figure L.183. Audiences by year in period 9.

733

CLP advisory board 1
CLP county services 1
eiNetwork 1
PA library Governor's Advisory Council 1
Private business 1
CLP city libraries 1

Actor

PA Department of Revenue 1
Local library trustees

2

Mary Frances Cooper

2

Pennsylvania General Assembly

2

Private civil society actor

2

Mass media outlets

5

County municipalities outside the city 1 5
Pennsylvania state library

4 121

Local libraries in Allegheny County 11 4 11
Contractor

2 6 1

Regional Asset District

10

111 4

21st century library study

37

1 6 11

ACLA

51
0

10

20

12 2
30

40

Audience count
21st century library study

ACLA

ACLA and CLP directors

Actor/audience unknown

Broadcast to Allegheny County residents

Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries

CLP city libraries

CLP county services

CLP district services

CLP Trustees

Contractor

eiNetwork

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Local municipal board

Regional Asset District

School districts

Figure L.184. Actor and audience combinations in period 9.

734

50

60

Power. Figure L.185 shows the numbers and types of power in period 9.

The

predominant form of power was communicative narrowcast (N=69), followed by administrative
narrowcast (N=52), formal decision (N=19), communicative broadcast (N=16), social economic
(N=11), social backroom deals (N=2), and administrative broadcast (N=1). Figure L.186 shows
the numbers and types of power by year. Communicative narrowcast was a significant form of
power in all years in period 9. Administrative narrowcast was a significant form of power in all
years except 2011. Formal decision was identified in 2013, 2014, and 2015. Communicative
broadcasts were made in 2013 and 2014. Social economic power was identified in 2013, 2014,

Power type

2015, and 2016. Social backroom deals were found in 2014 and 2015.

Administrative broadcast

1

Social backroom deals

2

Social economic

11

Communicative broadcast

16

Formal decision

19

Administrative narrowcast

52

Communicative narrowcast

69
0

10

20

30

40

50

Power count

Figure L.185. Power in period 9.

735

60

70

80

80
5
1
7

70

Power counts

60
50

30

3
1
6

40
30

17

15
20

1
6
5

10
0

3
2011

8

6
1
6

2012

2013

17

17

2014

1
2015

2
8
4
2016

Year
Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Communicative narrowcast

Formal decision

Social backroom deals

Social economic

Figure L.186. Power by year in period 9.

Figure L.187 shows actor, audience, and power combinations in period 9.

ACLA

transmitted administrative narrowcasts, communicative narrowcasts, formal decision, social
backroom deals, and social economic power within its own organization. The 21st century
library study transmitted administrative narrowcasts and communicative narrowcasts within
itself. A general view of the actors, audiences, types of power, and directions of power in period
9 is shown in Figure L.188.
736

PA
libr
Pe
ary
Pri nn
PA
Go
vat syl
De
ver
Count
e va Ma
par
nor
CL
y Ma civi nia ry Loc tm
's
P CL
munici ss l Ge Fra al ent CL Pri Ad
co P
palitie me soc ner nc libr of P vat vis
unt ad
s dia iet al es ary Re city e ory eiN y vis
outsid out y Ass Co tru ve libr bu Co et ser ory
Regional Asset Contracto Local libraries in Pennsylvania e the let act em op ste nu ari sin un wo vic bo
District
r
Allegheny County state library city s or bly er es e es ess cil rk es ard

CLP advisory board

CLP county services
eiNetwork
PA lib. Governor's Advisory Council
Private business

CLP city libraries
PA Department of Revenue
Local library trustees
Mary Frances Cooper
PA General Assembly

Private civil society actor
Mass media outlets

County municipalities not in city

Pennsylvania state library

Local libraries in Allegheny County

Contractor

21st century
library study

Regional Asset District

ACLA

21st century library study

ACLA

Actor

CLP Trustees
Local libraries in Allegheny County
eiNetwork
ACLA
ACLA
CLP county services
ACLA
Local libraries in Allegheny County
21st century library study
ACLA
21st century library study
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
Local libraries in Allegheny County
ACLA
CLP district services
CLP county services
Broadcast to Pennsylvania libraries
ACLA
School districts
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA and CLP directors
21st century library study
Regional Asset District
ACLA
21st century library study
Regional Asset District
Contractor
CLP city libraries
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
Local municipal board
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Broadcast to Allegheny County residents
ACLA
21st century library study
Regional Asset District
Local libraries in Allegheny County
Actor/audience unknown
ACLA
Audience

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
11
2
2
5
5
1
1
2
1
31
1
1
4
1
1
1
6
2
31
1
1
1
6 13
1
1
6
1
17
2
2
1
17
0

20

20
20

12

40
Power count

Administrative broadcast

Administrative narrowcast

Communicative broadcast

Formal decision

Social backroom deals

Social economic

Communicative narrowcast

Figure L.187. Actor, audience, and power combinations in period 9.

737

11

60

Figure L.188. Actor-power graph for period 9.

Legitimation and implementation. Figure L.189 shows legitimation in period 9. The
most frequent type of legitimation was success-discussion and periphery support (N=111),
followed by unknown (N=28), failure-objections (N=25), and failure-bypass representative
public (N=6). Figure L.190 shows implementation in period 9. The most frequent type of
implementation was success (N=125), followed by unknown (N=34) and failure (N=11). Figure
L.191 shows legitimation and implementation combinations in period 9. Of the N=111 events
that were successfully legitimated, N=92 were implemented. Of the N=31 total events that failed
to be legitimated, N=16 were still implemented.

Figure L.192 shows legitimation and

implementation combinations by year in period 9.

It can be seen that the majority of

transmissions that were not legitimated but were implemented occurred in 2014 and 2015.

738

Legitimation types

Failure-bypass representative public

6

Failure-objections

25

Unknown

28

Success-discussion and periphery support

111
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Legitimation count

Figure L.189. Legitimation in period 9.

Implementation types

Failure

11

Unknown

34

Success

125

0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation counts

Figure L.190. Implementation in period 9.

739

120

140

Legitimation type

Failure-bypass representative
public

4
2
6

Failure-objections

7

12
Unknown
11
17

Unknown

Success
Failure

17

Success-discussion and periphery
support

92

2
0

20

40

60

80

100

Implementation count

Figure L.191. Legitimation and implementation combinations in period 9.

740

2011

Success-discussion and periphery support

3

2012

Unknown 1
Success-discussion and periphery support

10

Failure-objections 1
Failure-bypass representative public 1

2013

Unknown 21
Success-discussion and periphery support

15

1

Failure-bypass representative public 1

2014

Unknown

12

5

Success-discussion and periphery support 2

31

14

Failure-objections 2 5 2
Failure-bypass representative public 11

2015

Unknown

32

Success-discussion and periphery support
Failure-objections

25
3 7 3

Failure-bypass representative public 2

2016

Unknown 2
Success-discussion and periphery support

8 2

Failure-objections 11
Year

0

Legitimation
Failure

Success

20
40
Implementation count

60

Unknown

Figure L.192. Legitimation and implementation combinations by year in period 9.

Circuits. Figure L.193 shows the circuits in period 9. The predominant circuit was
ACLA (N=62), followed by civil society (N=51), Regional Asset District (N=20), state (N=11),
and intra-library (N=10). Circuits are shown by year in Figure L.194. The ACLA circuit was
active from 2012 to 2016. It was a major actor in 2015. Civil society was a major actor in 2013
741

and 2014. Regional Asset District circuit was identified in all years except 2013. The state

Circuit

circuit was seen in all years except 2011.

Electronic Information Network circuit

1

Local school district circuit

1

Unknown circuit

2

Local municipal circuit

6

Economic circuit

6

Intra-library circuit

10

State circuit

11

Regional Asset District circuit

20

Civil society circuit

51

ACLA circuit

62
0

10

20

30

40

Circuit count

Figure L.193. Circuits in period 9.

742

50

60

70

80
1
6

70

4
5

60

4

Circuit count

50
4

40
46

30

20
3

10

6
0

5
1
3
1

2
1
2011

4
2012

2
1
2
2
1
5

31

7

9

2013

2014

2
1
11

2015

2016

Year
ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

Local school district circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Unknown circuit

Figure L.194. Circuits by year in period 9.

Figure L.195 shows actor positions in period 9. The most frequent actor positions were
core (N=98), followed by inner periphery (N=50), and outer periphery (N=22). Figure L.196
shows audience positions in period 9.

The most frequent audience positions were inner

periphery (N=91), followed by core (N=62) and diffuse public (N=17). Figure L.197 shows
743

actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year. The ACLA circuit shows a
variety of pathways throughout the period. The civil society circuit also shows a variety of
pathways in 2013 and 2014. Regional Asset District circuit pathways were primarily between
core and inner periphery. A general view of the tessellation in period 9 is shown in Figure
L.198.

Actor position

Outer periphery

22

Inner periphery

50

Core

98

0

20

40

60

80

Actor position count

Figure L.195. Actor positions in period 9.

744

100

120

Audience position

Diffuse public

17

Core

62

Inner periphery

91

0

20

40

60

Audience position count

Figure L.196. Audience positions in period 9.

745

80

100

Inn. per.
Core
Out. per.

Core

1

Inner periphery

3
1

4

Core
Core
Inner periphery

2
1
11

Diffuse public

1

Core

1

Inner periphery

2

Out. per.
Inn. per.
Out.
Core Inn. per. per.

Core

2015

3

Core

3

Inner periphery

3

Core
Inner periphery

5

2

7

Inner periphery

4

Diffuse public

4

15
4

3

Inner periphery

1

Core

1
7

5

1

1

3

1

Core

5

3

Inner periphery

12

Core

6

Inner periphery

11 2

1

3

Inner periphery

4

Core

Audience
position

3

1
9

Inner periphery

Year Actor
position

1

4

Core

Inner periphery

2 1

11

Diffuse public

Diffuse public

2

11

2

Core

2016

3

Inner periphery

Core

Inn. per.

11

Core

Out.
per.

Core

Inn. Out.
Out.
per. per. Core per.

2011
2012
2013
2014

Core

3
11 2
0

5

10

15
Circuit count

20

25

ACLA circuit

Civil society circuit

Economic circuit

Electronic Information Network circuit

Intra-library circuit

Local municipal circuit

Local school district circuit

Regional Asset District circuit

State circuit

Unknown circuit

30

Figure L.197. Actor position, audience position, and circuit combinations by year in period 9.

746

Figure L.198. Actor-circuit graph for period 9.

747

APPENDIX M: MINIMAL FORMULAS

[1] OUTCOME WITHOUT LOGICAL REMAINDERS

There are 4 terms that lead to positive outcomes:
RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY *
resistance
(period 2, period 5,
period 6)

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS
* legitimacy *
RESISTANCE

+

civil activity *
RESPONSIVENESS
* resistance
(period 3, period 5,
period 6)

+

civil activity *
RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY

+

(period 5, period 6,
period 7)

 SYSTEM CHANGE

(period 9)

The first term of the minimization corresponds to 3 periods, the second term corresponds to 3
periods, the third term corresponds to 3 periods, and the fourth term corresponds to 1 period.
The first three terms are concurrent explanations for periods 5 and 6.
Coverage is the way that the terms or paths of the minimal formulas cover the observed
cases (Rihoux & De Meur, 2009, p. 64). There are three measures of coverage for each outcome.
For the [1] outcome value, for instance, there is: 1) raw coverage, or the proportion of [1]
outcome cases that are covered by given term; 2) unique coverage, or the proportion of [1] cases

748

that are uniquely covered by given term; and 3) solution coverage, or the proportion of cases that
are covered by all the terms. Coverage measures for the above formula are shown in Table M.1.

Table M.1. Coverage for the [1] outcome formula without logical remainders.

Term

Raw coverage

Unique coverage

1

3/6

1/6

2

3/6

1/6

3

3/6

1/6

4

1/6

1/6

Solution coverage

6/6

The descriptive formula can be read as follows:
“The [1] outcome (SYSTEM CHANGE) is observed:

•

In periods that combine high responsiveness [RESPONSIVENESS] AND high
legitimacy [LEGITIMACY] AND low resistance [resistance]

OR
•

In periods that combine low civil activity [civil activity] AND high responsiveness
[RESPONSIVENESS] AND low resistance [resistance]

OR
•

In periods that combine low civil activity [civil activity] AND high responsiveness
[RESPONSIVENESS] AND high legitimacy [LEGITIMACY]

OR

749

•

In periods that combine high civil activity [CIVIL ACTIVITY] AND high
responsiveness [RESPONSIVENESS] AND low legitimacy [legitimacy] AND high
resistance [RESISTANCE].”

Since the four different paths to system change share the condition RESPONSIVENESS, the
minimization formula can be rewritten as follows in order to highlight the shared and different
conditions of the two paths that lead to the same outcome:

LEGITIMACY * resistance
RESPONSIVENESS *

{

civil activity * resistance
civil activity * LEGITIMACY



SYSTEM CHANGE

CIVIL ACTIVITY * legitimacy
* RESISTANCE

[0] OUTCOME WITHOUT LOGICAL REMAINDERS

There are 3 terms that lead to negative outcomes:
CIVIL ACTIVITY *
responsiveness *
LEGITIMACY *
resistance
(period 1)

+

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
responsiveness *
legitimacy *
RESISTANCE
(period 4)

+ civil activity *
RESPONSIVENESS
* legitimacy *
RESISTANCE



system
change

(period 8)

Each of the terms corresponds to 1 period. All terms use all 4 conditions to explain the outcome.
Coverage of the formula is shown in Table M.2.

750

Table M.2. Coverage for [0] outcome formula without logical remainders.

Term

Raw coverage

Unique coverage

1

1/3

1/3

2

1/3

1/3

3

1/3

1/3

Solution coverage

3/3

This descriptive formula can be read as follows:
“The [0] outcome (system change) is observed:

•

In periods that combine high civil activity [CIVIL ACTIVITY] AND low
responsiveness [responsiveness] AND high legitimacy [LEGITIMACY] AND low
resistance [resistance]

OR
•

In periods that combine high civil activity [CIVIL ACTIVITY] AND low
responsiveness [responsiveness] AND low legitimacy [legitimacy] AND high
resistance [RESISTANCE]

OR
•

In periods that combine low civil activity [civil activity] AND high responsiveness
[RESPONSIVENESS] and low legitimacy [legitimacy] AND high resistance
[RESISTANCE].”

751

[1] OUTCOME WITH LOGICAL REMAINDERS

Carrying out the minimization procedure with logical remainders included produces eight
solutions for [1] outcomes. The first formula is as follows:

civil activity *
LEGITIMACY
(period 5, period
6, period 7)

+

civil activity *
resistance

+

(period 3, period
5, period 6)

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS



SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 2, period 9)

This formula makes 5 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

This formula provides concurrent explanations for periods 5 and 6.
The minimal formula above can be visualized in a Venn diagram as seen in Figure M.1.
The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

There are 24, or 16, possible

configurations in the diagram. The area with horizontal stripes that represents the minimal
formula corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 5
logical remainder configurations. The remaining 6 configurations that are logical remainders or
observed [0] outcomes are not covered by the formula.

752

Figure M.1. First set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The second minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

civil activity *
LEGITIMACY
(period 5,
period 6, period
7)

+

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS

+ RESPONSIVENESS
* resistance

(period 2, period 9)



SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 2, period 3,
period 5, period 6)

This formula makes 4 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
753

CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The second formula provides concurrent explanations for periods 2, 5, and 6.
The second minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.2.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 4 logical
remainder configurations.

754

Figure M.2. Second set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The third minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

civil activity *
LEGITIMACY
(period 5,
period 6, period
7)

+

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS

+ legitimacy *
resistance

(period 2, period 9)



SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 3)

This formula makes 6 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
755

CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The third minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.3.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 6 logical
remainder configurations.

756

Figure M.3. Third set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The fourth minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

civil activity *
resistance
(period 3,
period 5, period
6)

+

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS

+ RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY

(period 2, period 9)



SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 2, period 5,
period 6, period 7)

This formula makes 4 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
757

CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The fourth formula provides concurrent explanations for periods 2, 5, and 6.
The fourth minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.4.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 4 logical
remainder configurations.

Figure M.4. Fourth set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

758

The fifth minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

civil activity *
resistance
(period 3,
period 5, period
6)

+

CIVIL ACTIVITY *
RESPONSIVENESS

+ LEGITIMACY *
RESISTANCE

(period 2, period 9)



SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 7)

This formula makes 6 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The fifth minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.5.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 6 logical
remainder configurations.

759

Figure M.5. Fifth set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The sixth minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

CIVIL ACTIVITY * + RESPONSIVENESS
RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY
(period 2, period 9)

(period 2, period 5,
period 6, period 7)

+ RESPONSIVENESS
* resistance

 SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 2, period 3,
period 5, period 6)

This formula makes 2 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

760

The sixth formula provides concurrent explanations for periods 2, 5, and 6.
The sixth minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.6.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 2 logical
remainder configurations.

Figure M.6. Sixth set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The seventh minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

761

CIVIL ACTIVITY * + RESPONSIVENESS
RESPONSIVENESS
* LEGITIMACY
(period 2, period 9)

(period 2, period 5,
period 6, period 7)

+ legitimacy *
resistance

 SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 3)

This formula makes 4 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The seventh formula provides concurrent explanations for period 2.
The seventh minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.7.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 4 logical
remainder configurations.

762

Figure M.7. Seventh set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

The eighth and final minimization solution for the [1] outcome is as follows:

CIVIL ACTIVITY * + RESPONSIVENESS
RESPONSIVENESS
* resistance
(period 2, period 9)

(period 2, period 3,
period 5, period 6)

+ LEGITIMACY *
RESISTANCE

 SYSTEM
CHANGE

(period 7)

This formula makes 4 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
763

CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{1}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The eighth formula provides concurrent explanations for period 2.
The eighth minimal formula for [1] outcome is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure
M.8.

The minimal formula is represented by horizontal stripes.

The minimal formula

corresponds to the 5 configurations with observed cases displaying [1] outcomes, plus 4 logical
remainder configurations.

Figure M.8.Eighth set of simplifying assumptions for [1] outcome.

764

[0] OUTCOME WITH LOGICAL REMAINDERS

The minimization for [0] outcomes, with logical remainders included, produces one formula.
This formula is as follows:

responsiveness

+

civil activity * legitimacy *
RESISTANCE

(period 1, period 4)

+

(period 8)



system change

This formula makes 6 simplifying assumptions:
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{0}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{0}RESISTANCE{0} +
CIVIL ACTIVITY{1}RESPONSIVENESS{0}LEGITIMACY{1}RESISTANCE{1}

The minimal formula for [0] outcomes is visualized as a Venn diagram in Figure M.9.
The minimal formula corresponds to the 3 configurations with observed cases displaying [0]
outcomes, plus 6 logical remainder configurations.

