©2017
Vanessa Lynn Kitzie
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

BEYOND BEHAVIORS, NEEDS, AND SEEKING: A QUALITATIVE
INVESTIGATION OF INFORMATION PRACTICES AMONG INDIVIDUALS
WITH LGBTQ+ IDENTITIES
By
VANESSA LYNN KITZIE
A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School-New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
In partial fulfillment of the requirements
For the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication and Information
Written under the direction of
Marie L. Radford

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION

This dissertation examines the information practices of individuals identifying as lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and/or queer (LGBTQ+). It responds to two significant problems in
current Library and Information Science (LIS) studies examining these populations. First,
there exist a paucity of research studying how these individuals act toward and interact with
information related to their LGBTQ+ identities. Second, extant research focuses on almost
exclusively on gay and lesbian sexualities, imposing a liminal, psychological model of identity
development on these actions and interactions. This imposition results in a myopic view of
the unique issues, concerns, barriers, and achievements of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities, often imposed by those outside these identities.
To address these problems, this dissertation adopts a constructionist methodology,
which envisions individuals as theorists within their own information worlds. A qualitative
research design consisting of inductive and deductive data collection and analysis supports this
methodology. Findings are triangulated by comparison between two data sources – semistructured interviews with 30 individuals identifying as LGBTQ+ between the ages of 18 and
ii

38, and web scraping of Question-Best Answer pairs from the LGBT thread of Yahoo!
Answers. Both data sources capture participant accounts of how their information practices
are shaped by sociocultural context and individual agency, as well as how online technologies,
namely social media sites and search engines, afford and constrain these information practices.
Key findings advance an information practices approach, which purports the
importance of sociocultural context in shaping how individuals act toward and interact with
information. Employing this approach uncovers a litany of practices important to individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities beyond needs, seeking, and use. Instead, practices encompass the
gamut of human experience, whether such experience is produced by intersubjective
understanding, or garnered by an individual’s responses to such understanding. Nor can
information be considered as formal, recorded sources, passively consumed. Rather,
participants’ preferred information sources are often unsanctioned, embodied, and emotional.
Participants want to know what it is like to adopt an identity, fraught with visibility and
questions of what constitutes authentic practice. They value information to address this need
derived from their own embodied knowledge as well as from those with similar knowledge.
Further, many participants need to address these desires and values within information
landscapes that visibly disrupt or deny the legitimacy of their existences. Thus, envisioning a
resource, such as a book as instrumental to one’s LGBTQ+ identity development only holds
if supported by an individual’s sociocultural context. For these reasons, this research
introduces a new lens via its conceptual framework from which to interrogate the assumptions
of past research and integrate a sociocultural perspective to both information and how
individuals, seek, share, use, avoid, mistrust, etcetera, information.
In terms of online technologies, research findings denote the importance of search
engines and social media sites to participants when engaging in information practices related
iii

to their LGBTQ+ identities. Key affordances of online technologies include connecting
participants to similar others, allowing participants to engage in embodied practices, accessing
sources that do not go through formal channels of peer production, and facilitating
participants’ control of what they share about their LGBTQ+ identities and to whom. Key
constraints of online technologies include lacking moderation-based features, making visible
strategies that erase or stigmatize LGBTQ+ identities, packaging LGBTQ+ identities into
monolithic metanarratives, enforcing norms related to authenticity, and collapsing
participants’ contexts. Whether these technologies represent an affordance or constraint is
influenced by how a participant roots them within their own meanings and notions of
relevancy. Therefore, online technologies do not provide deterministically good or bad
outcomes for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, but rather these outcomes are shaped by
individual experience, sociocultural context, and the material properties of the technologies
themselves.

INTRODUCTION
Consider the following three scenarios. In the first, interview participant Jamie,1 assigned at
birth and socialized as female, created a social media profile using male pictures to express
masculinity and be recognized by others as male. Due in part to this embodied knowledge,
Jamie now identifies as male. In the second scenario, interview participant Eva, a feminine
presenting, or femme, lesbian, was told by other lesbians in her social group to have romantic
relationships with women presenting as masculine despite her attraction to other femmes.
Since Eva derived most opportunities for socialization with lesbians from this group, she had
to seek out other information sources, such as online dating sites, to find a romantic partner.
In the third scenario, a social media participant posted a question to Yahoo! Answers asking
how to minimize the appearance of their2 breasts by binding them using materials from home
to hide this binding from their parents. According to the participant, the denoted “Best”
Answer links to an online resource created by a transgender man, with “useful, non-judgmental
information”3 on everyday life situations experienced by individuals with transgender
identities, such as binding, medical information, and romantic relationships. These scenarios
were taken from participant accounts comprising two data sources: a) interviews with
individuals with LGBTQ+4 identities5 between the ages of 18 and 38, and b) data collected from
questions and answers shared on the LGBT thread of the social media site Yahoo! Answers.6

1. All names are pseudonyms.
2. Third person pronouns are used when one’s gender identity is unknown.
3. See http://www.ftmguide.org/abouthudson.html.
4. This descriptor is popularly abbreviated as LGBT, LGBTQ, or LGBTQIA (among other variations including
the labels lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex, and/or asexual, among others. Yet
labels are problematic both theoretically (Gamson, 1995) and for participants. For this reason, LGBTQ+ is used
as shorthand to reflect labels most often used by participants, as well as to recognize the inability of labels to
holistically capture all identity expressions.
5. See Appendix A: Glossary for a Glossary of all italicized terms.
6. See https://answers.yahoo.com/.

2
Each scenario consists of information practices, or “an array of information-related
activities and skills” (Lloyd, 2012, p. 285) that reflect “shared particular understandings”
(Schatzki, 2001a, p. 3). Examples include Jamie’s embodiment, Eva’s active seeking, and the
secrecy of the participant asking a question on Yahoo! Answers. Information practices are
inextricable from identity, which represents a set of characteristics or affinities (“Identity,” n.d.;
Haraway, 1990, p. 197) that determine how individuals are treated. In all scenarios,
participants’ information practices responded to to the stigmatization of their identities, or the
presence of “an attribute that is deeply discrediting” (Goffman, 1963, p. 13) in comparison to
normative identity expectations of what an individual “ought to be” (p. 12) in each situation.
Both Jamie and the Yahoo! Answer asker’s stigmatized identities are relative to larger cultural
expectations, whereas participant Eva’s stigmatized identity, as indicated by her preference for
other femmes, is relative to her social group. Social groups and cultures to which participants
belong instantiate these expectations through the establishment of strategies, such as assigning
stigma, which define the boundaries of acceptable practices (de Certeau, 1984, p. 51-55).
Strategies materialize within places, which disseminate strategies from a specific location with
infrastructure such as libraries (p. 124). Individuals who practice within these places transform
them into spaces (p. 124) where they may engage in tactics, or “poaching” (p. xii) of strategies.
Jamie’s use of social media sites to upend traditional, corporeal expectations of masculinity
represents a tactical information practice. Strategies exercised by dominant cultures and social
groups and supported by places, combined with the tactics employed by individuals to create
spaces produce a context. A context consists of the interaction between individuals and
conditions (e.g., structures, reality, information) created by practices within a given point in
time-space. In turn, context shapes practices.

3
The field of Library and Information Science (LIS) concerns itself with the research
and practical aspects of helping individuals achieve information-related goals. The sub-field of
Human Information Behavior (HIB) examines actions individuals take to achieve these goals.
These three mentioned scenarios would be applicable to HIB studies that position individuals
and groups with marginalized, vulnerable, disenfranchised, etcetera, identities as facing
constraints to such achievement. Current theoretical lenses envision these constraints as
arising from obstacles to access, which are predominately physical or intellectual in nature
(Burnett, Jaeger, & Thompson 2005). For instance, the application of these lenses would
conclude that either participant Jamie lacks physical access to information sources facilitating
masculine identity expression, or these sources exist, but Jamie does not know how to locate
or use them. Yet these lenses prove inadequate to interpret Jamie’s account. While Jamie could
not express masculinity in physical places, such as at school, he identified virtual spaces
available to him. Further, he did not note any intellectual issues obviating his engagement in
virtual spaces. In Jamie’s situation, achieving masculine identity expression cannot be
condensed to an issue of access in a physically, intellectually, or technologically (for that
matter) deterministic sense. Instead, Jamie’s cultural and social group memberships shaped
what practices he perceived as available at a certain point in time-space (Dervin, 2003, p. 127,
scenario 9). Unlike extant research in HIB, Jamie’s scenario indicates the importance of social
group and cultural context in mediating a host of information practices beyond access.
This dissertation addresses this myopia of extant LIS research by focusing on practices
rather than behaviors (Savolainen, 2007), specifically examining how practices both produce
and are produced by context. Dervin envisions context as representing “a quest that demands
extraordinary tolerance of chaos” (2003, p. 112). Contextualism, or approaches to context,
articulate the relationship between humans and worlds. This relationship varies based on one’s

4
methodology, or theoretical approach to the analysis of methods (p. 126), in determining how
context is defined and examined as a phenomenon. Dervin (2003) offers various scenarios of
how context can be methodologically articulated. This dissertation envisions reality, persons,
structures, and information as produced by practices that characterize a context; in turn,
context shapes practices (Dervin’s 9th scenario, p. 127, scenario 9). Thus, neither humans nor
worlds are determined or determining. Instead, the relationships between them is recursive –
humans constitute their worlds and are simultaneously constituted by them (p. 114).
This work focuses on how the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities are constituted by practices and context when individuals are fulfilling information
goals related to their identities. The first two chapters outline this research by providing
contextual information, articulating theoretical goals, and contending research significance, in
the first chapter. The second chapter then provides a literature review, overviews applicable
theoretical frameworks, and summarizes findings from a pilot study. Based on these identified
gaps, challenges, and implications, the dissertation’s conceptual framework is then described
and germinant research questions are posed.

5
CHAPTER 1
Context, Research Goals and Problems Addressed, Significance
Context
Within the US, certain LGBTQ+ identities are ostensibly accepted. At the demographic level,
a record number of more than 10 million individuals identify as LGBTQ+ (4% of the
population in 2017, a 117% increase from 2012).1 Same-sex marriage was legalized in 20152
with polling data denoting public approval as between 553 and 61%.4 At the cultural level,
being queer is en vogue. Fashion trends started by queer people like the undercut have been
adopted within the mainstream5 and 1980s drag ball vernacular such as “yas,” “shade,” and
“reading” have experienced a revival in popular culture.6 Celebrities have started to identify as
queer in both their sexual preferences and dress.7 A transgender woman of color, Laverne
Cox, was featured on the cover of TIME magazine in 2014,8 the movie Moonlight, featuring a
queer black male protagonist, won the Best Picture Oscar in 2017,9 and the Showtime
television series Billions introduced the first gender non-binary character on television.10
Equating such progress with the notion that all relevant issues have been solved masks
many of the extant problems experienced by individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Such

1. See http://www.gallup.com/poll/201731/lgbt-identification-rises.aspx.
2. See https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-556_3204.pdf.
3. See http://www.pewforum.org/2016/05/12/changing-attitudes-on-gay-marriage/.
4. See http://www.gallup.com/poll/191645/americans-support-gay-marriage-remains-high.aspx.
5. See https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/31/opinion/sunday/hipsters-broke-my-gaydar.html.
6. See http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/heres-the-real-origin-of-the-wordyas_us_578ce747e4b0fa896c3f4306.
7. See https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/can-straight-people-be-queer-435.
8. See http://time.com/135480/transgender-tipping-point/.
9 See http://oscar.go.com/news/winners/moonlight-wins-3-oscars-including-2017-best-picture.
10. See http://www.vulture.com/2017/02/asia-kate-dillon-billions-non-binary-gender-identity.html.

6
individuals lack federal protections for discrimination,11 signifying that even couples who
desire monogamy and marriage must navigate differing state laws where wearing a wedding
ring may precipitate getting fired from their jobs. Considering the results of the 2016 US
election, the possibility for federal protections soon is not likely. The agenda related to
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities being pushed by a cabinet known for their anti-LGBTQ+
stances12 may only serve to further marginalize, particularly those most underrepresented. A
taste of what is to come is exemplified by the president rescinding protections for transgender
students to use the bathroom corresponding to their gender identity13 and the Supreme Court
sending a case that would test this ruling back to the lower court.14
Both federal and cultural recognition of those identifying within the LGBTQ+
umbrella who do not identify as monogamous, cisgender, white, gay, and/or lesbian remains
diminished. In the year 2015, there was a 20% increase in the number of homicides of
individuals identifying as LGBTQ+. Such homicides disproportionately affect people of color
(62%) and transgender individuals, specifically women of color (54%).15 As of March 2017,
seven transgender women of color have been killed at a rate on track to overtake 2016 as the
deadliest year on record for this group.16 The variability of social and cultural recognition for
individuals who identify as LGBTQ+ was exemplified by interview participant accounts. As

11. See https://www.aclu.org/map/non-discrimination-laws-state-state-information-map.
12. See https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2016/12/15/trump-cabinet-who-whohomophobia/9UDr8MnXIQAxjO369qzT0J/story.html.
13. See https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/22/us/politics/devos-sessions-transgender-students-rights.html.
14. See http://www.cnn.com/2017/03/06/politics/gavin-grimm-transgender-case-supreme-court/.
15. See http://avp.org/resources/avp-resources/520-2015-report-on-lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender-queerand-hiv-affected-hate-violence.
16. See http://www.glaad.org/blog/glaad-calls-increased-and-accurate-media-coverage-transgender-murders.

7
participant Sage states: “It means jack shit that you can get married if you’re going to get shot
on your way home.”
Despite the common rhetoric of “it gets better,”17 individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
continue to experience significant hardships. They are more likely to be socioeconomically
disadvantaged,18 incarcerated,19 have substance abuse and mental health issues,20 and commit
suicide.21 Individuals with LGBTQ+ identities are not only targeted for violence in the physical
world, but also by the mainstream media. Since lesbian and bisexual characters have been
introduced in TV shows, 95 of the total 383 characters (25%) have been killed off as of March
2016.22 This lack of visibility carries over to LGBTQ+ media where straight, white, cisgender
men are featured more on magazine covers than individuals with LGBTQ+ identities.23 One
of the arguably most popular current television series to feature a female transgender
protagonist cast a cisgender man in the role.24 Therefore, it matters less that LGBTQ+
identities are visible and more which identities are visible and how they are visible.
Considering this information, which admittedly only scrapes the surface of the unique
challenges faced by individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, is it surprising that the actor cast in

17. See http://www.itgetsbetter.org/.
18. See http://www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources/publications/lgbt.aspx.
19. See http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-lgbt-incarceration-usa-idUSKBN14C1ZI.
20. See https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-SexualOrientation-2015/NSDUHSexualOrientation-2015/NSDUH-SexualOrientation-2015.htm; https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/thetruth-about-exercise-addiction/201612/why-transgender-people-experience-more-mental-health;
http://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/gay-loneliness/.
21. See http://www.thetrevorproject.org/pages/facts-about-suicide.
22. See https://www.autostraddle.com/autostraddles-ultimate-infographic-guide-to-dead-lesbian-tv-characters332920/.
23. See http://fusion.net/story/286099/mykki-blanco-gay-media-so-white-magazine-covers/.
24. See http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/09/emmys-transparent-jeffrey-tambor-cis-trans-actors.

8
Billions did not apply the label “non-binary” to themselves until seeing it on a script? Per an
interview with the actor, Asia Kate Dillion, who plays Taylor on Billions:
When I saw the breakdown for the character, it said “female, non-binary.” And I
thought, “Interesting, I think I know about those words, but let me do research into
every aspect of this character and their world and who they are.” And so, female
meaning sex and non-binary meaning a gender identity that is an umbrella term for
people who identify as neither man nor a woman. I just went, oh my gosh, there is
language to express something about myself that I’ve always known, but could never
put words to. I mean, it really helped. It’s interesting: As much visibility as Taylor is
giving to the non-binary community now that Billions is on the air, Taylor gave that
visibility and hope to me first.25
Asia’s account signifies an information problem experienced by individuals with LGBTQ+
identities, which is that words like “non-binary” might be accessible to them, but not applied.
Some of the reason for this lack of application stems from the inequalities that individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities continue to face. In the current information landscape for these
individuals, they might be able to see themselves, but do not have the language to describe
what they see.
Research Goals and Problems Addressed
This research accomplishes an interrelated series of theoretical goals and practical applications.
One theoretical goal is to shift from the HIB lens traditionally used for this type of inquiry to
an information practices lens. In this dissertation, an information practices lens is envisioned
as conceptually distinct from an HIB lens, given both employ separate metatheoretical
epistemologies and methodological approaches. These approaches affect how each frames
context. An HIB lens defines context as a series of variables that yield predictive effects on
behavior (see Dervin, 2003, p. 127, scenarios 5 through 8; see also Talja, Keso, & Pietila, 1999),
while an information practices lens defines context as producing and produced by practices

25. See: http://www.vulture.com/2017/02/asia-kate-dillon-billions-non-binary-gender-identity.html.

9
(see Information Practices section for a comparison of behaviors and practices). Practices
represent enactments of interactions between persons, structures, realities, and information
within a given moment in time-space (Dervin, 2003, p. 127, scenario 9). This latter
methodological framing of context proves salient for the study of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities given the social and cultural strategies that shape their resultant information
practices.
This research addresses another theoretical goal: the contention that power shapes
information practices. Power is used in the Foucauldian sense; it does not represent a resource
wielded within a specific moment, but rather is pervasive, subject to constant flux and
negotiation. Power is agentless and structureless, neither positive nor negative. Rather, power
is embedded in everyday practices (Foucault, 1978). Therefore, power can both be used to
oppress and as a form of resistance. Adopting such a position posits that individuals are not
helpless, either cognitively or culturally, when achieving information-related goals (de Certeau,
1984).
A third theoretical goal is to examine how individuals with LGBTQ+ identities engage
in information practices using technologies.26 While technologies such as the internet provide
tactical affordances, e.g., anonymity, they also impart dominant social and cultural strategies
(see Napoli, 2014) that dissuade individuals with names not recognized as “real,” such as drag
performers, from maintaining a profile (see Lingel & Golub, 2015), or, as evinced by interview

26. One may draw an analytical distinction between technology as an artifact and technology as use (Orlikowski,
2000, p. 408). Per the former, technology is conceived of as an assemblage of materials socially, politically,
culturally, and economically organized in time-space (Dervin, 2003, p. 127, scenario 9). This assemblage proves
analogous to a place. While technological use is shaped by this assemblage, namely its affordances and constraints,
this assemblage does not determine use. Rather, individuals draw on technological assemblages, as well as their
own knowledge, experiences, meanings, and habits to enact technological use. This use constitutes a structure,
or rules and resources, which shapes future use (Orlikowski, 2000). Yet individuals can also modify this structure
by changing their use of technology over time. Thus, the relationship between technology and individuals is not
one of determinism or reproduction, but rather is negotiated based on context.

10
participant accounts, a search engine that provides links for pornographic sites when using the
keyword “lesbian.” Given that current LIS research of marginalized, vulnerable, or otherwise
disenfranchised groups tends to treat the technology as deterministic (see Haider & Bawden,
2006, 2007), this study instead frames it an actor (see below Conceptual Framework section)
that affords and constrains information practices.
Significance
This research has theoretical, methodological, and practical significance. Theoretically, this
research integrates sociocultural context into LIS studies of marginalized, vulnerable, or
otherwise disenfranchised groups. Extant research often conceives of a marginalized identity
as an objective, demographic variable, e.g., class, which presents a barrier to achieving
information-related goals presumed as shared. This research contends that individuals and
groups do not exist in an objective world, but rather operate within variegated information
landscapes (Lloyd, 2012, p. 773), where “modalities of information … that people draw upon
in the performance of their practices in working or everyday life … constitute the intersubjective
agreement that informs our situated realities” (p. 773, emphasis added). “Intersubjective”
signifies that information modalities – and it is argued in this dissertation – practices, are
constantly negotiated among interactants. “Situated” denotes that individuals and groups
belong to different realities, or sites, in which these negotiations occur. Individuals and groups
thus have multifaceted goals, as well as appropriate practices and modalities to address them,
which transcend a specific worldview. Given this observation, this dissertation refutes the
argument that information problems related to an LGBTQ+ identity cannot be addressed by
an ostensibly objective “corrective,” e.g., a library providing loaner laptops. To make this
refutation, this dissertation applies and extends theoretical and metatheoretical approaches not
typically brought to bear in LIS research and theory, including practice theory, stigma theory,

11
and sociomateriality, to capture the intersubjective and situated nature of the information
landscapes (Lloyd, 2012, p. 773) in which individuals reside.
From a methodological standpoint, collection of naturally occurring data from the
LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers, as well as the use of semi-structured interviews captured by
the critical incident technique (CIT) (Flanagan, 1954) and “Total Time Line” (Dervin, 1983)
demonstrate how individuals conceptualize their information practices. The researcher
iteratively uses emic/etic coding (see Appendix F: Final Codebook for full coding scheme)
to identify the types of practices that produce certain contexts and how these contexts shape
information practices. This choice of coding method not only introduces theoretical
approaches not previously used, or sparingly employed, but also engages with practice as an
emerging “umbrella concept” (Savolainen, 2007, p. 109) within LIS (see below Information
Practices section).
From a practical standpoint, rather than typifying information practices (see
McKenzie, 2003a, 2003b), this study adopts a constructionist approach that allows participants
to define these practices for themselves, providing rich data to extend extant typologies. This
research also examines how technological actors reflect and (re)produce existing strategies, as
well as engender tactics, both of which will inform information services and system design.
Some participant characteristics captured in this dissertation are not often represented
in existing work. Information sources not granted significant visibility in the literature, e.g.,
pornography, may emerge and this study legitimates them within the lived experiences of
participants. Purposive sampling identifies participants with LGBTQ+ identities less
dominant in the literature, e.g., queer, transgender. Many participants do not use libraries to
engage in information practices related to their LGBTQ+ identities. Thus, this research
conceives of the potential for “the library in the life of the user” as informed by participant

12
accounts, rather than expecting library use and, therefore, myopically addressing “the user in
the life of the library” (Zweizig, 1973; Zweizig & Dervin, 1977).
Conclusion
This chapter provided an overview of the research, including problems addressed, goals, and
significance. In sum, this dissertation examines the information practices of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. “Practices” is used in lieu of “behaviors” to denote the importance of
sociocultural context in shaping the relationship between individuals and information. This
research is conducted within a Western context, where certain LGBTQ+ identities have
become ostensibly accepted at the cultural level over time. When delving beneath this surface
acceptance, however, one finds that elements of LGBTQ+ identities remain hidden, e.g., the
language to describe them, and that certain identities are subject to negative sociocultural
consequences, including stigmatization and violence.
The goal of this research is to explore how participants practice information
considering these contextual barriers, as well as how sociocultural context may be identityaffirming. Participant data are collected from two sources – interviews and Question-Best
Answer pairs from the LGBT thread of Yahoo Answers. Research findings have theoretical,
methodological, and practical significance in extending knowledge of information practices as
a salient umbrella concept (see Savolainen, 2007), as well as contributing empirical insights to
the LIS field’s understanding of the unique challenges and accomplishments of individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities when seeking, sharing, avoiding, etcetera, information.

CHAPTER 2
Literature Review, Conceptual Framework,
Pilot Study Findings, and Research Questions
Introduction
This section overviews extant literature pertaining to the research area of this dissertation,
including inherent gaps and challenges. The conceptual framework used for this research is
then outlined with a focus on how it addresses these gaps and challenges. This framework has
been subject to empirical testing and improvement, specifically from pilot study findings (see
Pilot Study Findings, and Research Questions section). Finally, key findings and a
discussion of how they informed development of the conceptual framework are examined.
Literature Review
The research areas indicated by Figure 1 inform this study. Information practices represent
an emergent research area and the boundaries between Human Information Behavior (HIB)
and, as indicated by the dotted lines in the diagram, Information Practices are proposed to be
contested and mutable. For these reasons, research within both areas are examined. The
literature review does not examine LIS areas outside of HIB and information practices
pertaining to LGBTQ+ identities, such as collection development (for recent examples, see
Greenblatt, 2010; Downey, 2013; Jardine, 2013; Cart & Jenkins, 2015; Bosman, 2016), archival
practices (for recent examples, see Rawson, 2009; Barriault, 2009; Greenblatt, 2010; Kumbler,
2014; Wexelbaum, 2014; Piemer, 2015; Cifor, 2016), and knowledge organization (for recent
examples, see Keilty, 2009; Greenblatt, 2010; Johnson, 2010; Roberto, 2011; Drabinski, 2013;
Adler, forthcoming). It does, however, address how these areas impact information practices
and their inherent strategic discourse. For instance, Library of Congress Subject Headings

14
(LCSH) are considered in relation to the information practices they shape, such as searching
for LGBTQ+ book titles online and bringing this list to the library due to gaps in LCSH for
LGBTQ+ identities (Rothbauer, 2004). Another LIS area explored is research on Social
Question-answering (SQA) sites, given these sites comprise one source for data collection. A
related area outside of LIS in Computer Science (CS) also examines these sites, but refers to
them as community Question-Answering (CQA) sites. Also outside LIS, the literature review
covers work in the field of Science and Technology Studies (STS), which is a related, crossdisciplinary concept that contains studies examining the information practices of individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities on the internet. Figure 1 depicts these literature review areas.

Figure 1: Mapping the Proposed Research Areas.
Information Practices
Information practices represent an emerging “umbrella concept” within LIS (Savolainen,
2007, p. 109). Unlike information behaviors, which denote a cognitivist conception of needs
and motivations that drive actions such as information-seeking, information practices signify

15
constructivist and constructionist1 perspectives where people’s relationships to information
are constructed based on their memberships to larger cultures and social groups (Savolainen,
2007, p. 126). Practices constitute routine behaviors shaped by these forces. They are banal
ways that individuals “make do” within everyday life (de Certeau, 1984, p. xiv) and provide a
lens through which to see the world. An information practice approach has yet to articulate a
solid theoretical lens with most in-depth efforts made by Savolainen (1995, 2008), McKenzie
(2003a, 2003b), and Lloyd (2005, 2006, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013).
In the introduction of his everyday life information seeking (ELIS) theory, Savolainen
(1995, p. 259) describes how individuals strive to achieve a “mastery of life,” or the ability to
get through day-to-day routines and “keep things in order” by performing quotidian routines.
Achieving this mastery depends on maintaining subjective coherence to individual cognition
and affect, and objective coherence to social structures. Savolainen (1995) employs these two
forms of coherence to describe how ELIS differs by class, finding that differences in how each
class group perceived mastery predicated variations in information seeking behaviors2 and
sources consulted. This work purported the importance of underlying structures, both social
and individualistic, in shaping information practices.
Savolainen (2008) furthered the development of information practices by employing a
social phenomenological viewpoint from which to explore them. He divides information
practices into three modes – seeking, sharing, and use. He illustrates each mode via analysis

1. Although closely related and sometimes used interchangeably, social constructivism relates to how an
individual learns based on their memberships to social groups and cultures, while social constructionism examines
the artifacts produced from these interactions (see Talja, Tuominen, & Savolainen, 2005, who refer to
“constructivism” as “collectivism”). Since this research will examine how practices, strategies, tactics, spaces,
places, affordances, and constraints are materially produced, a constructionist approach is most appropriate.
2. Given that information practices represent a nascent concept in LIS, the word “practices” will not be applied
to HIB literature unless used by the author(s).

16
through interviews with 20 environmental activists and 18 unemployed people. Interviews use
the Critical Incident Technique (CIT) (Flanagan, 1954) and information source horizons
(Savolainen & Kari, 2007) the latter a combination of information horizons (Sonnenwald,
1999; Sonnenwald, Widemuth, Harmon, 2001) and zones of relevance (Schütz, 1946).
Findings delimit specific elements of sociocultural context shaping these three modes of
practice. Specifically, Savolainen (2008) finds that education and income differences account
for variations of information seeking practices among groups studied; media credibility,
cognitive authority, and information overload shape information use; and social networks
contribute to information sharing practices. Later work by Savolainen enriches his treatment
of information practices by demonstrating how they are shaped by virtual contexts, such as
online gaming, in which the value of information may be immaterial, e.g., digital currency
(Harviainen & Savolainen, 2014). Although critiqued for employing practices as a synonym
for habitual behaviors (see Wilson, 2008, who envisions practices as a subset of behaviors),
Savolainen (2008) advances the relationship between sociocultural context and the ways
people “deal with information” (Savolainen, 2007, p. 126) to capture practices other than
seeking, shaped by factors outside of internal needs and motivations.
Informed by Savolainen’s (1995) work, McKenzie (2003a, 2003b) provides a typology
of information practices based on a constructionist discourse analysis of interviews with
pregnant women. A key contribution of this work highlights the importance of non-active
information practices, such as passively scanning or being informed; such practices represent
the intersection between information and communication practices (McKenzie, 2003a,
2003b). This intersection plays an important role in this research study, given that stigma as
an analytical tool examines how individuals communicate information about themselves to
others.

17
Like Savolainen (1995) and McKenzie (2003a, 2003b), Lloyd (2005, 2006, 2010, 2011,
2012, 2013) argues that practices are shaped by sociocultural context. Based on findings from
information literacy studies of groups including firefighters (Lloyd, 2006), renal care nurses
(Bonner & Lloyd, 2011), and refugees (Kennan et al., 2011; Lloyd et al., 2013), Lloyd (2005,
2006, 2012) develops a “people-in-practice perspective” that positions information literacy as
a socially enacted practice. A main contribution of this work is in its identification of the
corporeal nature of practices. Per Lloyd “practices are what people do and are therefore visible
through the body” (2012, p. 776). Individuals enact practices to further intersubjective
understanding and, over time, these enactments become second nature to them. For instance,
interview participant Jamie embodied “male,” as intersubjectively understood by interactants
on social media, by engaging in practices such as using an image of someone who appeared to
be male in his user profile. Other research in LIS examining embodiment include studies of
gourmet cooks (Hartel, 2007), theater professionals (Olsson, 2010), individuals on holiday
(Haider, 2011), archaeologists (Olsson, 2016), and individuals browsing online pornography
(Keilty, 2016). Findings denote the recursive relationship between context and embodied
practice, and posit the importance of LIS research that examines information practices beyond
needs (see Olsson, 2005). Further, study findings emphasize the importance of material
objects, including recycling bins, scripts for a play, and mobile devices, as embedding and
shaping information practices.
Recent work employing an information practices perspective adopts it as a starting
point from which to identify practices important to specific communities. Examples include
bricolage as a practice adopted by welfare workers (French & Williamson, 2016), resilience by
refugees (Lloyd, 2014), authenticity by reenactors (Robinson & Yerbury, 2015), wandering by

18
urban newcomers (Lingel, 2015), and engagement by young children (Barriage, 2016).3 Given
the constructivist and constructionist perspectives employed, the research methodologies of
studies that use information practices as a central umbrella concept are mostly qualitative. Data
collection methods include ethnography, participant observation, and semi-structured
interviews. Such research yields smaller sample sizes as compared to quantitative research
studies. Since information practices represent an emerging concept, analysis methods tend to
be inductive and include discourse analysis, grounded theory, and thematic analysis.
Gaps and challenges. A major tension within information practices is whether it
should be distinct from information behaviors, or exist as a subset of this approach. Wilson
(2008) contends that Savolainen (2008) frames information practices as “habituated behavior,”
since information behaviors contain both cognitive and social dimensions. In fact, many
studies of information behavior could be reinterpreted as employing a practices approach (see
Fisher, Durrance, & Hinton, 2004, as an example) if practices are only defined by their
incorporation of sociocultural context. Wilson (2008) concludes that the burden of proof for
establishing information practices as a separate umbrella concept from behaviors lies in
accounting for the process by which behaviors become habituated.
Although Wilson (2008) delivers a strong argument against information practices as a
separate umbrella concept, he overestimates the incorporation of sociocultural context into
work adopting an information behavior approach. If the social dimension of information
behaviors lies on equal footing with the cognitive dimension, why do most information
behavior studies focus on needs and seeking (Olsson, 2005; Savolainen, 2008, p. 3; Cox, 2012,
p. 7-8)? If assumptions undergirding a behavior approach limit the scope from which people’s
3. Many of studies adopting an information practices perspective are from countries outside the US, including
Australia and Finland. Research in LIS could benefit from examining to what degree the assumptions
undergirding an information behavior perspective (Savolainen, 2007, p. 111) reinforce Western values.

19
interactions with information can be studied, perhaps it is more viable to adopt an alternate
perspective from which to envision these interactions rather than extend the concept of
information behaviors to mean all things to all people. Further, one of the reasons why
Savolainen’s (2008) treatment of practices is not too distinct from behaviors is that its three
modes – seeking, sharing, and use – are still very goal oriented (see Cox, 2012, p. 10). As Cox
suggests, a reorientation of information practices is needed that focuses more on context and
less on information by envisioning the “information aspect of all social practices” (2012, p.
10). The Conceptual Framework below employed by this research achieves such
reorientation by advancing the work of LIS scholars that align with sociology as a cross
discipline (Rothbauer 2004a, 2004b, 2007, 2011; Chatman, 1996, 1999; Burnett, Beasant, &
Chatman, 2001; Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010).
Another weakness of the information practice approach is the difficulty in defining its
breadth and scope (Savolainen, 2007). If practices are comprised of innumerable quotidian
activities, how can they be typified and described? Are all practices inherently informative?
The challenges in addressing these questions are demonstrated by the lack of consistent
terminology to describe information practices. As evidenced by prior research, the concept of
information practices signifies different meanings contingent on its use. Examples of these
meanings include information practices as domain analysis (see Hjørland & Albrechtsen, 1995
for a definition; see Fry, 2006; Roos & Hedlund, 2016 for examples), social practice (see
Sundin, & Johannisson, 2005; Papen, 2013), information in social practice (Cox, 2012), and
information work (Palmer & Neuman, 2002; Hogan & Palmer, 2005). Due to the multifocal
characteristics of an information practices lens, a related weakness is whether allied theories,
such as serious leisure (Stebbins, 1982) and information experience (see Bruce et al., 2014),
fall under the umbrella concept of information practices or not.

20
In other instances, the phrase “information practices” is adopted “without deeper
reflection on its ultimate meaning” (Savolainen, 2007, p. 123). A litany of studies employ the
phrase “information practices,” or simply “practices,” sans theoretical engagement with these
concepts (for a recent example, see Agosto, et al., 2016). Other studies may use “information
practices” interchangeably with “information behaviors” (for recent examples, see Julien,
2016; Pohjanen & Kortelainen, 2016). This critique does not suggest that such work cannot
advance an information practices perspective. Rather, it illustrates some of the inherent
weaknesses of determining the breadth and scope of an information practices perspective
(Savolainen, 2007), as well as whether information practices have a centralized meaning within
LIS (Wilson, 2008).
Given that boundaries of the more established concept, information behaviors,
continue to be contested, it does not suffice to suggest that this dissertation will solve the
issues of scope inherent to the more nascent practices concept. There exists no centralized
conceptual formulation of practices. Instead, the best this research can achieve is to advance
a specific approach to practices derived from the metatheoretical perspective of social
constructionism (see below Conceptual Framework section).
Adopting information practices as an umbrella concept addresses a problematic
assumption – often axiomatic within HIB research – that “needy” individuals (Olsson, 2005;
Savolainen, 2008, p. 3) have an articulated goal they are motivated to fulfill by seeking
information. Such an assumption only represents the tip of a metatheoretical and theoretical
iceberg of the interrelationship between information, individuals, and sociocultural context.
To go below the waterline (phrase borrowed from Bates, 1999), an information practice
approach is needed. Although information practices are emergent and not well-defined, the
overarching notion of practices as quotidian and mundane activities steeped in epistemic,

21
sociocultural, and embodied understanding (Lloyd, 2012, who refers to “sociocultural” as
“social”) represents a key philosophical approach guiding this study.
Marginalized Groups
Information poverty (Chatman, 1996) represents a dominant theoretical perspective within
HIB to study marginalized, underserved, or otherwise vulnerable individuals and groups. The
theory examines how individuals in highly localized contexts (e.g., a retirement home, a prison)
create shared meaning bound to this context. It employs six theoretical propositions to
describe conditions of information poverty that center on an insider/outsider dynamic, where
the insiders are those experiencing information poverty and outsiders are those within
mainstream culture (Chatman, 1996, p. 197). These propositions are further discussed in the
Conceptual Framework section. Given that this research builds on Chatman’s (1996) theory,
and that there exists no centralized way to describe marginalized groups in the LIS literature,
the review for this section is based on searches for the phrase “information poverty” included
in the abstract of works indexed by core LIS databases.4
A significant finding from this literature search indicates the paucity of studies
employing information poverty as a central theoretical concept grounding the empirical
research. Of those studies retrieved from the past ten years (2007-2017), 12 were empirical
and used information poverty as a guiding theory. Yet consider Figure 2 (see next page),
which depicts the number of documents in Google Scholar that use the phrase “information
poverty” by year. Although Google Scholar indexes from a larger (in fact, unknown) scope of
works considered “academic,” including open source publications and conference
proceedings, as well as works outside of the LIS discipline, one would reasonably expect that

4. Databases searched were: Library Literature and Information Science Full Text (H.W. Wilson), Library and
Information Science Abstracts (LISA), and Library Information Science and Technology Abstracts (LISTA).

22
the theory of information poverty would be employed most within the field in which it was
developed. Instead, the use of the phrase “information poverty” by hundreds of indexed
documents suggests that “information poverty” might function as a buzzword as opposed to
a middle-range theory that has been adopted and refined over time per Chatman’s original
intention (Chatman, 1996). In fact, it appears that the popularity of the phrase “information
poverty” correlates closely with the emergence of first and second wave digital divide studies
(see Yu, 2010, p. 908-912; Yu, 2011), suggesting that, like information practices, information
poverty is often used without considering its theoretical assumptions and their implications.
Further, results of an in-depth discourse analysis of LIS research employing an information
practice approach between 1995 and 2005 denote that within LIS, this concept has also been
prone to the economic and technological determinism inherent to many digital divide studies,
as well as to the paternalism adopted by some LIS scholars when discussing marginalized
groups (see Haider & Bawden, 2006, 2007).
Number of Documents Containing "Information
Poverty" in Google Scholar (1990-2016)
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

0

Figure 2: The Number of Documents Indexed by Google Scholar Containing the
Phrase “Information Poverty” Between 1990 and 2016.

23
Few studies employing information poverty as a theory since 2005 expanded the
application of its six theoretical propositions (see Chatman, 1996, p. 197). Exceptions include
Hasler and Ruthven (2011) and Hasler, Ruthven, and Buchana’s (2014) content analyses of
online newsgroup content to determine how well expressed situations of information poverty
conform to these six propositions. Bronstein (2014) employs a similar methodological
approach in examining two online support group threads for individuals who have obsessive
compulsive disorder (OCD). Findings from both studies indicate that while the six
propositions cannot be applied to all content shared, several propositions supported each data
source. Interestingly, different propositions apply to each data source, suggesting that the six
propositions may not apply to all contexts of information poverty, nor is information poverty
absolute.
Other research on information poverty employs data collection methods such as indepth interviews and participant observation, coupled with qualitative analyses, to describe
how information behaviors vary within specific contexts. Works that employ an information
poverty perspective using such methodologies focus on: information needs of HIV positive
individuals (see Veinot, 2009), information needs of intimate partner violence (IPV) survivors
(see Westbrook, 2009), Latina women’s perceptions of gender and information technology
(see Burnett, Subramaniam, & Gibson, 2009) information practices of members of the
extreme body modification community (see Lingel & boyd, 2013), and adolescent information
behaviors in disadvantaged and disengaged circumstances (see Buchanan & Tuckerman,
2016). Findings question whether all six information poverty propositions fully described the
lived experiences of participants. Several studies posit the complementarity of interdisciplinary
approaches in extending the concept of information poverty, specifically the salience of stigma
(Goffman, 1963) as a complementary theory (see Venoit, 2009; Lingel & boyd, 2013).

24
Gaps and challenges. A significant issue with current work is that it often frames
marginalization as something that can be fixed. Such studies propose a series of “solutions”
to the “problem” of information poverty, envisioning information poverty as a sort of disease
to be remedied, for example, rather than a unique ecological environment where individuals
engage in a series of behaviors or practices other than information-seeking to preserve an
insider/outsider dynamic.
Findings from work that empirically builds on Chatman’s (1996) information poverty
theory indicate issues with the original specification of the theory to localized groups deprived
of larger cultural context. Per these findings, the application of related, interdisciplinary
theories may capture some of the context lost within the specificity of the original
propositions. One interdisciplinary theory that has salience for this research and is used by
other studies, is stigma (Goffman, 1963). Venoit (2009) and Lingel and boyd (2013) employ
stigma to denote the practices through which individuals control information made visible
about themselves. They find that not only individuals, but also information, can be stigmatized.
While the Yahoo! Answers asker desires information about binding their breasts, they do not
want these resources visible to their parents. Rather, they wish to hide their binding practices,
presumably due to the perceived negative reaction to their adoption of a non-mainstream
identity. In response to this gap, this research employs an interdisciplinary framework that
includes stigma (Goffman, 1963) as a central theory.
A useful mechanism for examining threads of marginalization within LIS is to assign
individuals the role of insider and outsider relative to the social group analyzed (see Chatman,
1996). In practice, this assignation results in a necessary inversion as the outsider, stigmatized
group becomes insiders within a small world context (see Chatman, 1999). However, findings
from studies cited above denote that individuals with a specific marginalized status are not

25
synonymous with insiders in a marginalized group. While participant Eva shared the same
lesbian identity as other group members, they cast Eva as an outsider due to her outsider
(relative to the group) romantic preferences. To address this inconsistency, the Conceptual
Framework incorporates Jaeger & Burnett’s (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; 2010) theory of
information worlds, which iterates this dynamic among social group and cultural contexts.
Individuals with LGBTQ+ Identities
Older research on individuals with LGBTQ+ identities focused on the information needs of
gay men and lesbians, most often library users, during the process of “coming out”, or
disclosing their LGBTQ+ identities to others (see Creelman & Harris, 1990; Whitt, 1993;
Joyce & Schrader, 1997; Stenback & Schrader, 1999; Garnar, 2001). Such research adopted an
information behavior approach to individuals with LGBTQ+ identities in viewing information
seeking and use as shaped by both psychological (e.g., the “coming out” process as liminal)
and physical stimuli (e.g., the library not offering a specific resource). Data derived from
structured interviews completed by above cited studies indicate specific helps and barriers
related to information seeking and sources encountered at each stage of identity development.
Conclusions drawn suggest that individuals perceived the library as an important, yet
disappointing, resource (Hamer, 2003).
Like research on gay men and lesbians, most research on transgender and gender nonbinary individuals has focused on information needs (Taylor, 2002; Beringer & Jackson, 2007).
While the information needs of gay and lesbian individuals are centered on the liminal comingout process, findings from studies of transgender individuals denote that their information
needs are centered on a more fluid process of identity formation that is “less episodic and
more of a continuum, with many issues being dynamic for longer periods of time and with
relatively fewer periods of stasis” (Beringer & Jackson, 2007, p. 46).

26
Recent research adds to these findings by sampling outside of gay and lesbian
individuals (to a limited degree), incorporating sociocultural context and examining technology
use. Hamer (2003) dispels the essentialist preconception of the “coming out” process and
instead adopts a constructionist approach. He uses the CIT (Flanagan, 1954) to allow gay men
to define how specific incidents shaped their identity development. Data garnered from this
technique indicate that behaviors such as concealment emanated from feelings of fear over
how one may be perceived in a social group and within larger culture. This finding furthers
the strength of stigma (Goffman, 1963) as a viable concept in understanding the information
practices of these individuals (see above Marginalized Groups section).
Rothbauer (2004a, 2004b) examines the reading practices of lesbian and queer women.
Her research bridges sociology with LIS (Savolainen, 2007, p. 126) by employing concepts
from de Certeau’s (1984) “practice of everyday life” to analyze semi-structured interviews with
these women. Findings indicate that queer women have trouble searching for recreational
reading sources on queer topics when using both the internet and public libraries. Such
difficulty results from inadequate knowledge representation of lesbian and queer topics.
Whether sold online or circulated within a library, queer-related works contain subject
headings that lack terms to convey the fluidity and multiplicity of queer and lesbian identities,
as well as adequate cross referencing. Due to this lack of representation, individuals rely on
informal sources, such as fan fiction websites and zines, despite perceiving them as
unsanctioned (Rothbauer, 2004a, p. 101). Based on these findings, Rothbauer (2004a, 2004b)
offers two prescriptive suggestions for libraries: diversify and extend use of subject headings
to categorize queer literature, and exercise an awareness of information sources (therefore
implicitly condoning them and rendering them as normative). These suggestions reflect the
larger argument made in Rothbauer’s recent work (2007) that it is crucial for libraries to

27
interrogate their assumptions made when serving individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, and
question whether these assumptions benefit those they are supposed to serve.
Mehra and Braquet (2005, 2006, 2007) study the “coming out” experiences of queer
individuals and how these experiences shaped their information seeking behaviors. While this
work positions “coming out” as a liminal process, it recognizes how larger sociocultural
institutions such as work and religion affect information seeking behaviors, and how the
library as an institution imbues heterosexism. The authors also focus on internet use, surmising
that the internet serves as an emancipatory tool for many, specifically when first learning about
queer identities (Braquet & Mehra, 2006).
Most recently, Pohjanen and Kortelainen (2016) employ a phenomenologicalhermeneutic analytic approach to examine the information behaviors of transgender
individuals. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, their study is the first focusing on the
information behaviors of transgender individuals. Findings indicate the important role that
serendipity plays in conceiving of information needs related to transgender identities due to
the invisibility of transgender identities in larger culture. Such invisibility also contributes to
participants’ limited search vocabulary to retrieve relevant information about transgender
identities, as well as the lack of information itself. When able to locate desired information,
participants most valued information provided by other transgender individuals who shared
their experiences (Pohjanen & Kortelainen, 2016).
Gaps and challenges. A key gap of extant research is that many studies overviewed
do not critically consider negative consequences of technology use. One exception is Hamer
(2003), who found that participants avoided using the internet because of unwanted exposure
to sexualized content on search engine results pages, vulnerability to unwanted sexual
advances, and privacy concerns. Thus, technology should not be viewed as a deterministic

28
means through which individuals can achieve emancipation. Rather strategies undergirding the
affordances and constraints of online technologies must be considered. Another gap inherent
to current research regards the lack of agency given to individuals. Such agency can be captured
by employing tactics as an analytical tool. Tactics should be viewed in relation to strategies
disseminated by larger culture and social groups.
However, Rothbauer (2004a, 2004b, 2007) warns that strategies should not be viewed
as fundamentally bad and tactics fundamentally good. Rather, strategies produce tactics. For
example, the strategy of the library to hierarchally classify items using a controlled vocabulary
led to a point of commonality among lesbian and queer women in their ritual “coming out”
narratives – the inability to find resources. Thus, tactics and strategies should be envisioned as
constitutive. By adopting de Certeau’s (1984) rubric5 of “everyday life practices,” including the
tactic/strategy binary, Rothbauer (2004a, 2004b 2005, 2007) also extends research on
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities beyond a focus on information seeking and use to
consider the habitual practices in which individuals and institutions engage.
This research addresses these gaps by employing a constructionist metatheoretical
stance that does not assume what meanings participants ascribe to their identities, but rather
asks participants to define those meanings themselves. Further, the below Conceptual
Framework employs de Certeau’s (1984) rubric of everyday practices to challenge
sociocultural assumptions and determinations of LGBTQ+ identities. This research addresses
other gaps related to data collection, namely the overrepresentation of cisgender gay and
lesbian individuals, by sampling a group that represents less dominant identities within the
LGBTQ+ spectrum. This sample includes individuals who are female, identify as queer, and

5. Rothbauer (2007) regarded de Certeau’s (1984) application of practices to be conceptual in nature, while this
dissertation contends that it is metatheoretical.

29
are actively exploring their gender identities. Additional sampling gaps (e.g., focusing on
teenagers and young adults) and intersectionality6 (e.g., across class, race, etc.) are partially
addressed. Future work will examine these gaps using findings from the current study (see
Chapter 5).
Another gap noted by other literature reviews of LGBTQ+ studies in HIB is related
to the use of small sample sizes in addition to the observation that recommendations for
serving users with LGBTQ+ identities are based on anecdotal evidence (Robinson, 2016, p.
162). However, the researcher envisions these critiques as in contention. Namely, the latter
observation supports the need for qualitative research that accounts for the lived experiences
of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities to revise assumptions inherent in anecdotal research.
For qualitative research, a smaller sample size poses less of a concern given the demands for
“trustworthiness” differ (see Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 289-331) as compared to those held
by by quantitative researchers. After all, putting the resources into recruiting a large sample
size to triangulate research findings should only be completed once there are substantial
findings to triangulate. Given the current paucity of HIB studies of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities, addressing this gap seems premature.
Social Question-answering Studies
Studies of SQA, also referred to as CQA, span disciplines, bridging LIS with the field of CS.
SQA approaches tend to be more participant-based in examining why and how people seek,
share, discover, etcetera, information online with the assistance of social resources (see Gazan,
2007; Morris et al., 2010; Rosenbaum & Shachaf, 2010; Choi, Kitzie, & Shah, 2014). Such
approaches generally are adopted within the LIS field. A sub-area of interest within SQA
6. Winkelstein (2012) completed a dissertation that addresses intersectionality by examining the role of the public
library in the daily lives of homeless LGBTQ+ youth. Findings established six theoretical concepts to describe
the public library’s role: time, attitude, building relationships, welcoming, feeling safe, and cultural competence.

30
synergizes these approaches with virtual reference services to determine how strengths of both
platforms can be leveraged and their weaknesses mitigated (see Shah & Kitzie, 2012; Radford,
Connaway, & Shah, 2012; Shah, Connaway, & Radford, 2015; Radford et al., 2016).
Within CS, the term CQA is preferred in that it denotes a content-based approach that
connects an individual to relevant information using community-supplied features (see Jeon,
Croft, & Lee, 2005 for an early example). These features include community reviews and
voting (see Shah & Pomerantz, 2010; Yang et al., 2013), as well as question and answer content
(see Toba et al., 2014; Le, Shah, & Choi, 2016). The gap between an information need and
relevant information is bridged by incorporating these features into predictive (generally
regression-based) models and using the results to inform this connection.
Both types of studies signify the importance of affective and social group elements in
influencing how information is provided and shared. For example, within Yahoo! Answers,
answerers identify elements such as altruism and empathy as motivations for participation (see
Oh, Worrall, & Yi, 2013; Oh & Worrall, 2013; Oh & Worrall, 2017), and askers value content
that provides affective responses (see Kim, Oh, & Oh, 2007, 2008; Kim & Oh, 2009). Unlike
“Ask a Librarian” sites in which users seek objective information or instruction (see Radford
& Connaway, 2013) Yahoo! Answers content tends to be subjective. Content analyses of
questions suggest that most users solicit opinions, advice, and social engagement, rather than
content deemed “informational,” or providing a fact-based, verifiable answer (Kim, Oh, &
Oh, 2008; Choi, Kitzie, & Shah, 2012).
Gaps and challenges. Despite findings denoting the importance of affective and
social information among SQA and CQA participants, most of the literature on these topics
limits its scope to examining fact-based content that lends itself to verification. Examples
include quantitative approaches that examine how “objective,” textual features of content can

31
be used to predict the likelihood of a “Best Answer” rating (see Liu et al., 2011), and qualitative
approaches that study how often Yahoo! Answers users provide answers judged satisfactory
by experts (see Worrall, & Oh, 2013). While these studies make significant contributions to
research within SQA and CQA, particularly within the health domain, this overemphasis on
informational content shared neglects most content within Yahoo! Answers, which does not
have a “right” or “wrong” answer. The negotiation of an LGBTQ+ identity, for example,
intersects with information practices and behaviors that do not conform to this fact-based
model.
Exceptions to this gap include studies by Bowler et al. (2012, 2013, 2015), which
addresses the use of Yahoo! Answers by teenagers with eating disorders. The authors note that
this platform represents an information ecology for teenagers that transcends exchange of
fact-based content to embody a larger sociocultural context around the stigma of eating
disorders and youth, which can be described by how individuals ask questions and formulate
answers. Further, such context is (re)produced by online technologies. In one study, the
authors find that when browser advertisement blockers are turned off, participants interacting
on Yahoo! Answers threads related to eating disorders see weight loss advertisements (Bowler
et al., 2012). This finding suggests how technologies often produce unintended, unpredictable
effects, given they are co-constituted by sociocultural context.
To address the research limitations of SQA and CQA studies, this research adopts
approaches advanced by studies incorporating affect and sociocultural context. Such studies
do not approach Question-Answer content as providing a series of data points to train a
model. Rather, qualitative approaches informed by the metatheoretical perspective of social
constructionism are used to uncover how sociocultural context shapes the content shared and
what content constitutes a Best Answer. While the former quantitative approaches prove

32
appropriate for specific areas of investigation, too often these approaches are employed
(seemingly) atheoretically without addressing key assumptions underlying the work, such as
that all askers desire fact-based information, or that all grammatical errors and expletives
denote irrelevant or poor quality content. The marginalized status of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities displaces this group from mainstream discourses, rendering them subject
to the symbolic violence of the legitimacy and authority conveyed by taken-for-granted, factbased information, such as the male/female taxonomy (Bourdieu, 1984a, p. 109; 1990, p. 125133; Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992).
Science and Technology Studies
Web-based media platforms have become critical resources for LGBTQ+ identity
development (Pullen, 2010). However, studies within the field of STS emphasize a false
dichotomy between public and virtual spaces, arguing for the “recursive nature” of mediated
experiences, which inform culture and vice versa, blurring the boundaries between online and
offline (Beer, 2008, p. 51). Experiences of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities within one
space influence their practices in the other (Hillier & Harrison, 2007; Gray, 2009; Baym, 2010;
Gray, 2015). This observation is particularly salient within the sub-area of cyberqueer studies,
which purport the overlap between online and offline contexts as related to individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. Per Wakeford, such overlap reflects the structural disadvantages these
individuals face offline, while also providing opportunity to evoke new meanings centered on
LGBTQ+ identities online: “Cyberqueer spaces are necessarily embedded within both
institutional

and

cultural

practices,

and

are

a

means

by

which

the

lesbian/gay/transgendered/queer self can be read into the politics of representation and
activism confronting homophobia” (2002, p. 408).

33
In an offline (face-to-face) context, individuals experience significant barriers to
establishing an LGBTQ+ identity, including heteronormativity in home (Waldner &
Magrader, 1999) or school (Pacoe, 2011) environments, and fear of negative consequences
from disclosure (Hamer, 2003). The internet provides a means to establish communities where
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities can feel accepted, particularly when they feel
marginalized in related offline spaces (Bond, Hefner & Drogos, 2008). Reported motivations
for internet use closely parallel Goffman’s notion of stigma (1963) and Chatman’s “small
world” paradigm and theory of information poverty (1991, 1996, 2001) in that internet use
maintains anonymity (see McKenna & Bargh, 1998; Driver, 2007; Munt, Bassett, & O’Riordan,
2002; Szulc & Dhoest, 2013; DeHaan, 2013), provides a connection to LGBTQ+ peers (see
Hamer, 2003; Hillier & Harrison, 2007; Pullen, 2010; Fox & Ralston, 2016), and facilitates
exposure to a new set of norms that allow establishment and reinforcement of cognition about
the LGBTQ+ world (see Hamer, 2003; Pullen & Cooper, 2010).
Within online contexts, individuals engage in identity-testing with members of social
groups who have “been there” and possess the proper expertise to reframe, normalize, and
approve of LGBTQ+ identity expressions (Hillier & Harrison, 2007; Cooper, 2010; Hillier,
Mitchell, & Ybarra, 2012). They also gain “lived experience” by perceiving themselves in media
texts (Bond, Hefner & Drogos, 2008), such as a YouTube romance between two gay males
(Lazzara in Pullen & Cooper, 2010), or within grey literature, such as fan fiction and zines
(Rothbauer, 2004a, p. 100). Additionally, individuals engage in autobiographical work, creating
LGBTQ+ identities by sharing “coming out” stories (Hillier & Harrison, 2007; Craig &
McInroy, 2014) and practicing strategies of self-presentation and disclosure, including
managing multiple identities within one social media platform, such as Facebook (Cooper &

34
Dzara in Pullen & Cooper, 2010; Lingel & Golub, 2015; Fox & Warber, 2015; Haimson &
Hoffman, 2016; Dhoest & Szulc, 2016; Duguay, 2016; see also van Dijck, 2013).
In some instances, these activities establish a shared set of sensibilities between members,
who simultaneously create and adopt metanarratives of a “normal” LGBTQ+ experience,
which often assist them in tasks such as realizing and disclosing an LGBTQ+ identity. In the
same vein, these narratives also reinforce the commodification and fetishization of certain
LGBTQ+ identity characteristics, such as whiteness (see Tsang, 2002; Mitra & Gajjala, 2008;
Raj, 2011). Such homogenization of the LGBTQ+ experience can render certain individuals
whose experiences do not reflect these narratives (e.g., those who identify as asexual, lesbian,
non-white, or residing in a rural area), as “the other,” essentially marginalizing the marginalized
(see Foucault, 1978; Gamson, 1995; Pullen, 2010). One way such marginalization may occur
is by casting judgment over who is performing their identity well in a virtual context. Per
Wakeford: “The question might not be ‘Are you a lesbian?’ but ‘Are you lesbian enough?” (2002,
p. 413). Such judgment can shape the practices occurring both within and outside of this
context. Individuals might feel compelled, for example, to self-disclose and provide markers
of their experience to be judged as a credible source, which produces a “grey space between
public and private spheres” (see Rak, 2005, p. 173). Judgments on the authenticity of one’s
performance are not limited to whether one is LGBTQ+, as systems not designed with these
identities in mind might evoke norms centered on authenticity that reinforce hetero and
gender normativity (see O’Riordan & Phillips, 2007; Carstensen, 2009; Lingel & Golub, 2015;
Haimson & Hoffman, 2016). Studies within STS, therefore, highlight a tension between the
creation of a public LGBTQ+ identity within an “imagined community” (Sender, 2004, p. 5;
Anderson, 2006) and the inevitable differences experienced within the community, related to
individual agency and offline contexts.

35
Gaps and challenges. A significant limitation of STS studies on individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities is their Western focus (Dhoest & Szulc, 2016). Such focus can yield
several problematic assumptions, including access to online resources, economic selfsufficiency, and the relative safety to explore LGBTQ+ identities both online and offline. One
way these assumptions can be countered is to account for cultural and material contexts in
addition to the social context of the specific virtual environment.
As addressed by the work reviewed, another limitation of STS studies is when they
separate online and offline contexts. Namely, findings from studies reviewed indicate
consequences for not conforming to the demands of authenticity encoded into online
technologies and normatively practiced by the people using them. Such consequences refute
the neo-liberalist ideals of “freedom” determining how individuals present themselves online
(Cartensen, 2009). Yet these limitations do not imply that online technologies cannot afford
individuals new possibilities for being and identity expression (Wakeford, 2000). Instead, the
social, cultural, and material elements undergirding how online technologies work, as well as
the practices they afford and constrain, must be holistically examined to determine the unique
information landscape available to an individual with an LGBTQ+ identity online.
Conceptual Framework

Figure 3: Image of Conceptual Framework. Shaded Areas Represent the Research Focus.

36
A metatheoretical perspective provides researchers with a series of tools for identifying key
research problems and potential theoretical and methodological orientations from which to
address them (Talja, Tuominen, & Savolainen, 2005). Theories emanating from these
metatheoretical viewpoints and their empirical approaches “are not necessarily in line with
their stated epistemological views” (p. 82). Therefore, a metatheoretical approach should be
considered somewhat flexible in its deployment.
As depicted in Figure 3, theories are nested within metatheories and capture a
specified area of inquiry regarding how and what phenomena are studied. Metatheoretical
perspectives inform theories and a theory can be reinterpreted, to a degree, based on those
perspectives informing it. For instance, information worlds theory consists of five elements,
including information behaviors. Given that practice theory as metatheoretical perspective
informs this dissertation, information behaviors are not considered applicable when using this
theory within the overarching conceptual framework.
Theoretical Perspectives
This research is informed by three related metatheoretical perspectives: social constructionism,
sociomateriality, and practice theory, as well as theories of information worlds (Burnett &
Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010), stigma (Goffman, 1963), and de Certeau’s (1984)
binaries of tactics and strategies, and spaces and places. Practice theory is used both
metatheoretically and theoretically. Each metatheory and theory is now reviewed.
Social

constructionism.

Social

constructionism

represents

an

emerging

metatheoretical perspective within LIS that counters dominant objectivist and cognitive
perspectives (see Talja, Tuominen, & Savolainen, 2005). It contends that individuals and
groups assign subjective meaning to the actions of others and, through interactions, negotiate
how these meanings are outwardly produced and understood. Intersubjective understanding

37
manifests as shared agreement between individuals on these meanings. Over time, these
meanings solidify into commonsense knowledge of how individuals relate to one another
(Berger & Luckmann, 1966).
Different social groups and cultures have vested interests in defining social reality and
compete for resources (e.g., economic, political) to do this defining (Berger & Luckmann,
1966). Consider choosing between the men or women’s restroom. By making this choice, one
unthinkingly reinforces a larger cultural notion that gender is binary. Engaging with
information practices that refute this notion is difficult given they challenge what has been
taken for granted over a long period of time. Societies thus do not “develop” or “evolve,” but
rather are constituted by how individuals, groups, and cultures negotiate meaning,
characterized by struggles for legitimation of a dominant reality (Berger & Luckmann, 1966;
Kuhn, 1970; Foucault, 1978).
Social constructionism also informs practice by identifying regimes of power and truth
that shape how LIS researchers can study a phenomenon and limit what can be observed. For
example, Haider and Bawden (2006, 2007) identified four interrelated themes characterizing
limitations of information poverty: a) economic determinism, b) technological determinism,
c) historicizing the information poor, and d) the library’s moral obligations and responsibilities
to the information poor. These perspectives invoke a myopic view of information as a
commodity that can be successfully accessed by a certain type of expert knowledge.
The consequences of adopting a social constructionist metatheoretical position are
twofold. From a practical perspective, individuals assign their own meanings to their
information practices, rather than having these meanings imposed by the researcher. From a
theoretical perspective, dominant social realities shape what and how information practices
can occur within specific places and spaces. In interview participant Jamie’s case, a dominant

38
biological view of gender was expressed in places such as his home and high school, e.g., via
use of restroom signage, rendering it difficult for him to express his male identity.
A constructionist perspective also presents gaps related to the areas of inquiry.
Constructionist perspectives tend to either fully afford agency to an individual’s subjective
mental structures or to social and cultural structures (Cunliffe, 2008). As the scenarios
presented indicate, neither case is accurate. While participants are influenced by structures,
they also circumvent structural constraints to achieve information-related goals. Practice
theory clarifies this issue of agency, namely via de Certeau’s (1984) binaries of strategies and
tactics, and spaces and places.
Practice theory. In The Practice of Everyday Life, de Certeau (1984) examines how
dominated individuals resist being determined by a “grid of discipline” (p. xiv) imposed on
them by the social groups and cultures to which they belong. Two key binaries that make sense
of this resistance are strategies and tactics, and spaces and places. Strategies suggest
appropriate conventions to be practiced and establish a specific place in which these practices
can occur, for example an office or a church. Places are stable. They have a distinct location
and permanence, and denote the appropriate strategies that should be practiced within them.
A bridge represents a strategy used by an institution, the construction industry, to suggest that
when uneven terrain is faced, an individual should use the bridge to safely traverse this terrain.
The physical manifestation of the bridge represents a place where this crossing can occur.
Tactics appropriate strategies and introduce meaning into people’s everyday lives.
Tactics occur in spaces. Unlike a place, which has a fixed physical and temporal location,
spaces are fleeting and overlap. As de Certeau states, “space is a practiced place.” (1984, p.
117). A footpath leading under a bridge represents a tactic in that it suggests an oppositional

39
practice of walking on the uneven terrain rather than using the bridge. Unlike a place, the space
created by walking on the footpath is temporary as the path will weather away over time.
Practice theory complements constructionism by rooting meaning within the habitual
enactment of everyday life activities. Meaning is shaped by places and the strategies exercised
within them, but such places and strategies also create opportunities for resistance via the
creation of spaces that facilitate tactics, which then lend agency back to individuals. Practice
theory also facilitates production of reflexive research that identifies how dominant strategies
and places may shape assumptions inherent to the research.
An unexamined area in both constructionism and practice theory is the role technology
– specifically the internet – plays as a context that affords and constrains information practices.
This role is important, given that the internet represents more than just a tool providing access
to resources. Sociomateriality is thus employed as a final metatheoretical perspective.
Sociomateriality. A sociomaterialist metatheory overlaps with social constructionism
in contending that social and cultural structures shape technology. However, it also posits that
technologies can also shape these structures via their material features. Traditionally,
technology was envisioned as material in the sense of its physical components, such as
hardware, but materiality has also come to represent digital materials, such as software
(Orlikowski, 2000; Leonardi, 2010; Orlikowski & Scott, 2013; Leonardi, 2014; Scott &
Orlikowski, 2014).
However, a sociomaterialist viewpoint does not denote a bidirectional relationship
between sociocultural context and technologies. Rather, the relationship between these two
entities is blurred, rendering it difficult to discern where the technological material ends and
the immaterial, sociocultural context begins (see Callon, 1986). There exist several lenses
through which this blurriness can be examined. In this dissertation, the lenses employed are

40
affordances and constraints. Affordances constitute the materially-based construction and
features of a technology that suggest the use to which it should be put, while constraints pose
restrictions on how a technology can be used (see Norman, 1999; Latour, 2004; Gillespie,
Boczkowski, & Foote, 2014; Leonardi, Nardi, & Kallinikos, 2014; Baym, 2015). Both
affordances and constraints can be actual and perceived (see Norman, 1999; Baym, 2015).
Take the search box of an online dating site. Its construction and design suggest a
certain use: entering criteria describing individuals one would like to date and pressing the
“search” button to see a display of results. Such meaning is enacted by a combination of
affordances (e.g., the ability to enter criteria such as radius, suggesting the importance of
proximity for a potential partner) and constraints (e.g., no ability to search the full-text of an
online dating profile, prioritizing physical characteristics over how personality is articulated).
If this meaning of “search box” is continually enacted over time it becomes taken for granted
(Starr & Bowker, 1999; Suchman, 2007).
Much like technological affordances and constraints can shape practices, these
practices in turn constitute the technology. For instance, an online dating site’s search box can
also be used in unintended ways, such as a mechanism to identify and harass individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. These practices in turn influence further shaping of the technology, e.g.,
the decision of popular online dating site OkCupid to allow individuals identifying as nonheterosexual to hide their profiles from heterosexual users.7
One of the key arguments of sociomateriality is that technology can act independently
of humans in creating meaning. Although positions on degrees of agency differ (see Gillespie,
Boczkowski, & Foot, 2014; Leonardi, Nardi, & Kallinikos, 2014) and human labor undergirds

7. See https://okcupid.desk.com/customer/portal/articles/2161224-privacy-controls.

41
technological development (Brunton & Coleman, 2014), technology has capacity for
performativity outside individual control (Leonardi, 2014). Daemons, which are background
computing processes that run independently of individual interaction, manifest such
performativity. These performances have concrete material effects imbued with meaning by
users. Take a Wikipedia bot running as a daemon that detects vandalism and makes ostensibly
minor edits to pages, such as correcting grammar or fixing dead links.8 Imagine this bot
correcting use of the third-person pronoun to refer to an individual, e.g., changing “they” to
“he,” within the Genderqueer topic page. When an individual reads the revised page, this change
communicates a specific meaning to the individual regarding gender. This observation raises
an important characteristic of affordances and constraints, which is that they are actual and
perceived. The meaning one assigns to an affordance or constraint will be shaped by the
interrelationship between the material, technological features, e.g., a bot, and the sociocultural
context in which these features are used, e.g., to interpret gender. While affordances and
constraints are, therefore, subject to individual meaning, they are also shaped by material and
sociocultural contexts that disseminate strategies communicating dominant discourses (e.g.,
gender is binary), which benefit those in power (e.g., cisgender individuals).
In summing up the three metatheoretical perspectives discussed, it can be concluded
that shared knowledge of social reality is enacted within everyday life practices. These practices
are shaped by dominant social and cultural contexts, and enact these contexts by employing
strategies and tactics as well as spaces and places. Actors, both human and non-human, may
further strategies and places or produce tactics and spaces in opposition to them. Yet these

8. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Bots

42
perspectives are metatheoretical and represent abstract ways of looking at the world. The
theoretical frameworks now overviewed ground these concepts.
Information worlds. The theory of information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008;
Jaeger & Burnett, 2010) extends Chatman’s theoretical work on information poverty (1996),
small worlds (1999), and normative behavior (Burnett, Beasant, & Chatman, 2001). These
latter works posit the importance of both social roles, namely insiders and outsiders, and
norms in influencing the information sources and practices considered legitimate within a
specific place. These works also highlight practices outside of seeking, such as avoidance,
secrecy, and deception.
Information worlds address criticisms of Chatman’s work (1996, 1999) as localized
and not considering multiplicity of social contexts. The theory combines small world contexts
with the larger lifeworld, which represents the totality of information within a society based
on various perspectives within it (Habermas, 1964). This conceptual distinction has been
represented in this dissertation via use of the terms “social groups” and “culture.” Social forces
inhabiting small worlds and the larger lifeworld possess various degrees of influence that shape
dominant realities of both. Boundaries exist among small worlds, between small worlds and
the lifeworld, and at all levels in-between. How information flows between these boundaries
influences people’s awareness of their information needs or “gaps” in knowledge (see Dervin,
1999). Recognition of a gap in one’s knowledge does not only constitute a cognitive problem,
but also a sociocultural one, since people’s awareness and privileging of various informationrelated problems arise from what is deemed important by the various worlds to which they
belong (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010).
Jaeger and Burnett (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; 2010) identify five elements constituting
information worlds: a) social norms, i.e., what behaviors are appropriate, b) social types, i.e.,

43
roles that define the relationships between the social actor and others, c) information value,
i.e., a shared sense of what should be paid attention to, d) information behaviors, i.e., activities
available to individuals, and e) boundaries, i.e., where information worlds come into contact
with each other and where information may or may not be exchanged.
A key contribution of information worlds is the notion that multivariate social and
cultural strategies and places exist, and shape information practices. For this reason, it is
important to identify contextual elements of these strategies and places, such as their
boundaries, social norms, and what information is valued within them, for further exposition.
However, this theory does not address the mechanisms undergirding how an individual
interacts within the contexts these elements characterize. What factors might influence
individuals to use tactics and create spaces in the first place?
Stigma. One specific contribution of Chatman’s (1996, 1999) earlier work not used
by the theory of information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010) is to
describe self-protective strategies employed by individuals deemed “information poor.” These
strategies include secrecy, “a deliberate attempt not to inform others about one's true state of
affairs” (Chatman, 1996, p. 199), and deception, “a deliberate attempt to act out a false social
reality” (p. 200-201). Presence of these strategies suggest that individuals may avoid engaging
in specific information practices or with specific sources altogether. Thurs, their practices are
not limited to active seeking that fulfills a need, but are also shaped by sociocultural context.
Goffman’s (1963) theory of stigma furthers these observations.
Stigma examines how individuals respond to otherness within a given situation from
the perspective of people bearing the stigma, those who interact with them, and the context
of the interaction. Stigma is relative. Certain elements of a social identity that could be
stigmatized in one type of context are not in another. Stigma can also be managed and certain

44
individuals possess stigmas they can conceal. These individuals can either “pass” as normal or
choose to disclose their stigma, ultimately faced with the decision “to display or not to display;
to tell or not to tell; to let on or not to let on; to lie or not to lie; and in each case, to whom,
how, when and where” (Goffman, 1963, p. 42). As a result, an individual’s social world can be
typified between those aware of their stigmatized identity and those unaware, as well as within
the contexts9 where each type of person resides (p. 66). These contexts can be defined as back,
where an individual’s stigma is not discredited and other individuals share their stigma, civil,
where stigmatized individuals may be treated as if they are not discredited when they are, and
forbidden, where if an individual’s identity is discovered, they will be expelled from the
community (Goffman, 1963). Stigma and practice theory thus have a complementary
relationship. Namely, de Certeau’s (1984) binaries explore whether stigma disclosure is
appropriate and the types of practices that may be encouraged, tolerated, forbidden, etcetera,
within each context.
Resultant Conceptual Framework
Informed by the literature review, pilot study findings (described in the below Pilot Study
Method and Findings section), and theoretical perspectives, a resultant conceptual
framework has been outlined as depicted in Figure 3. It examines the relationship between
information practices, social and cultural strategies employed within places, oppositional
tactics created within spaces, the combination of strategies and tactics that shape information
practices, and LGBTQ+ identities, all of which characterize, produce, and (re)produce
context.

9. Goffman uses “spaces” instead of “context,” however the researcher contends that context as defined within
this dissertation represents a more appropriate descriptor.

45
Individuals are subject to multivalent social and cultural strategies, where information
of potential help lies outside of the dominant stock of social knowledge (Berger & Luckmann,
1966) or is privileged and thus hidden away by insiders (relative to the culture) (Chatman,
1996). Both conditions emerge due to the strategic assignation of stigma, afforded by social
and cultural mechanisms undergirding legitimation of a specific social reality (Berger &
Luckmann, 1966; de Certeau, 1984; Chatman, 1996). Strategies constrain the information
practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Yet practices can also tactically resist
strategies. The combination of both strategies and tactics practiced within a specific space or
place produces a context, which shapes future practices. This context can further be explicated
by the norms, social types, information value, and boundaries that characterize it (Burnett &
Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010).
Pilot Study Method and Findings
To inform the dissertation’s main data collection methods, a pilot study was performed. The
goals of the pilot study were to ensure that a sample of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
willing to address interview questions could be attained, to pre-test the semi-structured
interview protocol (see Appendix B: Interview Protocol), develop a coding scheme, and test
the applicability of proposed theoretical and metatheoretical frameworks. Seven individuals
who identified as having an LGBTQ+ identity between the ages of 26 and 32 were recruited
using purposive sampling. This age range was selected to examine effects of internet use
(Howe & Strauss, 2009, p. 4; “Social Media Use by Age Group Over Time,” 2016). The
recruitment period lasted for four weeks, followed by phone, face-to-face, and Skype semistructured interviews that used a protocol composed of thirteen questions.
Through reflexive interviewing, the pilot study strove to establish validity in
representing participants’ experiences and recognizing the influence of sociocultural factors

46
on their information practices (Kong et al., 2003). The study had the following features: a)
sampling female-identified individuals purposively, b) positioning the participant as theorist
of their own, defined information world (Dervin, 1999; Hamer, 2003), c) using semi-structured
interviews and probes, d) maintaining field notes, and e) establishing participants’ comfort
with the interview by explicating types and topics of questions to be asked.
Interviews lasted from 45 to 90 minutes and were audio-recorded and transcribed
verbatim. They were analyzed by the researcher using emic and etic coding (Miles, Huberman,
& Saldaña, 2014). High-level etic coding categories were derived from stigma (Goffman, 1963),
information poverty (Chatman, 1996), information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger &
Burnett, 2010), and information practices (McKenzie, 2003a, 2003b). Emic codes specific to
the research participants were then generated under each high-level category. After initial
codes had been developed and applied by the researcher, 20% of the data was coded by
another coder. After discussions and clarifications to resolve differences, a final Kappa value
of 0.82 was reached. For the duration of coding, the researcher used the constant comparison
method (Charmaz, 2014) to develop a refined set of themes and categories. Key themes were
identified by data analysis as constituting participants’ awareness, exploration, and adoption of
LGBTQ+ identities: a) space, b) norms, c) social types, d) information practices, e)
information control, and f) information value.
Implications of the Pilot Study for the Main Study
Pilot study findings supported Lingel and boyd’s (2013) contention that insider/outsider
dynamics are recursive within groups sharing LGBTQ+ identities. There exists a pervasive
dialectic between oppression, enforcement of norms related to gender and sexuality,
authenticity, and power, with the insiders dictating the “right” way to go about identity
exploration and adoption (Goffman, 1959; Foucault, 1978; Chatman, 1996). Insiders create

47
places, such as clubs and coalitions, through which to instantiate strategies supporting this
dialectic. To resist insider (relative to the group) strategies, participants engaged in tactics such
as secrecy and deception. Although secrecy and deception are viewed by Chatman (1996) as
presenting barriers to fulfilling one’s information needs, participants identified them as viable
tactics to manufacture and maintain spaces in which to identity test.
This finding supports use of information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger &
Burnett, 2010), which identifies strategies such as the assignation of value to certain social
types, e.g., insiders, and information sources. Although the pilot study did not employ de
Certeau’s (1984) tactic/strategy and space/place binaries directly, findings demonstrate the
applicability of both binaries to the data. Goffman’s (1963) typology of contexts from which
stigma can be managed, i.e., back, civil, forbidden, further characterizes the tactics and
strategies that can occur within defined places and spaces. The researcher contends that these
theories and metatheory (see above Conceptual Framework section) supersede information
poverty (Chatman, 1996) in understanding the information practices of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities.10
Findings from the pilot study also suggest that technology, such as the internet, is not
monolithic. Participants identified having different experiences within the same virtual
contexts. Further, the nature of spaces and places produced is temporal. A space inviting one
tactic may suddenly morph into a place where certain strategies forbid it. The metatheory of
sociomateriality is employed to address these shifting boundaries between space and place
within virtual contexts11 and the strategies and tactics afforded and constrained within them.

10. Information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010) leverage some of the strengths of
information poverty while mitigating its weaknesses.
11. This notion of spaces as temporary is also addressed in Gray’s (2007, 2009, p. 92) discussion of “boundary
publics.”

48
Another finding concerns the application of McKenzie’s (2003) typology to describe
information practices. The researcher initially used this typology in the pilot study given that
it represents one of the few instances in which information practices are typified. Further, this
typology is empirically supported (McKenzie, 2003a, 2003b). However, the researcher found
that this typology did not adequately describe the information practices of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities for two reasons: a) the categories developed by McKenzie (2003a, 2003b)
were not absolute when applied to the data, and it became difficult to discern whether an
account should be coded as one category or another, e.g., active seeking versus active scanning,
and b) individuals with LGBTQ+ identities engaged in several information practices not
reflected by the typology, such as avoidance and embodiment. For these reasons, this typology
was not employed by the researcher for the main study.
A final implication indicates the importance of embodied knowledge. Embodiment
facilitates the transition from living an “authentic” life (Goffman, 1959; Halberstam, 2005;
Gray, 2009) based on social and cultural dictates governing how LGBTQ+ identities should
be expressed, to exercising realness (Halberstam, 2005) or being true to oneself. Participants
who felt they were “putting on an identity” (Stephanie) that a “right way” existed to perform
it (Jamie) learned through personal experience (e.g., dating, binding) of no overarching right
way, but rather a right way for them. This finding denotes the importance of an information
practices perspective, particularly in incorporating a corporeal perspective (Lloyd, 2012).
Summary of Contributions of the Pilot Study to Main Study
Findings from the pilot study made the following contributions to the main study:
•

An initial category scheme, built on theoretical frameworks, was created and applied
to the interview data (See Appendix F: Final Codebook).

•

Interview protocol has been refined to incorporate the following:

49
o Debriefing questions
o Additional probes relating to internet use
o Questions regarding participants’ perceptions of libraries and other
information agencies
•

Researcher’s interview skills have developed by using silence to allow participants time
to elaborate and asking relevant, follow-up questions
o Resultant length of interviews has increased, yielding additional rich data not
initially gleaned

•

Researcher’s qualitative coding skills have matured, particularly in comparing and
combining high-level etic codes and relating these codes to emerging emic categories

•

Identified the following, emergent themes:
o Valence of an information practice, e.g., secrecy, as relative to the participant
o Temporal and fleeting nature of back spaces
o Applicability of de Certeau’s (1984) binaries of tactic/strategy and space/place
o Disclosure and non-disclosure as communicative practices that shape
information-related outcomes
o Extension of insider/outsider social dynamics within social groups comprised
of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
o Perception of technology not as a tool, but rather characterizing context by
affording and constraining information practices
o Importance of embodiment, specifically as it relates to authenticity and
realness

50
Research Questions
Based on the literature review, pilot study findings, and conceptual framework, this
dissertation poses the following research questions:
RQ1. How does sociocultural context shape the information practices of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities?
RQ2. How do the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities produce
sociocultural context?
RQ3. What is the role of technology, namely social media websites, if any, in affording
information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities?
RQ4. What is the role of the technology, namely social media websites, if any, in
constraining information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities?
Conclusion
One reason why the LIS field proves both challenging and exciting is due to its crossdisciplinary and interdisciplinary nature (see Floridi, 2002). Borrowing theories and concepts
from other disciplines and relating them to predominant LIS foci can lead to the development
of middle-range theories (see Merton, 1959, p. 108; Chatman, 1996, p. 193). Yet such
borrowing also may threaten the coherence of LIS as a distinct field of study and practice.
To content with this issue while leveraging the utility of prior theoretical development
from more established disciplines, this chapter addresses some of the gaps and challenges of
extant LIS literature. The outside theories and concepts selected have been empirically
demonstrated by prior research to complement those within the LIS field. Further, these
theories and concepts rest under the same metatheoretical umbrella, denoting the framework’s
conceptual coherency. A pilot study further refined this framework and informed the
development of research questions guiding this dissertation. The next chapter outlines the

51
methodological approaches employed to address these research questions, by bridging the
metatheoretical premises inherent to the conceptual framework with these approaches.

CHAPTER 3
Methodology, Strategies of Inquiry, and Methods
Introduction
“In recent years the term methodology has been used as a substitute for methods when it is
more usefully referred to as the theoretical analysis of methods” (Dervin, 2003, p. 126).

Brenda Dervin’s quote reflects a personal observation of the researcher, in that too often
“Methodology” sections of research studies are condensed into discussion of what was done
sans explanation of the research philosophy undergirding the work. John W. Creswell, a
specialist in mixed methods research, qualitative methodologies, and general research design,
identifies three factors that comprise the latter: “philosophical assumptions about knowledge
claims [i.e., methodology], strategies of inquiry, and specific research methods” (2013, p. 32,
emphasis added). This chapter reviews each of these factors. Given that the underlying
ontological, i.e., the nature of reality, and epistemological, i.e., how individuals know what they
know, claims for this study were made in previous chapters, this chapter begins with a
discussion of research methodology. It follows with an overview of the strategies of inquiry
employed by the qualitative research design, and emic/etic and mixed methods approaches.
The chapter then concludes by detailing the specific research methods – analysis of interviews
with individuals identifying as LGBTQ+ and Question-Best Answer content from the LGBT
thread of Yahoo! Answers, and how the methods reflect the research methodology and
strategies of inquiry. Table 1 (see next page) displays the dissertation research design.

53
Table 1. Dissertation Research Design
Methodology
Strategies of Inquiry
•
•

Practices as unit of
analysis
Sense-making
methodology
o Context
o Process
orientation
o Participants
as theorists
o Informatio
n as
structural
o Researcher
reflexivity
o Utopian
imagination

•

Qualitative
design
o Emic/eti
c
approach
o Mixed
methods
approach

Methods (Data Collection and
Analysis)
• Data collection
o Interviews with
30 individuals
with LGBTQ+
identities
§ Critical
incident
techniqu
e
o 300 QuestionAnswer pairs
from LGBT
thread of Yahoo!
Answers
• Data analysis
o Qualitative data
analysis
o Digital methods
o Constant
comparative
method

Methodology
Methodology constitutes “a study of the plans which are used to obtain knowledge”
(Polkinghorne, 1983, p. 5). Crafting methodology involves “reflexive analysis and
development of methods” (Dervin, 1999, p. 728) to bridge “the move from theory to method
and method to theory” (Dervin, 2003, p. 126). Researchers must understand and explain the
assumptions of their research rather than leap from theory to method and back, sans reflexivity
(Polkinghorne, 1983, p. 9). Therefore, methodology identifies the parameters for testing the
knowledge claims made by the conceptual framework of this dissertation.
The central knowledge claim of this dissertation can be expressed as follows: Shared
knowledge and understanding (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 56; Schatzki, 2001, p. 12) shape
people’s “information-related activities and skills” (Lloyd, 2011, p. 285), which in turn reify

54
their shared knowledge and understanding. Information represents anything that shapes an
individual’s understanding of their reality. Like reality, the meaning of information is situated
in and responsive to time and space (Dervin, 1983, p. 5-6; 1999, p. 730; 2003, p. 115). This
conceptualization of information aligns with Buckland’s “information-as-process,” where
“when someone is informed, what they know is changed” (Buckland, 1991, p. 351). This
knowledge claim has implications for what this study measures and analyzes. More specifically,
the researcher’s conception of information is not restricted to recorded information (Bates,
1999, p. 1048), but rather examines the processes through which individuals become informed.
Within Library and Information Science (LIS), the methodology most related to this
knowledge claim is sense-making, or how people make sense of their worlds by deciding what
information to seek, share, and use (Dervin, 1983, p. 3-8). Yet this perspective differs from
the one used in this study in three key ways. First, when using a sense-making perspective, the
phenomena of interest, or unit of analysis, is sense-making (Dervin, 1999, p. 729, footnote 4),
whereas the unit of analysis for this research is information practices. The latter is not
constrained to situations of information seeking, sharing, and use. Instead, it reflects a larger
methodological focus – how knowledge is constituted and translated through practices and
activities, including but not limited to, seeking, sharing, and use. Second, and related, sensemaking “stresses individual rather than collective understanding” (Tidline, 2005, p. 114),
whereas a practice approach adopts “a more sociologically and contextually oriented line of
research” (Savolainen, 2007, p. 120). Finally, sense-making relies on structured interviewing to
dispel the power dynamics inherent to habitual communication activities (Tidline, 2005, p.
115; Koh, 2013, p. 1830). This research employs semi-structured interviewing to capture
information practices other than those elicited via sense-making methods.

55
However, many of the metatheoretical assumptions employed within a sense-making
methodology parallel those made in this research. Further, Dervin (1999, p. 730, footnote 5)
has developed the sense-making methodology over time to encompass post-constructivist
approaches more complementary of a practice orientation. Sense-making has an extensive
history of being applicable in cross-disciplinary, interdisciplinary, and multimethod works
(Dervin, 1999, p. 729). Some recent examples (from the last five years) of how sense-making
has been employed in LIS studies include:
•

How theater professionals make sense of Shakespeare's works (Olsson, 2010). The
author uses both sense-making and conversational approaches to create an individual
interview protocol for 35 participants. Findings indicate the importance of not only
rationality, but also emotion, embodiment, creativity, and authority when sensemaking.

•

How men seek help when experiencing stressful life events (Wellstead, 2011). The
author conducts structured sense-making interviews with 15 men. In addition, semistructured interviews were completed with six professionals. Findings capture
information behaviors relevant to this group other than seeking and use, such as
avoidance.

•

How women make sense of health information that is uncertain and derives from
formal and informal sources (Genuis, 2012). Sense-making informs the semistructured interview protocol for individual interviews with 28 information seekers
and 12 health professionals. Findings denote the importance of embodiment and
feeling “normal” as motivators to seek information, the importance of social contexts
for knowledge construction, and the view of informal and formal sources as mutually
enhancing.

56
•

How adolescents collaborate to create digital projects, such as an online magazine
(Koh, 2013). The author employs structured group and individual interviews of 12
participants using the sense-making methodology. Findings suggest the development
of information creation as a relevant information behavior and a viable addition to the
evolving concept of information literacy.

•

How Thai immigrants seek information during the settlement process (Sirikul &
Dorner, 2016). The sense-making methodology informs the authors’ analysis of semistructured individual interviews with nine Thai immigrants. Findings denote some of
the barriers encountered during settlement, including library staff behavior.

A common thread uniting these studies is that they examine information behaviors (sometimes
referred to as practices), information, and knowledge not traditionally investigated by LIS
research. These studies also consider how power shapes how these behaviors, practices,
information, and knowledge can manifest. Therefore, sense-making provides a
methodological framework from which to tease out key issues centered on power as well as
knowledge creation and dissemination, (see Conceptual Framework section) inherent to the
key knowledge claim underlying this study.
Many of the assumptions of sense-making align with suggestions made by Kong,
Mahoney, and Plummer (2001) for queering the interview. The authors address four elements
that problematize how popular methods essentialize, or describe based on a set of innate
characteristics, an LGBTQ+ experience (p. 242-244). These elements include: a) the problem
with the subjective representation of participants, specifically who and what is being heard by
the researcher during the interviews, b) the procedural issue of legitimation, or how an
interview is represented as text, c) reflexivity, which represents the connection between
researcher and participant, and d) politics, morality, and ethics (p. 244-245). Some of the key

57
assumptions of sense-making adopted by this dissertation are now overviewed, folding in
methodological suggestions of how to queer the interview. As might be expected, many of the
methodological implications will apply to the interview method specifically, however, there
are also some implications for the second phase of data collection, which is analysis of
Question-Best Answer pairs from the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers.
Sense-making Methodology
Some of the key assumptions of sense-making adopted by this dissertation are the importance
of considering context, adopting a process orientation, conceiving of participants as theorists,
envisioning information as structural, exercising researcher reflexivity, and embracing a
utopian imagination (Dervin, 1983, 1999, 2003). Each of these assumptions is briefly
summarized with information on how each methodological premise informed resultant choice
of methods.
Context. Contextualism contends that individuals and their worlds co-constitute one
another; neither are independent entities (Dervin, 2003, p. 124). This premise has two
consequences for this research. First, contextual stability is an illusion. Instead, “reality is in a
continuous and always incomplete process of becoming” (Dervin, 2003, p. 116). Accordingly,
LGBTQ+ identities are “de-essentialized” in both data collection and analysis; there exists
“no clear type of person,” but rather “multiple pathways and experiences” shaping these
identities (Kong, Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001, p. 93; Hamer, 2003, p. 78). Second, context sits
at the locus between form and process, as well as within their mutual interdependencies
(Dervin, 2003, p. 117). This premise signifies a postmodern return to materiality made within
this research, specifically its focus on technological artifacts (Latour, 1996, p. 370; 2005, p. 7078) and embodiment (Bourdieu, 1990, p. 57-58). At first blush, this premise might appear to
refute the “information-as-process” perspective (Buckland, 1991, p. 351). However,

58
materiality in this research is envisioned as inseparable from practice. The materiality of one’s
body, or of a technological artifact, is assigned during an interaction rather than inherent.1
While materials do shape what practices are available and meanings applied to them, it is
unclear where the material ends and the symbolic begins.
Process orientation. A process orientation signifies not privileging outcome over
process (Dervin, 1999, p. 740). It refutes the idea that information is a “given,” or an objective
reflection of reality, as well as the related transmission model of information where, given that
information reflects reality, its transmission always leads to a successful outcome (Shannon &
Weaver, 1963; Dervin, 1999, p. 740-741). This transmission model is reflected in discussions
of information access, e.g., some digital divide studies, which contend that simply providing
someone with access to information will fulfill their related information need. In this work,
information access and use do not deterministically lead to “good” outcomes or even one
outcome, but rather multiple, contradictory ones (Dervin, 1999, p. 740-741). Therefore, this
research does not make the implicit assumption that “there is one right way to produce
knowledge” (Dervin, 1999, p. 732), but rather investigates what practices are useful “under
some conditions and methodologically mandates research to unearth these conditions”
(Dervin, 1999, p. 732). To unearth these conditions, attention must be paid to how processes
occur across space-time rather than “collaps[ing] many instances of sense-making into one
final outcome” (Dervin, 1999, p. 740).
Participants as theorists. Envisioning participants as theorists in their own
information worlds reflects the larger constructionist premise of this study that knowledge is
not grounded in absolute reality, but rather embedded in cultural and social contexts (Berger

1. Latour similarly argues that the technical and material are not synonymous given technology constitutes a
blurring of the material and the symbolic (for a brief, explicit treatment, see Latour, 2014).

59
& Luckman, 1963, p. 56-61; Talja, 1997, p. 77; Dervin, 1999, p. 733). This methodological
move rejects a focus of LIS research on purposive information seeking, which positions
individuals as uncertain and unknowing until their information needs are met (Frohmann
1992, p. 379; Talja, 1997, p. 69-74; Julien, 1999, p. 586; Olsson, 2010, p. 243). Instead, this
study recognizes the participant as “an expert in her world (e.g. of her body, her work, her life)
… with hunches, hypotheses, and generalizations about how things connect to things and how
power flows” (Dervin, 1999, p. 740). Adopting this perspective mandates the researcher to
trust participants as being able to “talk about their confusions and stumblings” (Dervin, 1999,
p. 734) and translate their knowledge from the unarticulated, e.g., embodied, to the articulated
(Dervin, 1999, p. 734). This premise also dispels the privileging of information presumed to
derive from “fact” or cognition. Information is not only limited to the cognitive realm, but
also encompasses the heart, body, and spirit (Dervin, 1999, p. 739; Olsson, 2010, p. 249-251).
Information as structural. Recognizing information as “inherently a structural term,”
(Dervin, 1999, p. 738) is not synonymous with envisioning information as fixed. Structures
represent both “medium and outcome of the practices they recursively organize” (Giddens,
1984, p. 25). In other words, structures are constantly being changed as they are enacted in
practice, but given their fixity in society appear slower to change over time (Schutz, 1964, p.
11 as cited in Dervin, 2003, p. 117; Giddens, 1984, p. 25-26). The importance of recognizing
the structural nature of information is in understanding the conditions “that permits [sic] the
definers to do their defining” (Berger & Luckmann, 1963, p. 134), namely the “cultural and
political discourses” (Kong, Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001, p. 241) that describe LGBTQ+
realities. Yet these discourses do not only operate at the cultural level, e.g., assumed
heterosexuality, but also within social groups, e.g., “normalization of the mainstream gay”
(Kong, Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001, p. 241). To address information as structural, there must

60
be a “recognition of a range of experiences” and focus on the “new groups on the ‘outside’”
of LGBTQ+ (Kong, Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001, p. 241) by the researcher. This premise
aligns with Buckland’s “information-as-knowledge” (Buckland, 1991, p. 351) category.
Reflexivity of the researcher. The researcher is not neutral or objective (Dervin,
1983, 1999, 2003; Kong, Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001). Rather, the researcher has already
imposed their own assumptions of how the world works when conceiving of a research
problem and defining its importance. Dervin (1999, p. 736-737) contends that all research is
interpreted through a “quadruple hermeneutic,” in which: a) methodology involves
interpretations, b) which are made by researched human beings, c) and interpreted by the
researchers, d) of how people interpret interpretations. A consequence of adopting this view
is that it problematizes the argument that the researcher should be a member of the group that
they study (Merton, 1972, p. 22) given that insider membership status does not circumvent
this hermeneutic. Further, this hermeneutic also brings to bear the power imbalance between
the researcher and those being researched (Kong Mahoney, & Plummer, 2001, p. 245-246).
Utopian imagination. One of the goals of this dissertation is to critique assumptions
made by the human information behavior (HIB) sub-area of LIS. Yet just as essential as this
critique is to put forth suggestions for how information systems and agencies can better serve
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. A utopian imagination tries to break free of “unstated
assumptions embedded in the normatively accepted defining discourses of the system”
(Dervin, 1999, p. 734) to redesign and reinvent the role of information agencies and systems
in the lives of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Thus, the specific framework employed
in this research examines ways to understand individuals with LGBTQ+ identities minimally
addressed within HIB, while also putting forth utopian “universals” or practice-based
implications (Dervin, 1999, p. 734).

61
Summary. The sense-making methodology complements an information practice
approach. Specifically, sense-making interrogates the power dynamics inherent to information
and knowledge, rather than envisioning them as objective and neutral. While sense-making
differs from an information practice approach in a few, key ways, it contains parallel
metatheoretical assumptions and an extensive history of applicability in cross-disciplinary,
interdisciplinary, and multimethod words (Dervin, 1999, p. 729). Key sense-making tenants
used in this work are considering context, adopting a process orientation, conceiving of
participants as theorists, envisioning information as structural, exercising researcher reflexivity,
and embracing a utopian imagination (Dervin, 1983, 1999, 2003). When combined, these
tenants empower research participants by allowing them to express their lived realities with
limited constraints imposed by the researcher on the collection and analysis of these data. Such
constraints are addressed by interrogating the assumptions made by the research design,
including its strategies of inquiry. These strategies are now outlined and follow the key tenants
of sense-making informing this study’s methodology.
Strategies of Inquiry
The methodological assumptions detailed in the previous section informed the “strategies of
inquiry” (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011, p. 246; Cresswell, 2014, p. 41), or plan for enactment of
the research design. This research employs a qualitative design comprised of emic/etic and
mixed methods approaches to collect and analyze textual data from individual interviews and
social media discourse.
A qualitative design was felt by the researcher to best address a research problem
central to this dissertation: that the current theories and frameworks used to explain the
information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities within the LIS field and subarea of HIB do not account for their lived realities. Qualitative research is well-suited for

62
“exploring and understanding the meaning individuals or groups ascribe to a social or human
problem” (Cresswell, 2014, p. 32), especially for topics where existing theories do not apply to
the group under study (Cresswell, 2003, p. 23). To describe the meanings elicited from
individuals of interest, the researcher collected data in participant settings (e.g., an interview
location of the participant’s choosing, the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers), generated
themes to describe the data, and engaged in interpretive analysis (Cresswell, 2014, p. 32).
An emic/etic approach was used within the qualitative research design. Emic
viewpoints are exercised by the study participants and represent “the meanings and purposes
that people ascribe to their actions” (Guba & Lincoln, 1994, p. 110). On the other hand, etic
viewpoints represent the epistemological and ontological constructions of the researcher,
articulated within the conceptual framework (Guba & Lincoln, 1994, p. 114). In other words,
etic viewpoints are deductively generated by the researcher and imposed on the data being
analyzed, while emic viewpoints are inductive and emerge from participant accounts (Miles &
Huberman, 1994, p. 61; See also Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014, p. 81). Note that “these
perspectives are not mutually exclusive and can be used in combination to yield a nuanced and
‘multidimensional’ view of the research context at hand” (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 215).
In addition, the researcher has personally experienced some of the re-identification and
socialization inherent to claiming a queer identity disparate to the one in which she was
socialized and enculturated. From this lived experience, the researcher observed how her
information practices and experiences have not been reflected in the LIS and HIB literature
and, therefore, wanted to capture the emic accounts of participants rather than solely imposing
etic, theoretical assumptions. An emic/etic approach proves appropriate for this research
given the dual desire of the researcher to test the validity of the conceptual framework and
uncover emic views of participants that might build on or contradict etic perspectives.

63
In addition to an emic/etic approach, the researcher uses mixed methods. Mixed
methods constitute multiple methods of data collection and/or analysis (Bryman, 2006, p. 9799; Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 229). For this dissertation, the following methods are
mixed: a) data collection methods, interviews and data scraped from a social media site, and
b) the type of data used, semi-structured data from the interview protocol and unstructured
data from the social media site. A mixed methods approach provides multiple lenses through
which to look at the same problem – “a researcher seeking to learn from the data, rather than
test a theory already arrived at, will usually be helped by having more than one way of looking
at what is being studied” (Richards, 2005, p. 35). Using mixed methods facilitates data
collection from both social group and cultural levels, emphasizing the “practices” stance taken
by this research, as opposed to a “behaviors” one. The interview data captured the perspectives
of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities at the social group level. In many instances, individuals
recruited knew one another personally due to the researcher’s use of snowball sampling, a
method well-suited for populations difficult to identify and locate (Connaway & Radford,
2017, p. 135-136) and conducive to inductive analysis (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014, p.
32). The researcher interviewed members of an online meet-up group, friends, and partners in
relationships, for example. While each participant had their own experiences, they shared
ideological similarities, e.g., alignment with the label “queer” to describe their identities, having
attended college. The LGBT thread data depict a cultural perspective as participants are not
likely to know one another in person and exhibit weak relational ties with others rather than
the strong ones exhibited between some interview participants (Boase & Wellman, 2006, p.
724).
Summary. Per the above Methodology section, a goal of this research is to capture
how participants interpret their own lived realities, rather than the researcher imposing her

64
own assumptions on them. For this reason, the researcher selected a qualitative research
design. To exercise reflexivity in recognizing the inevitability of her assumptions shaping the
research, the researcher employed an emic/etic approach. In this approach, the researcher
identified her own assumptions by creating deductive, etic codes, while comparing these codes
to emic, participant accounts, inductively derived from the data. Mixed methods were
employed to capture both social group and cultural perspectives inherent to the information
worlds theory informing the conceptual framework (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett,
2010). The specific methods of data collection and analysis are now discussed.
Methods
Defined as “any procedure employed to attain a certain end” (Runes, 1942, p. 346), methods
are directly informed by metatheory and strategies of inquiry, “tak[ing] their validity and
reliability from their participation in a particular system of inquiry” (Polkinghorne, 1983, p. 6).
The subsequent discussion of methods is separated into the broad categories of data collection
and analysis, followed by a discussion of validity and ethical concerns. This discussion is
somewhat difficult to organize given the two data collection stages overlap in terms of their
analysis, but also pose distinct ethical considerations and validity concerns. Therefore, each
section will be split into sub-sections for each data source – interviews and Social Questionanswering (SQA) data – with sub-sections not being created in instances where there exists a
complete overlap in treatment of methods.
Data Collection
Two data collection methods were used by the researcher to study individuals with LGBTQ+
identities – interviews and Question-Best Answer pairs from LGBT thread of Yahoo!
Answers. The data collection decisions unique to each method are now discussed.

65
Interviews
For this study, the researcher interviewed 30 individuals between the ages of 18 and 38 who
identify as LGBTQ+. Interviews are a common method in LIS (Connaway & Radford, 2017,
p. 239). Connaway and Radford detail several reasons for using the interview method, three
of which are informed by the research methodology: “finding out about the past,
understanding participants’ experiences and perspectives via stories, accounts, and
explanations, [and] discovering participants’ language forms” (2017, p. 239). Finding out about
the past is important given the process orientation of the research, while understanding
participants’ stories and language forms solidifies their role as theorists and experts within
their own lives.
This latter methodological stance of envisioning participants as theorists accounts for
why interviews rather than participant observations constituted the data collected. The
researcher did not want to limit what these practices can be for people, she wanted to hear
how participants described these practices in their own words. Further, there were certain
practices detailed by participants that the researcher would not be able to, or at the very least
would encounter significant difficulty in observing, such as sexual experiences, getting kicked
out of one’s house, and binding one’s breasts, which are all essential to how participants
constitute meaning within their lived realities.
Participant selection. One initial question regarding data collection – why focus on
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities? Goffman (1963, p. 44) identifies four ways that people
negotiate stigmatized2 identities over time: a) having an inborn stigma in which the individual
is exposed to the differences between themselves and others during primary socialization, b)

2. The researcher recognizes that Goffman’s (1963) use of “stigma” does not represent how most participants
describe their identities. She employs the word “stigma” to contextualize Goffman’s typology only and not to
suggest that LGBTQ+ identities represent stigmas.

66
being insulated during primary socialization from the consequences of a stigmatized status, c)
becoming stigmatized later in life and experiencing issues with re-identification and selfdisapproval, and d) learning a second way of being later in life that is considered “normal.”
Individuals with LGBTQ+ identities tend to fall into the middle two categories, which allows
the researcher to examine contrasting sociocultural contexts conducive or unfavorable (or
somewhere in-between) to fostering information practices centered around LGBTQ+
identities. Since LGBTQ+ labels are not mutually exclusive, in many cases the researcher was
also able to collect accounts where participants were beginning to question or explore other
facets of their identity aside from the primary LGBTQ+ label discussed.
Participants between the ages of 18 and 38 were selected for three reasons. First, as
indicated by the methodology, one of the key aims of this study was to capture past, present,
and future information practices. Given that the average age of those identifying as lesbian,
gay, and bisexual is approximately 16 years old (Savin-Williams, 2009, p. 163), as compared to
the 1980s, when individuals were between 19 and 23 (Savin-Williams, 2009, p. 118), recruiting
individuals 18 or older made it likely to capture those who began to re-identify and/or engage
in a second way of being (Goffman, 1963, p. 44), rather than those still questioning their
identities.3 Second, recruiting individuals under the age of 18 would likely involve obtaining
parental consent, which could pose a social risk for participants, particularly if their parents
are unaware of their LGBTQ+ identities. Third and finally, participants that are 18 to 38 years
old can be described as having traits and values shaped by their interactions with the internet,
namely social media sites (Howe & Strauss, 2009, p. 4; “Social Media Use by Age Group Over
Time,” 2016).
3. Similar data does not appear to exist for individuals who identify as labels other than bisexual, gay, or lesbian,
e.g., transgender, queer, genderfluid, non-binary, etcetera. Thereforethis number can only be viewed as a rough
estimate.

67
Recruitment. Recruitment occurred over a two-year period, from November 2014 to
November 2016. This extended period was due to the researcher having trouble identifying
and recruiting individuals with LGBTQ+ identities for this research. Such difficulty can be
attributed, in part, to the small proportion of the individuals who have LGBTQ+ identities.
The Williams Institute, which combines Census and Gallup survey data, estimates that
individuals who identify as LGBTQ+ represent approximately 3.8% of the US population
(“LGBT Data and Demographics,” 2016).4 Further, individuals may not want to disclose their
identities or discuss some of the information elicited by the interview that can be sensitive or
place them under emotional duress. Selecting an interviewing method addressed these
recruitment difficulties given that “large numbers of informants are not necessary [to use this
method], especially for exploratory investigations that are seeking initial, exploratory,
information, not seeking to generalize to a larger population (as is the case in quantitative
research)” (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 241).
Snowball sampling is useful “when members of the population are difficult to identify
and locate” (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 135) and for exploratory research (p. 136). The
premise of snowball sampling is to identify members of the desired research population, asking
them to participate in the research and to identify others who might participate. The researcher
sent an email script (see Appendix D: Email Recruitment Script) to personal contacts who
identify as LGBTQ+, as well as relevant organizations, e.g., the Rutgers Center for Social
Justice Education and LGBT Communities. Once the researcher identified an initial round of

4. This estimate may not be indicative of all those sampled for this research, given it does not explicitly count
those who do not identify with the LGBTQ+ label or those who may not feel comfortable disclosing their sexual
orientations and/or gender identities to polling units. Further, specific groups within the LGBTQ+ umbrella do
not share equal population proportions, such as transgender individuals, who represent 0.3% of the population.

68
participants, she then asked them to forward the recruitment script to others they knew who
might want to participate.
The researcher also engaged in purposive sampling over time. This method is used to
identify participants based on the research objectives (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 136). As
interviews began, the researcher found that many participants considered themselves as
outsiders, not only within larger culture, but also within the social groups to which they
belonged that identified as LGBTQ+. This social group outsiderism was found to be salient
to the stated research methodology, which envisions information as structural (Dervin, 1999,
p. 738) not only at the cultural level, but also at the social group level. Because this finding
emerged during the iterative data collection and analysis inherent to qualitative research
(Charmaz, 2014, p. 1; Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 289), the researcher modified data
collection to incorporate purposive sampling for “maximum diversity and maximum contest”
(Dervin, 1999, p. 738) to determine what is “unworkable about the ‘information’ currently
classified as expert or knowledgeable” (p. 738) within social groups. Specifically, the researcher
selected participants who identify as queer, bisexual, and transgender – three underrepresented
identities not reflected within mainstream understandings of LGBTQ+ identities.
Interview protocol. The research methodology informed development of the
interview protocol in several ways. First, the use of a flexible, semi-structured protocol
facilitated interviews that were “much more active, reflexive, and reflective” (Kong, Mahoney,
and Plummer, 2001, p. 241) than a fixed, structured set of questions. Interviews were
conversational, a technique that allowed participants to bring up topics that might not be
included in the protocol, ultimately allowing the researcher to share with participants some of
the perceived power inherent to an interview situation (Shuy, 2003, p. 187; Rothbauer, 2004,
p. 91; Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 241). Further, the protocol questions that were asked

69
employed “how” rather than “what” questions to avoid envisioning information as a fixed set
of outcomes, rather than a process (Dervin, 1999, p. 731).
To envision participants as theorists, the researcher employed a nonlinear focus on
LGBTQ+ identity development, rather than a psychological view of it as proceeding in stages
(Hamer, 2003, p. 77). The interview questions did not presume, for example, that identity
disclosure, popularly regarded as “coming out,” was perceived to be an important or even
necessary practice. Instead, the interview protocol asked participants to define their LGBTQ+
identities and information practices in their own words (Hamer, 2003, p. 79).
Questions focused on the past, present, and future, as well as the connections made
between them (Dervin, 1999, p. 744). Participants were asked to recollect events over different
time periods by using two techniques. The critical incident technique (CIT) asks participants
to recount their information practices during a recent, memorable moment (Flanagan, 1954,
p. 327) within the last six months. The second technique, a “total Time-Line,” asks participants
to consider a longer period from when they first became aware of their LGBTQ+ identities
to the present – as well as future goals and aspirations – and focus on the “‘most important’
step[s]” bridging these points in time (Dervin, 1983, p. 3). Table 2 displays selected questions
from the interview protocol and their alignment with the research methodology. For a full list
of questions, refer to Appendix F: Final Codebook.
Table 2. Sample Interview Protocol Questions
Question
Methodology
Please describe in your own words what an Sense-making;
LGBTQ+ identity [for italicized text, refer to Participant as theorist
the participant’s preferred label(s)] means to
you.
Think back to one of the first times you Sense-making;
began to explore an LGBTQ+ identity:
Information-asa. What were some of the goals you wanted process
to achieve by adopting this identity?
b. How did you fulfill these identified goals?

Method

Total time-line

70
Question
c. What were some significant challenges or
barriers faced in fulfilling these goals?
d. What resources or experiences helped
you the most in fulfilling these goals?
e. How did this purpose and goals change
over time, or did they change over time?
f. Do you find the ability to fulfill your
current goals is easier, more difficult, or
unchanged when compared to your past
goals?
Think back over the last six months, can
you remember a time when you spoke to
someone about your LGBTQ+ identity
which was particularly positive or
memorable in a good way? Describe what
happened. What was it that made it so
positive or memorable in a good way?

Methodology

Method

Sense-making;
Information-asprocess

CIT

Interview process. Interviews were conducted either face-to-face (n=10, 33%), via
Skype (n=19, 63%), or FaceTime (n=1, 3%), depending on the preference and location of the
participant. When interviews were conducted face-to-face, they were at a location of the
participant’s choosing, allowing the participant to have some control over the interview
process. Meeting locations included the homes of participants, coffee shops, and meeting
rooms at Rutgers University.
Before the interview, participants were emailed an informed consent form, approved
by the Rutgers Institutional Review Board (IRB), which specified the study purpose as well as
the risks, benefits, and compensation for participating. Participants also received a form
indicating that the audio of the interview would be recorded. They signed and scanned the
forms, then emailed them back to the researcher prior to the interview. They were
compensated with $25 for their participation. See Appendix E: Informed Consent and
Audio-recording Consent Forms for a copy of the informed consent and audio recording
forms.

71
Each interview was audio-recorded and transcribed. The length of the interview
averaged 56 minutes, which amounted to over 200 single-spaced pages of transcripts.
Following data collection and analysis, all interview recordings were deleted. In addition, all
email correspondences between the researcher and participants were also deleted. Two thumb
drives containing the digital files of interview audio and participant email communications are
kept in a locked drawer. Up to the point of deletion, all digital files were stored on a passwordprotected computer, in password-protected folders.
The only identifying information about participants elicited was their year of birth and
location. Participants’ real names are only known to the researcher and kept in a separate
password-protected folder with their email addresses. Year of birth and location were recorded
on the transcripts, as well each participant’s chosen pseudonym. However, in all presentation
of the research findings the participant will only be linked to their year of birth, not their
current location, to prevent triangulation of information that would potentially identify them.
Past participant locations are revealed per participant discretion.
Social Question-answering Data
To gain a deeper understanding of LGBTQ+ information practices, the researcher also
extracted Question-Best Answer pairs from the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers. As detailed
in the Literature Review, ongoing research in LIS and Computer Science (CS) studies SQA
sites, alternatively referred to as Community Question-Answering (CQA) sites. These sites can
either be examined on their own or to triangulate multiple populations and data collection
techniques to obtain a deeper understanding of a specific phenomenon (see Westbrook, 2008).
Triangulation denotes the use of multiple methods to measure the same phenomenon and is
used synonymously with mixed methods by some researchers (Gorman & Clayton, 2008, p.
12; Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 106-107). As explicated in the above Strategies of Inquiry

72
section, collecting data from Yahoo! Answers allows the researcher to incorporate cultural
context into the analysis, addressing one of the research goals: to examine how sociocultural
context shapes and is shaped by information practices.
Rogers distinguishes between digital and virtual methods with the latter representing
migration of “social science instrumentarium online” (2015, p. 8). An example would be the
use of Skype to conduct interviews. Digital methods use methods native to the medium, i.e.,
“written for the online medium, rather than migrated to it” (Rogers, 2015, p. 9). Due to the
instability of the medium conditions, digital methods are “experimental and situational”
(Rogers, 2015, p. 9). For example, Yahoo! Answers offered an application programming
interface (API) to scrape data. However, this API was discontinued as of June 3, 2014,5 making
it necessary for researchers collecting site data to either develop new data collection methods
or discontinue data collection from the site.
This change directly impacted data collection for this research. The researcher had
collected data from 2014 using the API and wanted to collect data again in 2016 to create a
longitudinal sample. To collect 2016 data, the researcher had to create a new series of methods,
including web scraping and data cleaning. Appendix C: Yahoo! Answers Scraping
Instructions details these methods and can be used by other researchers to collect data up to
three weeks prior. Unfortunately, these methods cannot overcome the constraints placed on
researchers who wish to collect historical data. Therefore, it is recommended that researchers
looking for older data sets consult those maintained by Yahoo! Answers to identify any
relevant to their research objectives.6

5. See https://yahoodevelopers.tumblr.com/post/86260183503/yahoo-answers-apis-will-be-removed-as-ofjune-3.
6. See https://webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/.

73
Site selection. Yahoo! Answers is an SQA site often regarded as an object of ridicule
based on its lack of quality content.7 Further, usage statistics, while sporadically reported from
Yahoo! and other analytics sources, indicate a decline in use from its peak in the late 2000s
and early 2010s.8 These two observations might raise questions regarding the viability of
Yahoo! Answers as a source for data collection.
Even taking such a decline into consideration, preliminary results from initial
interviews used in the pilot study (see the Pilot Study Method and Findings section) suggest
that Yahoo! Answers provides a rich site for data collection. Specifically, participants noted
the difficulty of locating resources when first exploring LGBTQ+ identities. As stated by pilot
study participant Eva, “I wish there was a handbook you get because it's hard to know where
to look.” This difficulty seemed to emanate from cultural factors, such as fear of adopting an
LGBTQ+ identity, but also from social ones, namely one’s outsider status due to a lack of
socialization into LGBTQ+ social groups (Merton, 1972, p. 15). Stefan, a dissertation study
participant, recalls the barriers they faced when locating information about non-cisgender
identities – namely, their outsider status and “notknowing the language.”
To counter not knowing the language, participants relied on sites that did not restrict
them to a controlled search vocabulary. As observed by dissertation participant Rose:
Google’s (https://www.google.com/) great because you can type in a whole question.
Recently, the girl I had a crush on, I kissed her at some point, so I put in ‘Are you gay
if you kissed a girl?’ Questions like that that were really specific based on my own
experiences hoping something might come up that was similar.

7. See http://mashable.com/2014/02/18/yahoo-answers-tech/#OMhq8TNfcSqL.
8. Although not always the most reliable, Wikipedia reports, to the best of the researcher’s knowledge, the most
comprehensive
reports
of
Yahoo!
Answers
use.
See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yahoo!_Answers#Site_statistics.

74
The results presented by Google to Rose in response were “mostly stuff from Yahoo!
Answers. People talking about their own experiences very similar to mine where they’re not
sure and they don’t feel comfortable with the situation.” As indicated by Rose’s account,
content from Yahoo! Answers may emerge as a top search result in response to questions
expressed in natural language. While Yahoo! Answers may be experiencing a general decline
in active users, such a decline does not necessarily apply to those consuming site content.
Data collection. The researcher collected content posted to the LGBT thread of
Yahoo! Answers during two time periods – 2014 and 2016. Collecting a longitudinal sample
reinforces the methodological stance of this dissertation on “information-as-process”
(Buckland, 1991, p. 351; Dervin, 1999, p. 740-741). Specifically, 850 Question-Best Answer
pairs were collected between February 26, 2014 and March 17, 2014 and 800 Question-Best
Answer pairs were collected between February 26, 2016 and March 17, 2016. Both time frames
represent a typical few weeks, in which there were no extraordinary events concerning
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Sufficient data (1,650 Question-Best Answer pairs) were
obtained for this exploratory study within this time frame.
Data collection was limited to Question-Answer pairs in which the asker rated the
answer as “Best Answer” since these pairs represent information that provided askers with
some sort of satisfaction, meaning, and/or credibility. To the best of the researcher’s
knowledge, all Question-Best Answer pairs from the thread were scraped within these time
periods. However, there is no way to verify the comprehensibility of the data collected, so it
must be specified that the researcher scraped the data that was available rather than an
exhaustive sample. From these Question-Best Answer pairs, the researcher randomly sampled
150 pairs from each year, creating a data set for analysis of 300 pairs.

75
To protect the anonymity of participants, the researcher only collected the question
subject, i.e., a short text box in which an asker can write a question or short description,
question content, i.e., a longer text box where the asker can elaborate on the subject, the best
answer, and the date the question was posted. This latter data point was collected to verify
that the researcher was capturing data from the specified date range and was not used for data
analysis. User names, which could identify individuals, were not collected. Like the interview
data, the Question-Best Answer pairs are saved to a password-protected folder. Further,
verbatim Question-Best Answer content is not quoted in the dissertation. Instead, it is
paraphrased to prevent content from being pasted into a search engine and used to identify
participants due to the site being publically available and indexed by search engines.
This method of data collection should not be viewed as participant observation nor
virtual ethnography (see Hine, 2000).9 Participant observation can be defined as the researcher
residing in a specific place inhabited by a given social group, actively participating in their daily
lives, and observing their everyday interactions (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005, p. 467). Although
translating this method into digital contexts requires redefining concepts such as space, social
groups, and even observation (Tsatsou, 2016, p. 108-109), participant observation in virtual
spaces requires some degree of researcher interactivity (Hine, 2000, p. 65), which is not present
in data collection.10 One advantage to the researcher’s presence being unobtrusive is that she
may capture data from participants unwilling to communicate directly (Angrosino &

9. The term “virtual ethnography” is contested for its use of the word “virtual,” which presumes that all meaning
making occurs online. Cyberethnography denotes the study of individuals in both physical and virtual
environments given these interrelate in people’s everyday lives (see Teli, Pisanu, & Hakken, 2007).
10. It should be noted that researchers also make the case for unobtrusive observation as a form of participant
observation online given that many individuals “lurk,” rather than produce content (see Gatson, 2013, p. 251252). While reading online is performative, the researcher also envisions reading offline as encapsulating the same
degree of performativity (de Certeau, 1984). Yet reading a physical book, while active and offering the reader a
“place,” is not considered participant observation, given that the latter would hinge on the researcher both
observing and interviewing participants about their reading practices.

76
Rosenberg, 2014, p. 473). At the same time not obtaining informed consent from online
research participants poses privacy concerns (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 349), addressed
in the Ethics section.
Data Analysis
Qualitative data analysis and the constant comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967, p.
102-103; Charmaz, 2014, p. 107; Corbin & Strauss, 2015, p. 85) were used on both the
interview transcripts and Question-Best Answer pairs. The purpose of qualitative data analysis
is “to identify patterns and themes in the data, [and] to discover relationships and insights into
the key issue or problem that is being investigated” (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 288). This
form of analysis is iterative and occurs simultaneously with data collection (Charmaz, 2014, p.
1; Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 289). For example, preliminary analysis of interviews
informed site selection and analysis of Yahoo! Answers Question-Best Answer pairs, as well
as refinement of the interview protocol and sampling methods. When engaging in qualitative
data analysis, the researcher must also maintain sensitivity to issues participants find relevant,
rather than imposing a paradigmatic stance on the data (Marshall & Rossman, 2016, p. 214;
Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 288-289). Maintaining sensitivity allows the researcher to
further position participants as theorists within their own information worlds.
Using the metatheoretical and theoretical orientations of the conceptual framework
(see the Conceptual Framework section), the researcher developed a provisional list of codes
and grouped them by thematic category to create a preliminary coding scheme (Miles,
Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014, p. 81). The researcher then imported all transcripts, QuestionBest Answer pairs, and field notes into NVivo, a qualitative research environment. NVivo
enabled the researcher to change and assign codes, calculate inter-coder reliability (ICR), and
generate coding queries (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 292). While coding the data, the

77
researcher relied on the constant comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967, p. 102-103;
Charmaz, 2014, p. 107; Corbin & Strauss, 2015, p. 85). This method is defined as “the analytic
process of comparing different pieces of data against each other for similarities and
differences” (Corbin & Strauss, 2015, p. 87). Such comparison enabled the researcher to refine
concepts based on themes inductively elicited from the data, categorize these concepts under
high-level thematic categories, and identify illustrative exemplars for each category, or code,
from the data. The constant comparative method complements an emic/etic approach
because it enables identification of emic codes to refine the preliminary etic coding scheme.
The researcher found that a sample of 300 Question-Best Answer pairs and 30
interview transcripts was sufficient to achieve saturation for the coding scheme.11 Saturation
is defined as the instance where no new data are providing insights nor are new coding
categories discovered (Charmaz, 2014, p. 214-216). Charmaz (2014, p. 214-216) notes how
saturation is often used uncritically and suggests that “researchers need to be self-critical about
saturation at multiple levels of conceptual development” (p. 215). The researcher was selfcritical at various stages of her iterative research process. Along with use of the constant
comparative method, the researcher revised her research questions several times to ensure the
scope of the questions was appropriate to the data being collected and engaged in purposive
sampling to inform the development of emic coding categories. Yet saturation does not signify
“a teleological closed system,” (Charmaz, 2014, p. 215) in which no further analysis should be
performed. Instead, saturation indicates that the coding scheme provides a good “fit” for the
data being described. Table 3 (see next page) depicts an excerpt of the codebook. The full
codebook is presented in Appendix F: Final Codebook.

11. Given that field notes were intended to maintain researcher reflexivity, their analysis was not counted toward
theoretical saturation.

78
Table 3. Codebook Excerpt
Code
Definition
Who is taken
seriously
within a
culture or
Social types
small world
People who act
“appropriately”
within a social
group or
culture; may
have access to
certain types of
privileged
knowledge, but
Social types\Insiders
not necessarily
People who act
“appropriately”
within a
culture (e.g.,
heterosexuals);
people who
have positions
Social
of power
types\Insiders\Within within the
a culture
larger culture
People who act
“appropriately”
within a social
group (e.g.,
people who
identify as
either lesbian
or gay in a
social group
where
bisexuality is
frowned
upon); people
who have
positions of
Social
power within
types\Insiders\Within the social
a social group
group

References Example
(Burnett,
Lee,
Hollister,
Skinner,
2014)

(Merton,
1972;
Chatman,
1996;
Jaeger &
Burnett,
2010)
"I don't see myself in a
relationship with any white,
straight identified cisgender
man..." (Emerson)
We can get rid of one participant,
but another takes over. Oh well.
There are a million more
homophobic people than gays as
it is. (Yahoo! Answers asker)
"Whenever there are these
conversations about the LGBT
agenda and gay marriage it tends
to be quite dominated by white
gay men and lesbians who I feel at
the end of the day they’re good on
certain levels, so they have money,
they have access, they’re likely
Christian or some you know
religiously privileged in some way
and then have access to many
different things and they can be
full humans in society if their
sexuality is just accepted." (Amina)
I’m a bi female and watch gay
porn sometimes. I think it’s ok.
My other bi friend who’s a girl

79
Table 3. Codebook Excerpt
Code
Definition

References Example
does the same. (Yahoo! Answers
answerer)

Note: Greyed areas are codes applied by the coding scheme whereas white areas represent
larger coding categories used to organize codes only.
Data analysis was informed by the researched methodology in several ways. First,
context was incorporated into the deductive coding scheme. Within this scheme, materiality,
namely of technological artifacts and embodiment, were added as conceptual categories. The
addition of these categories was meant to incorporate “the heart, body, and spirit” (Dervin,
1999, p. 739) into the researcher’s conception of information practices rather than confining
such practices to instances of seeking and use.
The importance of “information-as-process” (Buckland, 1991, p. 351; Dervin, 1999,
p. 740-741) also informed the deductive coding scheme. Specifically, the coding categories
consist of verbings when appropriate (Dervin, 1999, p. 732). Further, by coding for
technological affordances and constraints and using codes derived from the theory of
information worlds (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010), the researcher adopts
an anti-deterministic, outcomes-oriented view of both information access and technology.

80
The researcher considers information as structural by moving from “the abstract
‘What?’ to the sociologically concrete ‘Says who?’” (Berger & Luckmann, 1963, p. 134). To
make this move, the researcher added insiders and outsiders as deductive coding categories,
specifying this division at both social group and cultural levels (Merton, 1972; Chatman, 1996;
Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). As mentioned in the above Strategies of Inquiry section, the
researcher’s emphasis on developing inductive, emic codes to refine her deductive, etic coding
scheme also reflected the methodological framing of participants as theorists.
Validity
Threats to the validity of qualitative research include four types: a) credibility, or how well the
researcher represents participants’ accounts, b) transferability, or the degree to which findings
can be applied to other settings, c) dependability, or how well the researcher accounts for
changing research context, and d) conformability, or whether results can be corroborated by
others (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). How the researcher addressed each threat is now overviewed.
Potential threats to credibility include the imposition of the researcher’s own
interpretation on participants’ reflections, experiences, and actions (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p.
295-296). A specific credibility concern for this research is addressed in the question: What
does it mean for the researcher to be an insider or outsider within a specific group? To address,
this question, the researcher borrows from Merton. In his discussion of insiders and outsiders,
Merton (1972, p. 22) challenges “total Insider (and Outsider) doctrines of social
epistemology,” or the argument that one must be an insider in a social group to understand its
members. He contends that this doctrine cannot exist due to the “internal differentiation”
within groups of insiders (p. 23). In other words, while the researcher might be an insider
within the larger umbrella of LGBTQ+ identities, there are structural differences between her,
a white, cisgender queer woman who “passes” as heterosexual (Goffman, 1963, p. 57) and a

81
non-white, genderqueer individual who reads as non-hetero and non-cis normative. While the
researcher’s experiences may inform her sensitivity to normative social structures that she
construes as oppressive, she is not better equipped to describe the interplay of these structures
within participants’ lives than the participants themselves (Dervin, 1999, p. 740). Instead of
considering herself as knowledgeable of what others are going through, the researcher instead
positions herself as yielding power in her researcher role to participants.
To yield some of this power and counter credibility threats within interviews, the
researcher employs member checking, which “determine[s] the accuracy of the qualitative
findings through taking the final report or specific descriptions or themes back to participants
and determining whether these participants feel that they are accurate” (Cresswell, 2013, p.
251). A draft write-up of the findings chapter was sent to all interview participants and they
were asked to comment, via email or using a commenting tool, on their assessments of the
chapter’s accuracy in capturing their lived experiences (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 314;
Cresswell, 2013, p. 251). Member checking was not conducted with Yahoo! Answers
participants for reasons explicated in the subsequent Ethics section.
Transferability threats were addressed within the research approaches. By using an
emic/etic approach, the researcher could compare inductive, emic findings with existing
metatheoretical and theoretical frameworks via etic coding. A mixed methods approach
facilitated comparison of findings across the two data sources.
To counter dependability threats, the researcher maintained field notes during data
collection and analysis of both interview and Question-Best Answer data. These field notes
provide clarification of “the bias the researcher brings to the study,” specifically by
inventorying how her “interpretation of the findings is shaped by [her] background,” including
race, socioeconomic origin, culture, history, gender, and sexual orientation (Cresswell, 2013,

82
p. 251-252). In these notes, the researcher wrote about her own thoughts and experiences, and
took inventory of any notable events that might be shaping the data collected, e.g., an interview
that was conducted after Donald Trump was elected into office, but prior to his inauguration.
These notes contextualized interviews and Question-Best Answer pairs as produced within a
specific point in time-space (Dervin, 1999, p. 730) and assisted the researcher when writing
results from data collection and analysis.
Finally, conformability threats are addressed by calculating ICR. Specifically, the
researcher sent 20% of the anonymized data (6 transcripts, 30 Question-Best Answer pairs)
and the coding scheme to another coder. The researcher then trained the coder on the scheme
before she proceeded with coding. ICR was calculated using Cohen’s Kappa (Cohen, 1960).
This statistic provides a more robust measure than% agreement since it prefigures some of
this agreement occurring by chance (Connaway & Radford, 2017, p. 316). Once coding was
completed by the second coder, the researcher calculated an ICR value for all coding categories
as 0.94, which is indicative of very strong agreement.
Ethics
Research ethics can be divided into two types: procedural ethics and ethics in practice (Sharkey
et al., 2011, p. 1). Procedural ethics denote formal regulations imposed by the IRB at Rutgers,
whereas ethics in practice represent everyday issues that are more nuanced than what is
covered by formal regulations (Sharkey et al., 2011, p. 1). The types of ethics and how they
were addressed in the research design are now discussed.
The IRB application for this dissertation was approved in October 2014. The initial
IRB draft was for the pilot study and approved interviews with 7 participants between the ages
of 24 to 32. The IRB also approved qualitative data collection and analysis from public social
media sites, i.e., sites that are not password protected, which specified in their Terms of Service

83
that data is publically accessible. The researcher purposefully did not name any social media
sites in the IRB, instead indicating that her selection of a social media site would fulfill the
criteria stated above and be mentioned by interview participants who would inform site
selection. When the researcher was drafting her dissertation proposal a year later, she amended
the IRB to include 15 participants and changed the age range to participants to between the
ages of 18 to 38. Although the researcher made slight changes to the interview protocol after
the original study was approved, the changes were not major and, therefore, the original
protocol was not amended. The researcher feels that this decision was appropriate given that
she specified in the IRB that the protocol would be semi-structured, meaning that smaller
additions and changes based on how the participant directed the interview were to be
expected. Upon approval of her dissertation proposal, the researcher filed a final amendment
with the IRB to increase the proposed number of interview participants from 15 to 30
individuals. Changes to the IRB over time were based on the researcher’s commitment to an
iterative process of data collection and analysis, and the desire to analytically contend with the
concept of theoretical saturation.
In the IRB, the researcher stated that all participant identities would be kept
confidential, meaning that the researcher would know of their identities (whether physical or
virtual), but no one else would. In the case of interview participants, the researcher took the
following steps to preserve confidentiality: a) collecting only their year of birth and location,
b) sending them interview transcripts where they could request removal of any potentially
identifying information, c) saving all digital records indicating their identities on a password
protected folder and computer, d) deleting all digital records indicating their identities and
keeping two physical backups in a locked file cabinet upon completion of data collection, and
e) using pseudonyms in all research reporting.

84
For Yahoo! Answers data, one of steps in data collection required scraping a link to
each page on the thread where the question and all subsequent answers are located. Compiling
these links provided the researcher with access to participant’s user names, which in many
cases might be synonymous to knowing their identities especially since identity construction
is entangled within virtual spaces (Wakeford, 2000, p. 411). For this reason, links to the original
Question-Best Answer threads were deleted once collected and saved on two thumb drives,
both in locked file cabinets. The only other information collected was question subject,
question description, answer, and date.
Outside of the IRB, the researcher also considered more nuanced ethical issues that
were not mandated. For interviews, the researcher adopted the concept of “ethics as process”
(Ramcharan & Cutcliffe, 2001, p. 363; Cutcliffe & Ramcharan, 2002, 1002t; Sharkey et al.,
2011, p. 2), which considers how the researcher’s relationship with participants might influence
the study. One of the ways the researcher exercised ethics of process was to detect when the
research became too intrusive or sensitive to participants (Cutcliffe & Ramcharan, 2002, 1002t)
and adjust her approach accordingly. For instance, to end interviews, the researcher would
ask, “Was there anything that I did not ask you that I should have?” This question not only
elicited focused information from participants that they felt was relevant to the study, but also
addressed anything about the interview that made participants uncomfortable. Over time,
participant responses to this question assisted the researcher in presenting the negative CIT
question. Originally, the researcher specified in the IRB that this question might risk eliciting
emotionally sensitive information from participants. She did not consider that this risk could
be addressed during the interview process beyond obtaining informed consent. Based on one
participant response to the final interview question, the researcher decided to let participants
know ahead of time about the negative CIT question by either sending them the protocol prior

85
to the interview or during the interview by saying the following before presenting the CIT
questions: “I am going to ask you two questions now, one is positive and the other is negative.
I will start with the positive.”
Reviewing field notes also improved researcher-participant interactions. The
researcher strove to make interviews a positive experience where participants felt that their
identities and experiences were respected. For instance, by using the verb “transition” when
interviewing participants who did not identify as cisgender, the researcher assumed that all
participants either felt that they needed gender confirmation surgery or that all non-cisgender
identity development followed a linear process, in which one suddenly “becomes”
transgender.12 When one participant expressed her distaste of having the word “transition”
being used to describe her experience, the researcher incorporated this information into future
interviews with individuals who did not identify as cisgender by avoiding the verb “transition”
unless the participant used it themselves. Following her methodological directive to position
participants as theorists and incorporate “ethics-as-process” (Ramcharan & Cutcliffe, 2001, p.
363; Cutcliffe & Ramcharan, 2002, 1002t; Sharkey et al., 2011, p. 2), the researcher ensured
her evolving relationships with participants shaped future data collection,
Collecting and working with data scraped from social media sites, such as Yahoo!
Answers, raises several ethical issues not addressed by the IRB. While guidelines for internet
research are available, it is “unclear to what extent ethics committees use these” (Sharkey et
al., 2011, p. 1). For this reason, it is often left up to the researcher’s discretion what ethical
directives should be implemented within a project. One guiding principle informing this
research is the concept of “contextual integrity” (Barth et al., 2006, p. 185; Nissenbaum, 2010,

12. The researcher likely made this assumption due to her outsider status as a cisgender woman.

86
p. 140). This concept contends that when participants reveal information within a specific
context, they have expectations of what will happen with that information within that context.
Contextual integrity can be measured by four constructs: informational norms,
appropriateness, roles, and principles of transmission (Barth et al., 2006, p. 185). Two
constructs, informational norms and appropriateness, are relevant to this work and are now
discussed.
Informational norms regulate the transmission of information from one party to
another (Barth et al., 2006, p. 2). For instance, a website’s Terms of Service communicate the
rules an individual must agree to when using the site. Although some researchers contend that
content analysis of public websites can be ethically appropriate without obtaining informed
consent (Angrosino & Rosenberg, 2014, p. 473), participants do not generally read these
Terms of Service or, even if they do, have a clear idea of what they mandate (Kennedy et al.,
2016, p. 14-15). For this reason, the researcher debated whether to provide informed consent
for those contributing Question-Best Answer pairs to the LGBT thread data collected. She
ultimately chose not to do so for a few reasons. First, Yahoo! Answers affords ephemeral
participation, which renders it difficult to obtain informed consent. Users can create multiple
accounts or post anonymously; further, the site displays content based on how recently a
question was asked, meaning that a post is only visible for a limited period. Second, the site
has experienced participant attrition over the last few years, signifying that it would be difficult
to contact posters who had left the site. Given that the data collected is longitudinal, it is less
likely that participants from the 2014 period of data collection would ever be made aware that
their data was collected. Therefore, the informal norms of ephemerality and the public nature
of the site influenced the researcher’s decision to not obtain informed consent.

87
The second construct of contextual integrity is appropriateness, or what information
is permissible to collect within a given context (Barth et al., 2006, p. 3). Since the researcher
was interested in analyzing Question-Best Answer pairs, she only collected this information in
addition to the date the question was posted. The researcher paraphrased all Question-Best
Answer pairs to prevent identification of posts via web searches of verbatim quotes
(Eysenbach & Till, 2001, p. 1105). While the researcher maintains a spreadsheet of the
verbatim Question-Best Answer pairs and dates, these data will be kept for future research
only and will not be shared.
Another question the researcher pondered was whether it would be appropriate to
reveal the name of the thread being analyzed in her write-up, as this revelation could risk
negative exposure to the thread and those using it. She ultimately decided to name the thread
for the following reasons. First, the identity of the thread could be easily insinuated by people
reading the work since Yahoo! Answers has a unique model of assigning Best Answers not
found on other SQA sites. Further, the identity of the site could be intuited by looking at the
researcher’s previous publication history, which denotes several articles and talks on Yahoo!
Answers content, including about the LGBT thread. Finally, the researcher believes that the
implications from this research could be directed toward those instantiating, designing, and
facilitating Yahoo! Answers, including the possible need for a content moderation feature.
With all ethical decisions, the researcher has tried to only expose participants to risk
when she felt that the risk was relatively low compared to the importance of fulfilling the
related research objectives. In the case of interviews, the development of researcherparticipant relationships over time caused the researcher to rethink some of the ethical
decisions formally articulated in her IRB application and modify them over time. In the case
of Question-Best Answer data, the researcher had to make “active and anticipatory” as

88
opposed to “reactive” ethical decisions given that ethical concepts translate differently over
time within virtual environments (Angrosino & Rosenberg, 2014, p. 473-474). Upon
reflection, the researcher contends that the decisions made mitigate risk to participants and
are justified in strengthening the research findings via a mixed methods approach.
Conclusion
In this chapter, methodology, strategies of inquiry, and methods have been discussed, as well
as validity and ethical concerns. One prominent observation made by the researcher when
writing this chapter is the consistency of the research design from pilot study to approved
dissertation proposal. The strength of this design can be attributed to the researcher critically
thinking through the methodology before choosing strategies of inquiry or methods. After all,
one should not choose tools for a job without knowing which will be most effective in each
context. The sense-making methodology was found to be helpful in creating this context given
that it is informed by some of the same metatheories comprising the conceptual framework
and has premises complementary to queer methodologies. It has also been tested and proven
effective in various disciplinary contexts, including LIS. Once the key sense-making
methodology tenants applicable to the research objectives for this study were identified, the
actual study design seemed to fall into place. As the researcher encountered questions and
issues with the research design at the project onset, she found it helpful to consult these
guiding methodological claims. Due to the strong connection established between the three
components of the research design – methodology, strategies of inquiry, and methods – this
design can be replicated by others when studying the unique intersections between the concept
of information practices and marginalized groups. These intersections will now be explored in
the following chapter, which reports on the results of data analysis of the semi-structured
interviews and Question-Best Answer pairs.

CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
Introduction
This chapter overviews findings that address the following research questions:
RQ1. How does sociocultural context shape the information practices of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities?
RQ2. How do the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities produce
sociocultural context?
RQ3. What is the role of technology, namely social media websites, if any, in affording
information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities?
RQ4. What is the role of the technology, namely social media websites, if any, in
constraining information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities?
Findings are derived from two data sources – participant interviews and Question-Best
Answer pairs from the LGBT1 thread of Yahoo! Answers. As specified in the Social Questionanswering Data section, the researcher triangulated the conceptual framework using these two
sources to obtain a deeper understanding of the unit of analysis, information practices.
Participant interviews represent the social group level, while Question-Best Answer pairs
represent the cultural level (see the Conceptual Framework section for a discussion of social
group and cultural levels). Given the permeability between both contexts (see “soap bubble”
metaphor from Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 36-37), findings combine the two data types by
research question rather discussing them separately. This combined analysis captures how an

1. Although the researcher uses the label “LGBTQ+” to describe participants, the label “LGBT” is used by
Yahoo! Answers to describe the thread. This terminological distinction articulates the inherent problems with
using umbrella labels to categorize identity – an inherently non-categorical entity.

90
individual’s social group memberships contribute to the perception of information across the
lifeworld, or “the whole ensemble of human relations which is coordinated and reproduced”
(Brand, 1990, p. xii; see also Habermas, 1992). Participant demographics for both data sources
are discussed followed by findings for each research question.
Participant Demographics
Interview Participants
Thirty individuals between the ages of 18 and 38 were interviewed for this research. Their
median and mean ages are the same – 29 years old. Table 4 (see next page) depicts participant
numbers, chosen pseudonyms, identity labels,2 and preferred pronouns. The researcher
employs pseudonyms and preferred pronouns to describe interview participants.
As indicated by the table, umbrella labels such as “LGBTQ+” do not communicate
the fluidity and multiplicity by which participants describe themselves. The inability of labels
to convey individual identity expressions represents a larger problem with categorizing
identities not categorical in nature (Adler, 2013, p. 6). Yet labels prove necessary to organize
individuals within a culture or social group and provide them with access to certain resources.
As interview participant Autumn states: “My identity is something that exists without labels.
But to communicate it to the world and gain access to the healthcare that I need, I’m required
to use labels. “Trans” is the label that makes sense to use because of how I want to be treated
and what I need access to.”3 Autumn’s account exemplifies that labels not only represent a set
of characteristics or affinities (“Identity,” n.d.; Haraway, 1990, p. 197), but also determine how

2. The researcher asked participants to disclose preferred identity labels for their sexual orientations and gender
identities. Some participants also labeled their gender presentations.
3. All participant quotes have been lightly edited for clarity.

91
individuals are treated. Couching one’s desires within identity labels thus represents an
information need.
Table 4. Participant Names, Identity Labels, and Pronouns
P#
Pseudonym Identity labels
1
Ben
Gay, Male
2
Will
Gay, Gender questioning, Male
3
Emerson
Queer, Masculine-of-center, Gender
questioning, Female
4
Stephanie
Queer, Bisexual, Female
5
Eva
Gay, Female
6
Jamie
Straight, Transgender, Male
7
Diane
Gay, Female
8
Casey
Queer, Gender non-conforming
9
Rihanna
Queer, Androgynous, Female
10
Rose
Queer, Female
11
Amina
Queer, Female
12
Stefan
Non-binary, Queer, Genderqueer
13
Whitney
Gay, Female
14
Sebastian
Queer, Bisexual, Polysexual, Pansexual,
Female
15
Sage
Queer, Transgender, Genderqueer,
Genderfluid
16
Sierra
Transgender, Bisexual, Female
17
Campbell
Queer, Gender Non-conforming
18
Lauren
Queer, Female
19
Nicole
Queer, Gay, Female
20
Rachel
Transgender, Female
21
Cole
Queer, Butch, Lesbian, Female
22
Kristen
Queer, Female
23
Kyle
Queer, Transgender, Male
24
Sarah
Queer, Female
25
James
Transgender, Gay, Male
26
Jessica
Bisexual, Female
27
Mary
Transgender, Bisexual, Asexual, Female
28
Joanna
Queer, Gender non-conforming
29
Autumn
Queer, Transgender, Female
30
Mark
Transgender, Male

Pronouns
He/him/his
He/him/his
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
He/him/his
She/her/hers
They/them/theirs
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
They/them/theirs
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
They/them/theirs
She/her/hers
They/them/theirs
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
He/him/his
She/her/hers
He/him/his
She/her/hers
She/her/hers
They/them/theirs
She/her/hers
He/him/his

As indicated by Table 4, the labels participants most often use suggest that mainstream
LGBTQ+ communities treat them as outsiders and instead pay attention to the demands of
gay and, to a lesser extent, lesbian, cisgender individuals (see Rust, 1993; Gamson, 1995;

92
Jagose, 1996; Ward, 2000).4 Most participants identify as female (n=19, 64%)5 and queer
(n=18, 60%). More than half do not identify as cisgender (n=17, 57%), meaning their sense
of personal identity does not correspond with the sex and gender they were assigned at birth
(“Cisgender,” n.d.).
Figure 4 (see next page) depicts a map of participant locations, specified as city and
state of residence at the time of the interview. Participants are from 17 distinct locations,
almost half of which overlap (n=13, 43%). Such overlap represents the impact of convenience
and snowball sampling methods on data collection and captures social group context. For
instance, six participants from Minneapolis, MN know one another via an online meet-up
group. Of the distinct locations, eight are in the Northeast (47%), one in the South (6%), three
in the Midwest (18%), and four in the West (24%). One individual resides outside of the US
in El Salvador, but grew up in the Northeast US (6%).

4. Race and class represent other identities overlooked within mainstream LGBTQ+ issues (see Vaid, 2012).
While some participants voluntarily disclosed these identities, the researcher did not incorporate them as the
focal lens for this research. However, this chapter addresses intersectionality broadly.
5. All%ages are rounded up to the nearest whole number.

93

Figure 4. Map of Participant Locations.
Yahoo! Answers Participants
The second set of participants created Question-Best Answer pairs within the LGBT thread
of Yahoo! Answers. The researcher randomly sampled 300 of these pairs, 150 per year, from
a database of 1,650 total pairs collected during the same period of February 26 to March 17 in
2014 and 2016. Unlike interview participants, those contributing Question-Best Answer pairs
did not consent to participate in this research. For this reason, demographic information
connected to participant profiles was not collected and Question-Best Answer content is
paraphrased.6
Participants sometimes disclose identifying information in Question-Best Answer
content. Others may not disclose due to the stigma associated with claiming an LGBTQ+
label (see Goffman, 1963 for a discussion of stigma; see Hillier & Harrison, 2007; Veinot,
6. Even if these data were collected they indicate the user’s activity on Yahoo! Answers such as the amount of
questions asked and answered, rather than characteristics salient to the research questions such as age or identity
labels.

94
2009; Lingel & boyd, 2013 for examples of studies examining stigma within a Library and
Information Science (LIS) context) or a rejection of identity politics, and, therefore, labels
altogether (see Gamson, 1995; Jagose, 1996). Of the 300 pairs sampled, 39% (n=118)
contained information about an individual’s age and/or identity labels.7 Most content with
identifying information is from the 2014 data sample (72%, n=84). One reason why more
identifying information was offered in 2014 as compared to 2016 may be explained by the
content-based differences observed, detailed in the below Cultural and Social Group
Strategies section.
When participants did disclose, they shared identity labels 169 times and ages 51 times.8
Askers were more likely to provide their ages and identity labels (70%, n=83) than answerers
(30%, n=35). Regarding age, 65% (n=33) of participants were under 18. Of the 35% (n=18)
of participants 18 or older, all but one identified as being in their 20s. This finding suggests
that the ages of participants from Yahoo! Answers skew younger than those of interview
participants, allowing the researcher to capture the perspectives of a more diverse age group.
Twenty% of participants (n=35) used the label “gay,” thirteen% “female” (n=22),
twelve% “bisexual” (n=21), eleven% “transgender” (n=19), and eleven% “male” (n=18).
However, as Figure 5 (see next page) depicts, the frequency distribution of labels disclosed
by askers and answerers has a long tail of labels used once or twice, further reflecting the
inability of umbrella labels to depict the meanings participants ascribe to their identities. Since
most participants did not disclose their genders nor preferred pronouns, the pronouns “they,”
“them,” and “theirs” are used when referring to Yahoo! Answers participants. Since the

7. Only explicit statements, e.g., “I am a lesbian,” were coded to prevent misidentification.
8. These counts exceed the total number of Question-Best Answer pairs since both the asker and answerer could
disclose labels and, further, may have disclosed multiple identity labels.

95
researcher did not collect user names, participants are also referred to as “asker” and
“answerer.”
Frequency of Label Use Among
Yahoo! Answers Participants
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Figure 5. Long Tail of Yahoo! Answers Participant Labels.
Findings for Interviews and Question-Best Answer Pairs by Research Question
Findings are informed by data analysis and the unit of observation for analysis varied by data
source. For the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers, the unit of observation was Question-Best
Answer pairs; the researcher examined pairs rather than individual questions or answers given
that the latter responded to the former. For the interviews, the unit of observation was a
transcript. Coding was not restricted to a specific unit of text, such as a sentence or paragraph,
for two reasons. First, there were a variety of writing styles within the Question-Best Answer
pairs and participants may have used nonstandard writing structure, e.g., lack of punctuation
(Hasler, Ruthven, & Buchanan, 2014, p. 29). Second, the researcher transcribed participant
interviews, meaning that the punctuation assigned was subjective to the researcher. As a result,

96
the researcher looked for sections of text relevant to themes describing the unit of analysis:
information practices (Hasler, Ruthven, & Buchanan, 2014, p. 29). Therefore, the unit of
coding was segments of data conveying one or more themes (see Charmaz, 2014). Given the
interrelationship between themes, codes could overlap and multiple codes could be assigned.
Findings demonstrate that identity and information practices represent two
inextricable concepts. As Autumn’s previous description suggests, the labels one adopts
and/or is recognized as9 determine the information and resources available to them. These
labels also shape how one envisions relevance, which is described as the “relation between an
item of information and a particular individual’s personal view of the world” (Wilson, 1973,
p. 458), and meaning, or the use of relevant information to “reshape, redefine, or reclaim [one’s]
social reality” (Chatman, 1996, p. 195). Therefore, what individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
do with their identities cannot be condensed into the dominant practice of “coming out,” a
historical focus of extant LIS studies (see Hamer, 2003). Instead, this examination must be
opened to how people exist in the world based on their identities, including what information
they seek, share, use, value, avoid, etcetera.
RQ1. How Sociocultural Context Shapes Information Practices
This section answers RQ1, which asks: How does sociocultural context shape the information
practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities? Findings from data analysis suggest that
strategies (re)produce10 sociocultural context. Strategies establish both what information
should be considered relevant and meaningful, was well as what practices can be used to derive
this information. One way that strategies accomplish this “defining” of legitimate practices,
relevancies, and meanings, is by creating places where certain practices can occur and from
9. Individuals may not be recognized by their desired identity labels.
10. “(Re)produce” represents the recursive relationship between practices, of which strategies are comprised,
and sociocultural context envisioned in this research.

97
which strategies can be disseminated (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 34). Key knowledge claims
from data analysis are presented, followed by a discussion.
Findings
The knowledge claims empirically derived from the data are listed below. These claims are
organized by etic and emic themes. The researcher derived emic themes from the data and
then compared and matched them to related etic themes from the literature. Comparison and
matching occurred simultaneously with analysis. The first time a knowledge claim is
introduced in the discussion, it is indicated in parentheses. Knowledge claims for RQ1 are:
1.1. Cultural strategies shape what information is accessible to participants
1.2. Cultural strategies shape what information is visible to participants
1.3. Cultural strategies benefit certain individuals with LGBTQ+ identities over others
1.4. Cultural strategies denote who gets recognized as having an LGBTQ+ identity based
on whether an individual convincingly engages in authentic practices
1.5. Cultural strategies are disseminated via formal sources
1.6. Cultural strategies are disseminated via cultural insiders
1.7. A special type of cultural insider is the wise
1.8. Participants mistrust formal sources
1.9. Participants mistrust cultural insiders
1.10. Insider/outsider dynamics are recursive at the cultural level
1.11. At a cultural level, all LGBTQ+ identities are considered outsider identities
1.12. Individuals have multiple, intersecting identities and may have other insider identities
despite identifying as LGBTQ+
1.13. Social group strategies shape what information is accessible to participants
1.14. Social group strategies shape what information is visible to participants

98
1.15. Social group strategies help participants locate identity-affirming resources
1.16. Social group strategies are disseminated by informal sources
1.17. Social group strategies are disseminated by interpersonal sources
1.18. Social group strategies are influenced by cultural strategies
1.19. Insider/outsider dynamics are recursive within social groups
1.20. Social group strategies render individuals with certain LGBTQ+ identities as insiders
1.21. Social group strategies benefit certain individuals with LGBTQ+ identities over
others
1.22. Social group strategies denote who gets recognized as an LGBTQ+ identity based on
whether an individual convincingly engages in authentic practices
1.23. Strategies are disseminated by places, which have geographical and temporal
permanence
1.24. Place can be typified into back, civil, and forbidden
1.25. The place types (i.e., back, civil, forbidden) are context-dependent
1.26. Participants cited back and forbidden places as most influential in shaping their
information practices
1.27. Libraries were most often given the designation of civil places by participants
Tables 5-8 denote the main themes and sub-themes coded for RQ1. Table 5 depicts the main
themes coded as strategies from participant interviews and Question-Best Answer pairs
ordered by prevalence of total codes assigned.

99
Table 5. Main Themes Coded as Strategies.
Strategy Themes
Strategies
Cultural
Implicit
Explicit
Social group
Implicit
Explicit

Total Sources
Coded as
Theme11
32 (100%)
32 (100%)
32 (100%)
24 (75%)
32 (100%)
32 (100%)
11 (39%)

Total Codes
Assigned to
Theme
925
584
468
116
341
313
28

Table 6 denotes the insider/outsider sub-themes coded as strategies.
Table 6. Insider/Outsider Sub-themes Coded as Strategies.
Strategy Sub-themes
Total Sources
Social group insiders
32 (100%)
Authenticity
31 (97%)
Cultural insiders
31 (97%)
Cultural outsiders
29 (91%)
Social group outsiders
31 (97%)

Total Codes
405
274
241
222
207

Table 7 depicts the information sub-themes coded as strategies.
Table 7. Information Sub-themes Coded as Strategies.
Strategy Sub-themes
Total Sources
Stigma
32 (100%)
Enforcement mechanisms
31 (97%)
Affording visibility to insiders
30 (94%)
Interpersonal sources
28 (88%)
Withholding information
28 (88%)
Informal sources
20 (63%)
Formal sources
23 (72%)
Mistrust of cultural insiders and formal sources
25 (78%)

Total Codes
353
288
189
186
133
94
88
81

Table 8 (see next page) displays a summary of the number of sources and codes for the place
theme and sub-themes ordered by prevalence of codes assigned.

11. Each table presenting main coding categories has been derived from coding 32 sources: 30 interview
transcripts and 2 sets of Question-Best Answer pairs from the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers. Each set
contains 150 Question-Best Answer pairs – one pair from 2014 and the other pair from 2016.

100
Table 8. Place Themes and Sub-themes.
Place Themes and Sub-themes
Total Sources
Places
26 (81%)
Back
21 (66%)
Forbidden
20 (63%)
Civil
14 (44%)

Total Codes
160
66
57
27

Discussion
Cultural and Social Group Strategies
The information made accessible and visible12 to individuals by cultural institutions or social
groups determines what they consider to be meaningful within their everyday lives. To create
this meaning, institutions and groups implement strategies, or sanctioned ways of engaging
with them (Knowledge Claims 1.1 1.2). It is expected that individuals belonging to these
institutions and social groups will practice strategies, which have both geographical and
temporal permanence (Knowledge Claim 1.23). Strategies tend to be unquestioned and
assumed to be “the way things are” (de Certeau, 1984, p. xix-xx, 34-39). They can be implicit
or explicit.
The identities one can assume are constructed from birth and learned over time.
Heterosexual and cisgender represent two hallmarks of such assumed identities within modern
Western cultures.13 As interview participant Jessica notes: “[When] everyone’s born, it’s
assumed that they’re straight.” From the perspective of gender identity, de Beauvior (1972, p.
267) exemplifies this contention when she states: “One is not born, but rather becomes, a

12. The word “visible” is used in addition to “accessible” given the constructionist metatheoretical perspective
of the researcher. This perspective contends that reality is socially constructed and that multiple representations
of reality exist based on interpersonal, organizational, and cultural negotiations (see Berger & Luckmann, 1966).
13. An example of a culture not assuming binary gender identities is the historical role of two-spirit people. Twospirit people are American Indians who embody both male and female spirits. Historically, these people were
considered important members of their tribes and still are among certain first nation tribes. See
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/08/fashion/08SPIRIT.html?_r=0

101
woman.” Such assumptions are both implied by cultural institutions and codified into law. The
information participants are privy to thus reinforces heterosexual and cisgender ideals and
does not afford visibility to identities outside them.
One strategy that exemplifies these assumptions is going to the bathroom, a banal,
unquestioned, and invisible14 act for those identifying as cisgender. For those who do not, such
an ostensibly simple act refutes the meanings they ascribe to their gender identities. As
interview participant Campbell states: “When I go to the bathroom, I keep my head down. I
don’t interact with anyone. I put on the armor before I go in. It really bothers me when in gas
stations it’s a single-stall bathroom, but you’re forced to make that choice of are you a woman
or are you a man?” This strategy of using the bathroom pertaining to one’s biological sex
derives from knowledge-power15 (see Foucault, 1978, p. 58, 70, 143). The scientific institution
of biological determinism denotes a physical place, i.e., the bathroom, where this power to
define who is a woman and who is a man, can be distributed. In Campbell’s account, this
knowledge-power determines legitimate identity categories and appropriate practices centered
on (re)producing their legitimacy.
Implicit Cultural Strategies
As indicated by Table 5, implicit strategies are more prevalent than explicit ones. Implicit
strategies are inferred, but not expressed (Burnett et al., 2014). They simply represent the way
things are. Cultural insiders and formal sources communicate these strategies, which showcase
insider identities while erasing and stigmatizing outsider ones (Knowledge Claims 1.5, 1.6). On
one hand, implicit cultural strategies are insidious since no explicit record exists regarding

14. “Invisible” in the sense that going to the bathroom is not something to which most people pay attention.
15. Foucault’s (1978) treatment of knowledge and power as inextricable parallels the constructionist
metatheoretical perspective of the researcher.

102
which identity expressions should be ignored, limiting participants’ awareness of alternate
outsider identities. On the other, these strategies can be empowering given they inform and
reinforce cultural identity, which can establish an individual’s sense of belonging.
Formal sources represent information produced by cultural institutions and insiders.
Examples include books, television shows, and even search engine results (see Napoli, 2014
for an argument framing search engine algorithms as institutions). Sources can also be
interpersonal. Cultural insiders represent interpersonal sources taken seriously within a culture
(Merton, 1972; Chatman, 1996, 1999; Burnett et al., 2014), such as parents, doctors, and gender
therapists. These individuals most often identify as cisgender and straight. Both formal sources
and cultural insiders occlude visibility of LGBTQ+ identities. Participants often relied on
formal sources since they were disseminated within the cultural institutions they inhabited,
such as books assigned in school. Those who used these sources indicated not “knowing the
language” (Stefan), being “limited to lesbian and gay” (Campbell), not being aware that
“transgender was a word” (Rachel), or even that “transgender existed” as an identity category
(James). Per Kyle:
In high school, [LGBTQ+ identities were] never talked about. I never thought it was
an option. As ignorant as that sounds, it just wasn’t a thing. My senior year I had this
class and we were talking about the Laramie project16 and one of my peers was talking
about his “coming out” process. I remember being like, “Is he going to get into
trouble, can he be talking about this?”
These accounts illustrate a key strategy of cultural insiders: withholding information relevant
to cultural outsiders (Chatman, 1996, p. 197, proposition 2). Cultural outsiders signify those
whose identities deviate from collective standards held by cultural insiders (Merton, 1972;

16. See http://www.tectonictheaterproject.org/The_Laramie_Project.html.

103
Becker, 1973; Chatman, 1996). Such withholding of information maintains the legitimacy of
these standards.
If represented in formal sources, cultural outsiders may be stigmatized. Stigma is
defined as “the situation of the individual who is disqualified from full social acceptance”
(Goffman, 1963, p. 11). Stigma complicates visibility at the explicit cultural level. Even if an
identity is made visible by explicit cultural strategies, e.g., federal recognition of same-sex
marriage, this identity may not be considered by implicit cultural strategies as legitimate. For
instance, Joanna describes how information about LGBTQ+ identities is stigmatized by the
social news and entertainment company, Buzzfeed, (https://www.buzzfeed.com/) and by
search engines:
When you’re on Buzzfeed, it’s like, “[A] queer person gets murdered, [a] queer person
gets shot.” God, it’s awful. Not only do you have to deal with people writing about
their hate [for] gay people, you also have to listen to these incidents. It’s impossible to
search without running into these things. Unless you’re searching for something super
specific, you’ll come up with at least one thing that’s bad in the results that will taint
your experience.
As Joanna’s account makes clear, one can be subject to enforcement mechanisms that
reinforce which identities should be expressed.17 Such mechanisms represent consequences
for following or not following a strategy (Burnett et al., 2014). When searching for
information, Joanna cannot escape the visibility of enforcement mechanisms, such as violent
acts against queer people. Per Joanna, having a specific, articulated search query constitutes
the only way to negate such stigmatized portrayals, yet most individuals lack such ability
(Belkin, 1980; Belkin, Oddy, & Brooks, 1982a; Belkin, Oddy, & Brooks, 1982b). This inability
to formulate specific search queries is compounded for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities

17. This point is recognized in the APA DSM-5 manual’s 2013 change of “Gender Identity Disorder” to “Gender
Dysphoria,” to recognize that individuals identifying as transgender do not have an inherent mental disorder, but
rather may be susceptible to distress due to stigma applied at the cultural level to their identities.

104
who do not have the language to express their identities. As a result, participants relied on
naïve queries when searching, such as: “I was born a boy and wanted to be a girl” (Rachel),
“Are you gay if you kissed a girl” (Rose), and “Feel male, but only inside” (Jamie).
The strategies of withholding information and stigmatization combine to produce a
dearth of relevant and meaningful information related to LGBTQ+ identities produced by
cultural insiders and formal sources. As a result, participants rely on informal and interpersonal
sources that provide them with information about LGBTQ+ identities deemed relevant and
meaningful at the social group level (Knowledge Claims 1.13, 1.14 1.15, 1.16, 1.17). Yet cultural
strategies occlude visibility of and access to these resources (Knowledge Claim 1.18). Consider
Autumn’s description of formal versus informal sources for pornography featuring
transgender women:
I don’t watch a lot of porn because it’s hard to find something [that] features trans
women in a way that doesn’t fetishize them. I’m dating someone now who works in
the sex industry and they’re like, “You know why it’s hard to find?” There’s this one
trans woman who refused to be used for fetishization and has managed to carve out a
career for herself, but she has literally been blacklisted from all the major porn
industries in the US. Now she is indie, but it’s a difficult path. Finding good porn is
hard.
This account illustrates the difficulty of escaping implicit cultural strategies given their
dissemination by formal sources with widespread coverage and a vast reserve of resources. In
comparison to explicit cultural strategies, there exist no formalized statements dictating if
transgender individuals should be featured in mainstream pornography or, if so, how these
individuals should be portrayed. For this reason, Autumn did not initially know why
pornography affirming transgender identities was hard to find. As she comes to find out,
pornography is created for cultural insiders who desire fetishized portrayals of transgender
individuals. The pornography industry thus influences what content is created by employing
economic enforcement mechanisms, such as blacklisting an actor for unsanctioned portrayals

105
of transgender sexuality. This example illustrates the invisibility of implicit cultural strategies.
To those inside the pornography industry, these strategies may be deliberate, however, to those
watching the sources produced, such strategies appear as the way things are, and constitute an
example of information value.
Findings from data analysis indicate that these limited and stigmatized portrayals of
LGBTQ+ identities by formal sources contribute to participants’ perceived status as cultural
outsiders (Knowledge Claim 1.11). Exposure to stigmatized information could be the extent
of one’s searching on the topic. As Will recounts: “When I was younger, I [experienced] a fear
and conflation of pedophilia with [my gay] sexuality. That was something I spent a long time
talking to therapists about.” It took Will years to feel comfortable adopting a gay identity in
part due to the stigma he perceived applied to this identity.
Despite the influence of cultural strategies on participants’ self-perceptions, findings
from data analysis indicate that, over time, they consider their LGBTQ+ identities to be
legitimate and discount stigmatized portrayals of them. Many exist in opposition to cultural
strategies by adopting the label “queer” (n=18, 60%). While the meaning of this label differs
for each participant, “queer” deconstructs cultural strategies that create and legitimate identity
categories with solid, impermeable boundaries between them (Gamson, 1995, p. 390-391). As
Nicole states: “Queer can be all-encompassing of that which is not considered the norm.”
Thus, identity categories like “queer” represent to participants more than their individual
desires, but rather the refutation of what cultural insiders deem relevant and meaningful. For
these reasons, participants do not envision formal sources that reinforce dominant cultural
strategies as relevant to their everyday lives and, therefore, mistrust them (Chatman, 1996, p.
197, proposition 4; Knowledge Claim 1.8, 1.9). Consider Sierra’s explanation of why she does
not use the library for information about her transgender identity:

106
I think that librarians aren’t even using libraries for resources in this area. [For] several
reasons. Privacy is a big one. I wouldn’t ever want to check out any of the books that
would have been helpful. Even with circulation, there’s no record of it, but do you
even want to bring that up to the desk? When I first found out that trans was an actual
thing, the only books I saw [in the library] were negative, like The Transsexual Empire,
which was anti-trans to its core. Just seeing a snippet of that, it was like, clearly this
isn’t anything I would want. Then it was easy to say, “Well, books aren’t going to be
an answer.”
Sierra does not view the library as relevant to her transgender identity for two reasons. First,
the information the library possessed was stigmatizing whereas Sierra envisions her
transgender identity as legitimate. Data analysis suggests that such mistrust can become
totalizing and difficult to overcome. Just seeing one book that stigmatized transgender
identities was enough for Sierra to write off the library and its collection as institutions and
sources not to be trusted. Second, not only can information related to LGBTQ+ identities be
stigmatizing (Lingel & boyd, 2013, p. 987), but such information can impart stigma on the
individual consuming it. To Sierra, just the practice of checking out a book was enough to be
recognized as transgender and have the stigma related to this identity category applied. As a
result, Sierra had to manage the visibility of her information practices. Since the library
employs strategies that engender such visibility, e.g., taking a book to the circulation desk,
Sierra did not view the library as relevant since it did not afford control of her information
practices.
Explicit Cultural Strategies
At the cultural level, explicit strategies are articulated by formalized statements, such as laws
(Burnett et al., 2014). These strategies regulate what identities are visible and how they can be
practiced. This regulation occurs via the use of enforcement mechanisms by cultural insiders.
Explicit strategies manage which identities are visible and how these identities can be
expressed, e.g., declaring an infant “male” or “female” on a birth certificate. This declaration
can be problematic for those who do not choose to identify as either. As Autumn states: “How

107
I was labeled at birth by some doctor, un-consensually, is not how I choose to identify.” For
those identities made visible, explicit cultural strategies can regulate how they are practiced.
For instance, the American Psychiatric Association renders “transgender” visible as a mental
condition that can be diagnosed as “Gender Dysphoria” (American Psychiatric Association,
2013). Those who desire to be explicitly recognized as transgender must engage in a series of
practices, e.g., seeing a gender therapist, to attain this diagnosis.
Identity visibility and expression are closely related. To be made visible as a certain
identity, one must engage in a series of sanctioned practices. Consider the following example
from a 2014 Question-Best Answer pair:18
Q: I’m a male wanting to be female and will soon start taking hormones. What are
their effects?
A: I hope that you’re following the necessary gender reassignment system. You must
see a gender therapist for hormones and need to be 18 years old or have parental
consent. Don’t self-medicate. First, even if you are on a safe dosage and ask other trans
people for theirs, hormone dosages don’t act like other medications. You must have a
doctor get your base hormone level to decide a dose. Second, to eventually get surgery,
you will need to see a gender therapist. If you’ve been self-administering hormones, it
will be difficult for the therapist to determine your base hormone level before legally
prescribing. I’m sure you know this and have chosen the right path. Just in case. I even
once considered self-medicating. The first effects seem like placebo effects, but you
start to feel more at ease and your sex drive starts decreasing. Your erections will come
less often. I noticed my breasts growing one month in and a year later I have a B cup.
Hope this helps and good luck with your transition.
Here, the answerer overviews practices the asker must take to be recognized as female at the
explicit, cultural level. Engaging in these necessary steps to be recognized as one’s desired
gender identity represents an authentic practice (Goffman, 1963; see also Halberstam, 2005,
p. 125-151; Gray, 2009, p. 123). Goffman (1963, p. 132) defines authenticity as “recipes for an
appropriate attitude regarding the self.” In this account, both asker and answerer envision

18. To protect participant privacy, all Question-Best Answer pairs are paraphrased.

108
transgender identities as created and regulated within the scientific institutions of medicine
and biology. Engaging in authentic practices renders an individual as “real and worthy”
(Goffman, 1963, p. 132). Those who do not engage in authentic practices are viewed as “selfdeluded” and “misguided” (Goffman, 1963, p. 132). For instance, the answerer discourages
practices outside the formalized gender reassignment system, such as self-medicating
(Knowledge Claim 1.4).19 Authentic practices are embodied, or in other words, are performed
through the body and over time become a habituated skill (see Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. 146153; Bourdieu, 1984b, p. 78-96; Lloyd, 2010).20
A specific type of cultural insider, referred to as “the wise” (Goffman, 1963, p. 40),
prevalently disseminates explicit cultural strategies (Knowledge Claim 1.7). Goffman (1963, p.
40) describes the wise as those “whose special situation has made them intimately privy to the
secret life of the stigmatized individual and sympathetic with it.” The wise regulate authentic
practices using enforcement mechanisms. For instance, in most states, individuals cannot be
formally visible as their desired gender (if “male” or “female”) without being diagnosed and
treated by a healthcare provider.21 In the Question-Best Answer pair example above, the asker
relies on the wise to both permit, e.g., via parental consent, and make visible, e.g., via
hormones, their desired gender identity.
Authentic practices are also adopted by those with non-heteronormative sexualities.
For example, Will contends that his identity as a gay man has become less visible since

19. The researcher does not suggest that the health effects of taking hormones, even if prescribed by a doctor,
could not potentially pose harm to an individual. Rather, since cultural strategies frame one’s transgender identity
as only achievable within the intuitions of medicine and biology, these strategies may limit participants’ identity
expressions as having to be authenticated by these institutions.
20. Authentic practices can also be regulated at the implicit cultural level, such as Sage being told growing up
that “good girls don’t do x, y, z.”
21. Lamda Legal provides updated online resources regarding identity documents for transgender individuals.
See: http://www.lambdalegal.org/know-your-rights/article/trans-identity-documents

109
marrying his partner: “I don’t have to assert [my gay] identity as much because it’s obvious
[since] I’m married to a man. I’ve created a life for myself where I don’t have to regularly assert
the right to express myself in a more offensive way.” Although the explicit strategy of same
sex marriage gave Will desired recognition of his relationship, it also narrowed his avenues for
identity expression. Since Will has engaged in an explicit, culturally sanctioned strategy of
same-sex marriage, his visibility as a gay man has become reduced to the authentic practice of
being married. He no longer must “assert” his gay identity in ways not culturally sanctioned,
such as activism. Will’s account suggests that explicit recognition of LGBTQ+ identities can
be affirming; however, such recognition also limits the multiplicity and fluidity of how these
identities can be expressed. Such limitations condense LGBTQ+ identities into taken-forgranted, monolithic categories and identities outside of these categories do not garner the same
attention (Knowledge Claim 1.3).
A lack of explicit strategies also determines identity visibility and expression at the
social group level. For instance, Rachel details what types of transgender identity expressions
were available to her when searching:
When I started searching [for information on transgender identities], everyone was
going stealth. Stealth is once you live as your gender, you don’t speak of being trans,
you just pretend that you’re cis. Everyone was saying just do that because there was
no protection for trans people in the workplace. And I was like, “Shit.” That really had
a profound effect on me. Until the day I went female full time, what would I have to
do to protect myself in the workplace?
Transgender individuals create the social group category of “stealth” as a response to the lack
of explicit enforcement mechanisms preventing them from violence and workplace
discrimination (both implicit enforcement mechanisms).22 Some considered engagement in
authentic practices as preferable considering these negative enforcement mechanisms.

22. For an overview of state laws and policies related to individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, see
http://www.hrc.org/state_maps. At the time of writing, the year 2016, was the deadliest year on record for

110
Given that “everyone was going stealth,” Rachel first gave preference to a “stealth”
identity. Her limited exposure to this monolithic identity category convinced her of a correct
or preferable way to “be” or “do” an identity. However, this decision to “go stealth” only
lasted until Rachel adopted a female identity and rendered this identity as visible to others.
“The day I started to live as female full time I threw everything out the window and was like,
‘I’m just going to educate people.’” Rachel’s unique context, comprised of interactions with
her body, with other people, with books, etcetera, contributed to this decision. Yet strategies,
such as authentic practice, do not incorporate such context.
By establishing one right way to be recognized as LGBTQ+, strategies narrow one’s
avenues for information. For instance, what if some individual wishes to be formally
recognized as a gender different from that assigned at birth, but cannot afford or does not
desire hormones? This individual has less access to, and visibility of, information sources,
particularly within cultural institutions such as libraries. Consider Mary’s explanation for how
she thinks the library can improve in serving transgender users:
There’s people who make managerial decisions [who] may have never met or may
never bother meeting with a trans person. What they end up doing is turning it into
this monolithic category. There’s only one way to be gay, there’s only one way to be
transgender, so on and so forth. And they fail to recognize that someone walking
through their library who looks just like any other woman could be a transgender man
who is just not transitioning or hasn’t transitioned yet. Could be a child. There needs
to be this immediate awareness that just because someone looks different, that isn’t
the only way to identify them as trans.
The library commits a misstep by condensing transgender identities into a series of authentic
practices made visible and permissible by cultural strategies. Through strategies such as
collection development, reference, and programming, the library prioritizes serving the needs

transgender individuals, most of them women of color. Of course, no one knows the exact count of such
homicides, not only since some may not be reported, but also due to misgendering of individuals by the media.
See http://www.glaad.org/blog/2016-was-deadliest-year-record-transgender-people

111
of individuals who engage in these practices.23 Those who do not, like in Mary’s account, may
not only consider the library irrelevant to their LGBTQ+ identities, but also may question the
legitimacy of their identities and information practices centered around them. As James states:
“You sometimes just want to read [a] story and know that in a fantasy world where dragons
exist, you exist.”
Implicit Social Group Strategies
Data analysis indicates that participants attain information on LGBTQ+ identities within
social groups comprised of individuals who share these identities. Participants rely on social
groups for such information given that they do not have access to, or visibility of, information
representing these identities at the cultural level. Implicit social group strategies maintain
insider/outsider dynamics, indicating to attention should be paid (Knowledge Claim 1.20).
Participants consider knowledge of such dynamics to be important given their mistrust of
formal sources produced and disseminated by cultural insiders. However, implicit social group
strategies do not exist in a vacuum. Rather, they are privy to cultural strategies, which also
influence who is considered a social group insider, which identity expressions are available,
and whose identities are made visible.
Implicit social group strategies can engender participants’ identity expressions by
introducing them to a set of shared sensibilities and identity outcomes. As Diane recalls:
One of my best friends [participant Eva] came out toward the end of college. She had
a group of friends, a lot of them gay. I would spend time [with them] in the summers
and this was a time when I wasn’t out. I felt a comfort level around these people and
it was very much like, “Oh I sort of belong in this.” It was good to have community
to talk to and be a part of. These people were open and proud of who they are. [They
were] not ashamed, their families knew, and everything was fine. It seemed like, “Oh
wow this is what’s possible.”

23. Libraries also engage in explicit cultural strategies to maintain visibility of certain LGBTQ+ identities as
conveyed within formalized systems, such as subject headings (see Adler, 2012).

112
Diane relies on insiders within a specific social group with the shared identity category of
“gay.”24 She considers them as insiders given their experience adopting, negotiating, and
expressing a gay identity, which parallels Lingel and boyd’s (2013, p. 986-987) expert/novice
distinction within social group insider/outsider dynamics (Knowledge Claim 1.19).
Feeling a sense of belongingness and affinity toward insiders within this social group
allowed Diane to consider adopting a gay identity. The positive feelings that social group
members exhibited toward their identities may have mitigated both the shame Diane directed
toward her non-heterosexual desires and fears of disclosing to her own family. Diane’s use of
the word “possible” indicates that strategies shape what participants consider meaningful
within their lives. Namely, strategies at the social group level can be leveraged by participants
to engender visibility and affirmation to identity expressions outside of those considered
culturally normative.
Whether one has experience practicing an LGBTQ+ identity does not fully determine
insider/outsider status. Much like at the cultural level, social groups contest insider status
based on whose practices are considered authentic, which varies among these groups
(Knowledge Claim 1.22). For instance, Stefan details their experience with different LGBTQ+
social groups on the social blogging website, Tumblr (https://www.tumblr.com):
Truscum are trans people who believe you have to have dysphoria to be trans. You
can’t be non-binary, you can’t be genderqueer. You have radfemmes who may be
lesbians, but they believe trans women are men. You have people who are like, “You’re
doing queerness wrong.” Really? There’s one true path to queerness and I’m doing it
wrong? You get one platform and have so many different opinions that there’s gonna
be people that make you mad. I don’t think truscum … like, see? By calling them
“scum,” I don’t think they do queerness right.

24. Female-identified participants such as Diane, Eva, and Whitney preferred the label “gay” rather than
“lesbian,” since the former was more culturally mainstream. Such preference exemplifies that cultural strategies
shape determination of one’s insider status since “gay” is a label most often applied to men, whose needs are
given cultural preference as compared to women’s.

113
While Tumblr offers more variegated social groups found at a cultural level, these groups
employ their own set of strategies to both reinforce and challenge the authenticity of one’s
identity. Such implicit strategies for inclusion may aid in collective organizing. For instance,
radfemmes25 can organize around shared, collective definitions of “womanhood” and
“lesbian” (see Merton, 1972, p. 23-24; Gamson, 1995, p. 392-393). What complicates Stefan’s
account is that each social group exercises awareness of the strategies adopted by others and
tries to undermine them. By their own admission, Stefan uses the label “scum” to qualify a
social group engaged in an identity discourse they consider to be inauthentic. This constant
observance and regulation of LGBTQ+ identities can become emotionally exhausting for
participants. As Casey states: “Tumblr got really overwhelming for me because the community
is intense and offers knee-jerk reactions. It felt like I was like being constantly policed, so I
exited Tumblr because I couldn’t handle it.”
Insider/outsider dynamics among individuals with LGBTQ+ identities are not
totalizing. Rather, an individual can have multiple, intersecting identities, some of them insider
and some of them outsider. How these identities overlap, also referred to as “intersectionality,”
determines what systems of oppression or privilege they are privy to within a given context
(see Crenshaw, 1989). Further, cultural strategies influence who is considered an insider at the
social group level by condensing insider/outsider identities into monolithic representations.
Consider Sebastian’s description of intersectionality within LGBTQ+ social groups:
One group that’s in the mainstream media when it comes to queerness [is comprised
of individuals like] Neil Patrick Harris, Ellen Page, and Ellen DeGeneres. You need
more than that. You need poor people, you need disabled people, you need people of
color. You can’t just say, “Oh, queer people,” and only mean the guys running around
at Pride in no underwear. You have to include everyone. I have [four] identities. I’m
queer, I’m black, I identify as Latina, I’m a woman. All of those intersect. Even within
25. Some online communities use the term “trans exclusionary radical feminists (TERFs)” to acknowledge that
not all radical feminists exclude transgender women. See http://transadvocate.com/terf-what-it-means-andwhere-it-came-from_n_13066.htm

114
[LGBTQ+] communities there’s prejudice. If you don’t address that, you’re not
addressing queerness as a whole.
Sebastian’s account reinforces a finding from analysis at the level of implicit cultural strategies.
Formal information sources, such as the mainstream media, magnify visibility of those
considered normative within LGBTQ+ social groups (Knowledge Claim 1.10, 1.12, 1.21).
Such visibility may be afforded given these individuals possess other insider identity categories,
such as being white, affluent, able-bodied, skinny, attractive, and monogamous. These
representations frustrate participants like Sebastian who exist outside of them.
By disregarding individuals with intersecting outsider identities, implicit social group
strategies can erase non-dominant LGBTQ+ identities as expressed by the following 2014
Question-Best Answer pair:
Q: How can I “come out” to my Christian parents? Sometimes I’ll hear my parents
bash gay people and say they are going to hell. They don’t know I’m bisexual.
Sometimes I think about not telling them. Has anyone else experienced this? Should I
wait to tell them until I move out or never mention it?
A: Don’t tell them until you can support yourself. When it comes to religious people,
it’s better to not “come out” to them. Don’t get me wrong, I have religious friends
and they are great, but will put their religion before anything else. They’re scared their
imaginary friend “God” will send them to hell for associating with a sinner. When you
do “come out”, saying you’re bisexual can break the ice, but you need to be honest
and tell the truth. You may not realize it now, but in most cases people think they’re
bisexual then later realize they’re gay. Keep that in mind and don’t fear what is going
to come.
The asker wants information related to disclosing their bisexual identity when religion
constitutes a barrier. The answerer first delegitimizes the cultural institution of religion,
envisioning it as mutually exclusive from LGBTQ+ identities. Much like Sierra expresses
mistrust in libraries and books to provide her with information related to her transgender
identity (see above), the answerer mistrusts religion as a lens from which to envision LGBTQ+
identity expression. Discounting intersections between those who identify as LGBTQ+ and

115
religious ostracizes participants such as Mary, who recounted feeling “angst [toward] religious
people on [the online forum] reddit [https://www.reddit.com/].”
The answerer then trivializes bisexuality as a temporary interstice to gay or lesbian.
Such erasure can be problematic when individuals are first learning about LGBTQ+ identities
from those they consider insiders within a social group and thus to whom they assign
credibility and authority. Recall that this answer was assigned the “Best Answer” designation
by the asker. This designation indicates that to some degree, the asker agreed with the answer,
which has implications for the identity labels and expressions they believe are possible.
The examples conveyed by interview participant Sebastian and the previous QuestionBest Answer pair exemplify why the researcher does not use the word “community” to
describe LGBTQ+ social groups. While some participants use “community” to describe their
relationship with others sharing one or more of their identities, this word assumes a “cohesive
… self-identified collective authority” (Lingel & boyd, 2013, p. 982). Consider the phrase, “the
LGBTQ+ community.” Some insiders with LGBTQ+ identities described, as well as their key
demands, such as marriage, likely come to mind. Therefore, “community” signifies “visible
insiders.” It also assumes geographical connectedness, further discussed in the below Back,
Civil, and Forbidden Places section.
Explicit Social Group Strategies
Table 5 indicates the researcher infrequently assigned codes for explicit social group strategies.
As cultural outsiders, group members do not command the political, economic, geographic,
academic, etcetera, resources necessary to enact them. In some instances, participants were
privy to explicit social group strategies, particularly when using online technologies. When
social groups employ explicit strategies, they can de-stigmatize information sources related to

116
LGBTQ+ identities. Jamie remembers how Tumblr moderator guidelines facilitated his
information seeking, scanning, sharing, and exchange:
I found a Tumblr that was only for people like me. It was all sorts of trans men. Any
issue you could think about or want an answer to, you could ask on there and [the
moderators] would weed out things that were hurtful. If anyone tried to bash someone
on there, it would be toast.
The explicit social group strategy of moderator guidelines provided Jamie with a safe space for
learning about male transgender identities by delineating group boundaries. Social group
outsiders, e.g., not transgender men were not welcome. Information moderators deemed
stigmatizing was not allowed. These guidelines were created by social group insiders, whose
conceptions of meaning and relevance related to male transgender identities appeared, from
Jamie’s perspective, to align with those held by group members.
When social groups lack explicit strategies, who interacts and what they share can be
variable for whom they have meaning and relevance. Longitudinal analysis of Question-Best
Answer pairs denotes an increase of content ostensibly26 stigmatizing individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. Content was coded for the stigma theme 22 times in the 2014 dataset as
compared to 99 times in the 2016 dataset. The following Question-Best Answer pair from
2016 exemplifies content coded as stigmatized: “Q: To all real women, are you offended that
Bruce Jenner speaks for you? A: Yes. He is a man, that’s how he was created.” Per the example,
these social group members do not consider transgender identities as legitimate. Questioning
the legitimacy of transgender identities stems from the cultural strategies of biological
essentialism and religion: to be considered an authentic woman, one must have been created
as woman by God and assigned this sex at birth.

26. The researcher uses the word “ostensibly” given the intent of the asker and/or answerer is unknown. The
below RQ4. How Technologies Constrain Information Practices section further discusses this unknown
intent.

117
Unlike Jamie’s Tumblr group, the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers does not contain
moderation guidelines or denote specific group roles. Instead, it relies on a site-wide policy in
which “trusted members of the Community … consistently and accurately report abusive
questions and answers” (emphasis added).27 The issue with this policy lies in those words
italicized. Who does Yahoo! Answers choose to trust and how does it determine the accuracy
of their reporting, as well as what constitutes abusive content? This site-wide policy is devoid
of context established by specific social groups interacting within the topical threads of the
site. For this reason, decisions regarding who to trust, who is accurate, and what content is
considered abusive are not bound by clear definitions of who is an insider and what
information is relevant and meaningful among them. This example illustrates the temporal,
impermanent, and rather fleeting nature of LGBTQ+ social groups. Since these groups are
not cultural insiders, they lack access to resources such as the ability to formulate specific
moderation guidelines, which can lend permanence to their strategies. Content shared and
exchanged within these social groups becomes subject to change due to the permeability
between social group strategies and overarching cultural ones.
Summary of Key Findings
Data analysis of interviews and Question-Best Answer pairs revealed that participants envision
cultural and social group strategies as permitting access to resources and visibility of
information, which affects what participants consider as relevant and meaningful in their
everyday lives. Strategies are unquestioned and represent assumptions, whether explicit or
implicit, of the way things are. Individuals rely on cultural insiders, namely the wise, to validate
the authenticity of their desired identity expressions. Cultural insiders stigmatize identities not

27. See https://help.yahoo.com/kb/SLN8252.html

118
recognized as authentic. Formal information sources, such as libraries and the mainstream
media, afford visibility to legitimate LGBTQ+ identities and condense these expressions into
a monolithic set of characteristics. Such lack of visibility to non-mainstream LGBTQ+
identities, as well as to their multiplicity and fluidity, further mitigates an individual’s awareness
of, and desire to pursue, those identities not validated at the cultural level.
Social group strategies help participants locate resources to validate their identities,
protect them from stigmatized information, and afford visibility to identity expressions,
including language, lacked at the cultural level. However, social group strategies can also
condense LGBTQ+ identities into monolithic categories. Such categories privilege those who
have other identities rendered insider at the cultural level. Implicit social group strategies also
presume insider status based on collective definitions of authentic practice. Both definitions
of “insider” can be problematic given one’s identity expressions contain multiplicity and
fluidity beyond a fixed set of defined characteristics. Insider/outsider dynamics are, therefore,
recursive at the social group level, and can narrow horizons of possibility for what an
LGBTQ+ identity looks like.
Back, Civil, and Forbidden Places
Strategies determine the information available to individuals, suggest what individuals should
consider to be relevant and meaningful in their everyday lives, and shape how they seek, share,
use, exchange, etcetera, information. Yet strategies do not occur in a vacuum, but rather
possess geographical and spatial context. This section overviews these contexts using de
Certeau’s (1984, p. 117-118) concept of place and Goffman’s (1963, p. 101) themes of back,
civil, and forbidden.

119
The concept of place28 is closely tied to strategies (de Certeau, 1984, p. 35-36). Cultural
institutions employ strategies to suggest appropriate practices and establish a specific, stable
place where they can occur (de Certeau, 1984, p. 35-36). Emerson identifies the Western Wall
in Israel as a place that reinforces gender as authentic practice:
I had short hair and a jacket and sweatshirt on. I went to the Western Wall, which is
divided by gender, and got called out that I was in the wrong section by someone in
Hebrew. As a masculine-of-center identified person in [my hometown], no one ever
gives me any trouble for that. Getting my choice of gender expressions smacked in my
face [made me think about] how I feel about my gender.
The religious institution of Judaism establishes the Western Wall as a place to pray. By dividing
the wall by gender, this place communicates that gender is binary and those desiring to pray
must authentically practice gender by having their bodies present as female or male. Further,
this presentation must be recognized as female or male by those who regulate entry.29
Emerson’s account represents what Goffman (1963, p. 101) regards as a forbidden
place. In his discussion of stigma, Goffman (1963, p. 101) notes that stigma operates
differently depending on one’s context. These contexts can be typified into three different
places or spaces (see the below Back, Civil, and Forbidden Spaces section for a discussion
of space): a) back, where an individual’s stigma is not discredited and other individuals share
their stigma, b) civil, where stigmatized individuals may be treated as if they are not discredited
when they are, and c) forbidden, where if an individual’s stigma is discovered, they will be
expelled from the community (Knowledge Claim 1.24). In Emerson’s case, she was visibly

28. While place as used in this section refers to geographic location, virtual environments also represent
“geographies of enablement and constraint'” (Law & Bijker, 1992, p. 301). Such enablement, referred to in this
research as affordances and constraints are discussed in the below RQ3. How Technologies Afford
Information Practices and RQ4. How Technologies Constrain Information Practices sections.
29. In 2015, a transgender woman was denied access to the wall since the way her body presented was not
recognized as either male or female. See http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4612205,00.html

120
recognized as not conforming to the expectations for gendered authenticity demanded by the
Western Wall and was told to leave the specific section she inhabited.
In the US, a lack of explicit cultural strategies regulating LGBTQ+ identities signify
the importance of place in determining how they are governed. As Mark states: “They passed
a law in [my state] saying that you don’t need to medically transition to legally change your
name or your gender. That new law [has] made my life a lot easier than it could have been a
year ago.” In his state, Mark can be recognized as male without engaging in authentic practices
mandated by other states, such as gender confirmation surgery. Living in a place that
recognizes his desired gender identity without requiring access to as many economic resources
assists Mark in attaining recognition of his desired identity expression. Such recognition proves
important for Mark, given his father’s imposed negative enforcement mechanism of cutting
Mark out of the family’s insurance upon learning of his transgender identity. Both concepts
espoused by Goffman (1963, p. 101) and de Certeau (1984, p. 117-118) were combined to
provide a typology of places in the coding scheme (see Appendix F: Final Codebook).
Back Places
Despite places being created by, and conduits of, cultural strategies, data analysis indicates that
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities could locate back places to practice their desired identities
(Knowledge Claim 1.26). Colleges and universities represent examples of back places. As
Casey recalls:
When I did decide to use “queer” [to describe myself], I did it in a college environment.
I [did not have] to go out of my way to research [queer] because I was surrounded by
it. My school had a lot of queer and LGBT academic production. I was exposed to
some pretty key people in terms of picking and choosing what I felt [was] relevant.
Casey has access to physical infrastructure, i.e., a college and its resources, as well as wise
cultural insiders, i.e., professors, who did not discredit, but rather encouraged, LGBTQ+
identity expressions. Other strategies exercised within the back place also engendered these

121
expressions and include accepting LGBTQ+ identified students, hiring faculty engaged in
LGBTQ+ academic production centered on LGBTQ+ identities, approving LGBTQ+
themed courses, etcetera. By accessing the physical infrastructure of a college, Casey could
receive information relevant to their queer identity in a sustained way. For instance, Casey
could come back to specific buildings that fostered LGBTQ+ academic production multiple
times to get more information; something not possible in other, less temporally bound
contexts, such as an LGBTQ+ meet-up group.
Other places identified as back places include radical bookstores, LGBTQ+ centers,
and cities and towns that are ideologically liberal and have LGBTQ+ enclaves, such as a
“gayborhood.” Yet all back places belong to larger geographic contexts that may be less
welcoming to individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Cultural and social group strategies, such
as gentrification, or university or college policies that stifle LGBTQ+ identity expressions,
threaten to permeate back places. Therefore, while such places experience more stability than
back spaces (discussed in the below Back, Civil, and Forbidden Spaces section), they remain
subject to change or even dissolution due to cultural and social group strategies because they
depend on these strategies to attain their status as place (Knowledge Claim 1.25).
Forbidden Places
The strategies imparted by forbidden places encourage authentic practices that erase
LGBTQ+ identity embodiment and visibility completely. Examples of forbidden places
identified by participants vary in scale and include countries, states, towns, neighborhoods,
libraries, workplaces, and churches. Such places erase LGBTQ+ visibility by imparting
enforcement mechanisms. As Whitney recalls from several years ago: “When I was in North
Carolina, I was on a street with the girl who I was dating, holding hands. We walked past a
church and people threw rocks at us. Literally. I still have a scar on my leg where people threw

122
fucking rocks at us. It was horrifying.” Violence colors the enforcement mechanisms of
forbidden places. It explains why participants use words like “scared” or “unsafe” to describe
them. This violence can be literal, such as throwing rocks at a same-sex couple, or it can be
symbolic (Bourdieu, 1984b, p. 109; 1990, p. 125-133; Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992).
Symbolic violence manifests when individuals with LGBTQ+ identities literally
embody strategies imparted by forbidden places (Bourdieu, 1984a, p. 109; 1990, p. 125-133;
Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). Consider the following 2016 Question-Best Answer pair:
Q: I’m going to Catholic High School next year and am scared because I’m gay. How
is it going to be?
A: If I were you, I think it would be safer not to tell anyone that you’re gay. I have
many friends at Catholic schools and colleges that keep it secret. Not saying everyone
will hate or bully you. It’s just that a lot of my friends made the decision to keep it
secret to be safer. If you do choose to “come out” it will lead to some problems. Your
safest bet is to not tell anyone for a while until you’re sure they are going to accept
you.
In this exchange, the asker does not have a choice regarding whether they can attend Catholic
High School. Their recognition that practicing a gay identity at this school is forbidden
manifests in their embodied emotion of fear. The answerer suggests that to be safe, the asker
should keep their gay identity secret by practicing an authentically straight identity. To be
deemed straight involves neither disclosing one’s gay identity to others nor engaging in
information practices that may be recognized as gay, e.g., having a same-sex relationship, and
instead engaging in those recognized as straight. For example, Will recalls becoming “more
buttoned up” to cover “flamboyant,” “expressive,” and “dramatic” childhood practices
recognized by others as indicative of a gay identity.
Two interview participants (6%) considered libraries to be forbidden places. Stefan
had the following to say about their experience starting a new job in a public library:
Everybody calls each other “Miss.” “Miss” makes my skin crawl. I was like what about
“Mx?” I had to explain, trying not to out myself [that] it’s a gender-neutral title and it

123
makes me more comfortable than being called “Miss.” Then somebody told my
supervisor. She was like, “People won’t accept you if you don’t use an honorific. The
honorific is the invisible desk between you and [the user].” I was really upset. People
called me “Miss” all day long.
Stefan works at a library in a city most would consider ideologically very liberal. Further, others
may perceive the public library as, in Sage’s words, a “magical bastion of progressive
liberalism.” Yet the ideological values communicated by both city and library occlude strategies
that render these places forbidden for certain identities. Stefan does not have a choice
regarding their identity expression. They are forced to feel deeply uncomfortable by
conforming to the library’s strategy of establishing authority via an “invisible desk” between
librarian and library user. The lack of explicit strategies preventing Stefan from this discomfort,
coupled with the enforcement mechanism of being fired leaves Stefan in a situation where
they must be referred to and respond as “Miss” with no perceived recourse. As Stefan states:
“I’m not saying jack shit to anybody because they can fire me.”
While strategies within the library can produce its status as a forbidden place, so too
can the surrounding context permeating the library. When asked what role, if any, the library
could play in constructing a back place for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, Lauren
addressed the importance of recognizing such permeability:
[The state where I currently reside] happens to be the most extreme example of a place
where [if the library had visible LGBTQ+ services, collections, and spaces] there
would be backlash, which if anything could do more damage. I could imagine people
picketing the public library close to where I lived. I could imagine a closeted 23-year
old [seeing that and] being like, “Wow, this is worse than I thought.” The only reason
why I stop from fully saying yes [to visibility of LGBTQ+ identities in the library] is
[that] as sites of the production and maintenance of cultural ideas, it’s dangerous to
totally be insensitive to the micro-context.
Lauren’s account exemplifies the permeability of boundaries inherent even to proper places
like the library, as they are susceptible to strategies from the larger places and institutions of
which they are part. Halberstam (2005, p. 33-37, 70, 183-184) and Gray (2009, p. 89-91) discuss

124
the tensions between demands for LGBTQ+ visibility made at the cultural level and the places
where such demands can be actualized, i.e., liberal, urban areas. As their research and Lauren’s
account demonstrate, such demands cannot withstand places that do not support these
identity expressions.
Civil Places
While civil places do not explicitly forbid LGBTQ+ identities, they do not employ strategies
that foster their visibility. Sebastian recalls how her high school, “just kind of let the [gaystraight alliance] exist. [The school] didn’t really do much about it. It definitely didn’t get as
much support as say, a sports team.” Visibility constitutes a key characteristic determining civil
places. Even in places that seemingly accept LGBTQ+ identities, individuals may not have the
resources, such as geographical connectedness to other individuals with LGBTQ+ identities,
to attain the visibility expected of an authentic LGBTQ+ identity (Gray, 2009, p. 30). As an
answerer within a 2014 Question-Best Answer pair expresses: “Feeling like you’re the only gay
guy at school is very common, even in more accepting places.”
When participants discussed libraries, they most often described them as civil places
(n=11 sources, 34%; 33 total codes; Knowledge Claim 1.27). One can visit a library to access
LGBTQ+ materials, but their physical organization renders them less visible and couches
LGBTQ+ identities within a larger stigma discourse. Consider Sage’s description of issues
they encounter when visiting the library:
I think the biggest problem is that a lot of the materials feel hidden away. If they are
there, they are in the “Sexuality” section, which is a problem because I don’t really
want to go by… It’s stigmatizing the books when you put them in with the sex. And
so many times I’ve noticed that they’re scattered in different places. You might have
some under “Feminism,” you might have some under “Gender,” you might have some
under “Health Issues.” There’s not a central LGBT section. Nowadays, the library is
not somewhere I go to find information.

125
Despite the strategic rhetoric of diversity and inclusivity espoused by organizations, such as
the American Library Association (ALA),30 the library collocates books to areas that
communicate stigmatizing discourses to participants. Such discourses do not align with the
affirming fluidities and multiplicities participants attach to their own identity descriptions.
Further, by hiding LGBTQ+ materials away, the library makes Sage perceive LGBTQ+
identities as closeted and, therefore, invalid. Sage’s account bolsters an observation made by
Rothbauer (2010) that many individuals with LGBTQ+ identities reject the strategy of
closeting employed by libraries and realized in practices such as organizing collections. Even
for those who desire privacy when browsing resources, such as Sierra (see the above Cultural
and Social Group Strategies section) being able to see resources made visible as LGBTQ+,
rather than as “Sexuality,” “Feminism,” etcetera, is identity affirming and can convince
participants that the library is a safe, back place where they can engage in identity expression.
Summary of Key Findings
Strategies are inextricable from geographical place. By giving or withholding a specific place
to things – whether bodies, information sources, or bodies as information sources – strategies
produce a type of knowledge that describes how the world works and who exists within it.
Laverne Cox, a transgender actress, encapsulates this idea in a response to bathroom bills,
which seek to restrict bathroom use to those whose biological sex corresponds with their
gender identity: “These bills are not about bathrooms. They’re about whether transgender
people have the right to exist in public space. If we can’t access public bathrooms, we can’t go
to school, we can’t work, we can’t go to healthcare facilities” (CBS News, 2017).

30. See http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual/updatedpolicymanual/section2/diversity

126
The type of place one encounters can be described as back, civil, or forbidden. These
designations are context-dependent. For instance, a college may be perceived as a back place
for those with queer identities, but not for those who identify as transgender.31 Further, the
boundaries of co-located places experience variable permeability. In some instances, one can
locate a back place among many forbidden ones. In others, the properties of surrounding
places and cultural institutions seep, or threaten to seep, into the place in question, rendering
it difficult for back places to be established.
Data analysis indicates that participants cited back and forbidden places as most
influential to their information practices. One reason why participants less often discussed
civil places may be that they experience less visibility than back and forbidden ones, since civil
places do not adopt an explicit stance on how LGBTQ+ information practices are regulated.
Libraries were most often given the designation of civil places and in only one account
were described as back. While libraries ostensibly promote diversity and inclusion, their
strategies stigmatize and, in some cases, erase LGBTQ+ identities. As indicated by Sage and
Sierra’s accounts in this section as well as the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies
section, prior experiences with the library stuck with participants. Even an interaction viewed
as inconsequential by a librarian may have imparted symbolic violence onto an LGBTQ+
individual to the point where they would not choose to visit the library again. The individual
has imputed value to the library that mitigates their use of it over time.
However, changing the library’s strategies to create a back place does not present a
tenable solution. As indicated by Lauren’s account above, in contexts where boundaries
between places are permeable, these strategies might harm rather than help. Returning to the

31. For a recent example, see https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/magazine/when-women-become-menat-wellesley-college.html

127
recursive nature of insider/outsider dynamics, strategies always benefit certain individuals over
others. There must be an outsider, after all, for there to be an insider. Thus, one person’s back
place might be another’s forbidden one. Sage addresses this argument by asking the question:
“When you think about libraries as safe spaces, who are they safe for?”
RQ2. How Information Practices Shape Sociocultural Context
While strategies shape the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, these
individuals also exercise agency by appropriating these strategies to (re)produce sociocultural
context. This section overviews how this appropriation occurs by answering RQ2: How do
the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities produce context?
Specifically, this section discusses the practice of tactics, defined as the temporary seizure of
strategies to render desired meaning (de Certeau, 1984, p. 36-38). Tactics influence how
cultural and social group strategies can be appropriated and produce spaces in which these
appropriations occur. This section overviews the properties of tactics, their meaning to
participants, and how tactics produce spaces. The section concludes with a summary of key
findings.
Findings
The knowledge claims empirically derived from the data are listed below. The knowledge
claims for RQ2 are organized by etic and emic themes. For clarity, each knowledge claim is
parenthetically cited in the subsequent discussion when first mentioned. The knowledge claims
for RQ2 are:
2.1. Tactics cannot exist without strategies
2.2. Participants are not passive consumers of information
2.3. Participants are active agents in determining the relevance and meaning of their
information landscapes

128
2.4. Participants engage in tactics by appropriating strategies to achieve desired
information outcomes
2.5. Key tactics identified by participants are embodied practice, realness, and
information control
2.6. Embodied practice inspires participants to explore sexual and gender identities
outside those considered normative
2.7. Participants view information from formal sources as irrelevant to their embodied
experiences
2.8. Participants view information from cultural insiders as irrelevant to their embodied
experiences
2.9. Interpersonal sources who share participant experiences are considered more
legitimate than formal sources
2.10. Realness visibly disrupts strategies
2.11. Realness interrogates insider/outsider dynamics
2.12. Information control denotes participants’ knowledge of strategies as espoused by
their ability to creatively and deftly navigate them
2.13. By engaging in tactics, participants envision information practices as contextdependent
2.14. By engaging in tactics, participants envision information practices as individualized
2.15. Spaces constitute a temporary assemblage of practices
2.16. Spaces can be typified into back, civil, and forbidden
2.17. The space types (i.e., back, civil, forbidden) are context-dependent
2.18. Information grounds constitute back spaces
2.19. Spaces are immaterial

129
2.20. Spaces are overlaid on places
2.21. It is difficult for participants to locate certain spaces given they lack physical and
geographical permanence
Table 9 displays the major tactics theme and the sub-themes, ordered by prevalence of total
codes.
Table 9. Tactics Themes and Sub-themes.
Themes and Sub-themes Total Sources Total Codes
Tactics
32 (100%)
2,838
Embodied knowledge
32 (100%)
1,388
Information control
32 (100%)
391
Disclosure
25 (78%)
183
Secrecy
29 (91%)
133
Covering
20 (63%)
68
Deception
10 (31%)
33
Realness
32 (100%)
232
Creating meaning
29 (91%)
205
Consuming
27 (84%)
105
Producing
24 (75%)
100
Table 10 displays a summary of the number of sources and codes for the space theme and
sub-themes, organized by prevalence of total codes.
Table 10. Space Theme and Sub-themes.
Space Theme and Sub-themes Total Sources
Space
30 (94%)
Back
29 (91%)
Forbidden
23 (72%)
Civil
16 (50%)

Total Codes
178
96
54
38

Discussion
Tactics
The conceptual framework underlying this dissertation (see Conceptual Framework)
contends that individuals cannot escape strategies. Strategies can change over time, but they
structure society and thus always exist (de Certeau, 1984, p. xx). However, this contention

130
does not signify that individuals are without agency. Rather, individuals consistently
appropriate strategies and rework them to align with the meanings they assign to everyday life.
Consider Joanna’s description of their high school’s sex education program: “My school had
a pretty great sex ed. program. Even though it was very straight, I was like, ‘Ok it’s based on
a body.’ I could transfer that.” Akin to de Certeau’s treatment of reading (1984, p. xxi-xxii, p.
166-175), Joanna is not a passive consumer of information related to sexual health. Rather,
Joanna took the strategies of sexual health made visible to them and “transferred” these
strategies to their own body. While a strategy may communicate cultural and social discourses,
a tactic strips the strategy of this discourse and reinvents it as embodied knowledge
(Knowledge Claim 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4). While tactics also include production in the sense that
one produces knowledge by engaging in them, this production is often invisible. Therefore, it
was important for the researcher to have the interview participants as a data source, given that
interviews elicited critical incidents from participants to highlight these tactical practices.
Embodiment
As indicated by the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, strategies
(particularly at the cultural level) render LGBTQ+ identities as invisible, or, if visible, as
stigmatized. How then do those unaware of the multiplicity and fluidity of LGBTQ+ identity
expressions seek information given they have been led to believe this information is not real
or is dangerous to pursue? Data analysis indicates that participants rely on embodied practices
(Knowledge Claim 2.6). These practices denote knowledge obtained through the body and
personal experience (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. 146; Bourdieu, 1984c, p. 165-222; Lloyd, 2010).
Embodied practices are therefore innately linked to feelings and emotions, both of which have
been largely overlooked as viable practices within the LIS literature (see Dervin, 1999, p. 730;
Olsson, 2010). Consider Mark’s account detailing how he became aware of his transgender

131
identity: “When I was dreaming, my identity in my dream was as male instead of female. That’s
how I became aware that my narrative was as a male and then I realized that something was
off.” This account expresses a disconnect between strategy and tactic. A certain discourse is
articulated to Mark as a strategy – you are a female because you were assigned this category at
birth. However, this strategy does not match how Mark feels when dreaming. This sense of
difference, or something being “off,” was realized by Mark as a tactical, embodied response
to this strategy.
Another key feature of tactics is that they are creative. In Mark’s case, such creativity
was literal. What is more creative than what one dreams? In Jamie’s case, he practiced creativity
by taking inventory of his body’s responses to strategies when minimizing the appearance of
his breasts using a binder:
I’m a little heavier so when I have a binder it cuts in. If you’re a stick, it’s cut perfect,
but I’ve got a large chest. I wear three [binders]. I wear a t-shirt one, a muscle top one,
and then I wear the strongest one on top. It’s a tank top and makes me as flat as I
want. I don’t get cuts because the t-shirt one keeps it off my skin. That took me a long
time to figure out what to do.
Jamie had to be mindful of his body’s response to a binder that was not designed for him, but
rather for an archetypal “stick” body. Ultimately, he developed knowledge of how to make his
binder fit. Only Jamie has this knowledge (see discussion of bras in McGaw, 2003). The fact
that embodied knowledge is individualized challenges how individuals traditionally conceive
of knowledge from the top down (as per strategies). Instead, as Jamie’s account suggests,
knowledge can be developed within the individual, particularly if they are marginalized. As de
Certeau (1984, p. 37) notes, “a tactic is an art of the weak.” Much like strategies are subject to
tactical interpretations, information does not become knowledge until it is consumed, and
thus, actively reworked and reinterpreted by the “ordinary” (de Certeau, 1984, p. v) person.

132
Information Control
A connection exists between information practices and sharing. By engaging in information
practices, one also shares or does not share certain information related to their identities.
Information shared determines what is visible and what can be accessed: “To display or not
to display; to tell or not to tell; to let on or not to let on; to lie or not to lie; and in each case,
to whom, how, when and where” (Goffman, 1963, p. 42). Participants had to be tactical in
determining whether to disclose, when to disclose, and how to disclose (Knowledge Claim
2.12). Data analysis revealed four practices centered on sharing or not sharing: disclosure,
secrecy, covering, and deception (see Goffman, 1963).
Participants engaged in disclosure to be recognized by others as their desired identities.
For example, Diane states that disclosing her gay identity to others “made it real to me.” This
practice of disclosure represented a tactic since Diane could disclose on her own terms: “I’ve
told everyone I cared to tell that I’m gay. Other than that, I’m living my life and posting the
pictures [on Facebook] that I want. If you look at my [Facebook profile] I think it’s pretty
clear I’m in a relationship with another woman.” Diane does not feel forced to disclose, but
rather wants to be recognized as gay by those she “care[s] to tell.” She appropriates strategies
for those she does not care to tell. Specifically, Diane imparts the responsibility of determining
her LGBTQ+ identity to them, rather than engaging in the authentic practice of “coming out.”
To make this determination, individuals must engage in a series of strategies to recognize
Diane’s practices as “gay,” such as assigning certain relevance to the content she posts on her
Facebook profile. Diane might also be engaging in social steganography (boyd & Marwick,
2011; Marwick & boyd, 2014) by presenting information on her Facebook in a way that might
be recognized by those in the know as gay, while knowing that this presentation occludes such
recognition from others, e.g., “Look at that nice picture of Diane and her best friend.” While

133
in other contexts, such strategies might negatively impact how Diane perceives her gay identity,
in terms of disclosure, Diane depends on these strategies to obviate a “need” to disclose.
In other instances, participants weigh the perceived consequences of disclosure with
its benefits. For instance, Sierra disclosed her transgender identity to access hormones:
I was flat out broke. If I could have had everything go my way, I would have just
started hormones then told my parents much later. You could argue that’s not safe or
whatever, but that’s what I was going to do. Since I need[ed] money, I talked to my
mom first because she’s the one that always gives me money, but that required a whole
new step because it’s like, how do [I] tell her? What kinds of things can I expect?
Sierra’s need, rather than desire, to disclose her transgender identity emanated from two
explicit cultural strategies. First, to be recognized by others as her desired gender identity,
Sierra had to engage in a specific process of gender confirmation and elicit approval from
cultural insiders, such as a gender therapist. Second, due to the lack of federally mandated laws
requiring health insurers to pay for any treatments related to gender confirmation, attaining
these services is costly. What makes Sierra’s disclosure tactical is that she decided to disclose
after carefully weighing the consequences (see discussion of risk-taking, Chatman, 1996, p.
196-197). Sierra views such disclosure as beneficial since it provides her with resources
necessary to express her desired gender identity. Further, she set the parameters for when and
how the disclosure would occur and prepared herself by researching potential scenarios, or
things to expect. This account illustrates how strategies and tactics are intertwined. Sierra could
not fully escape from cultural strategies, so instead became aware of their constraints and made
informed decisions regarding the best ways to address them.
Disclosure also operates at the social group level. When social group insiders recognize
participants as LGBTQ+, such recognition can engender access to information about these
identities. As Cole recounts: “I was invited to this group. It was a bunch of older women [and]
I think they’re all lesbian identified. They invited me in and took me under their wing like,

134
‘Hey, you’re a baby butch.’” Like Diane’s account above, Cole’s account denotes how
disclosure does not only signify a verbal declaration. Rather, disclosure pertains to any
embodied practice recognized by others as indicative of an LGBTQ+ identity. Practices
related to self-presentation and dress represent disclosure practices and indicate to whom these
practices are visible. Those unfamiliar with the term, “baby butch,” for instance, would not
know how to recognize one. Thus, disclosure hinges on an individual’s knowledge of what
information others find relevant based on the meanings they assign to their everyday lives – a
marker of information value. Cultural outsiders possess a depth of knowledge and unique
perspective, given they are both painfully aware of knowledge made dominant by cultural
strategies, as well as that espoused by the social groups to which they seek membership.
Possessing both types of knowledge renders participants poised to tactically navigate the
everyday barriers to and challenges of identity expressions not considered or experienced by
cultural insiders.
Participants not only disclose to attain social group membership but also to be viewed
as a valuable information source within said group. As Casey states: “I run an LGBT archive
and research center. I have to say I’m queer all the time so that people don’t think I’m a
random straight ally who is fascinated by the queer community.” However, being visibly
LGBTQ+ is not an option or desire for everyone. The visibility required to access resources,
be invited to join a social group, or be identified as a valuable information source, is pitted
against the influence of cultural and social group strategies in determining who gets to be
visible. This tension can lead to situations where participants do not feel equipped to practice
information related to their LGBTQ+ identities. As Sage states: “There’s certainly a sense of
having to balance the safety of being anonymous with the fact that I can only get so much
information anonymously, or I can only express so much anonymously.” Therefore, disclosure

135
does not solely constitute an “information problem” (Lingel & boyd, 2013, p. 983) from the
perspective of what information is shared with whom. Given the complications centered on
LGBTQ+ visibility, disclosure also problematizes what information is available to participants
and whether those participants are envisioned as a valuable information source by others.
Participants may also not wish or feel the need to disclose their LGBTQ+ identities,
instead keeping them secret. Participants maintain secrecy via their tactical selection of
information sources. For instance, Eva explains why she preferred watching the lesbianthemed show, The L Word to using a search engine when researching her gay identity:
“Watching The L Word was easier because you’re not saying anything, you’re just watching a
show. You’re not making a statement or a question.” Eva’s concern with using a search engine
may emanate from her fear that others might discover her gay identity via her search history
or a desire to keep her gay identity a secret from herself.
However, Eva’s account cannot be concluded with that a blanket statement, such as
“LGBTQ+ television shows are most helpful to individuals when exploring these identities.”
Instead, resource choice is subject to the unique intersection of strategies and tactics, as well
as the places, spaces (see the below Back, Civil, and Forbidden Spaces section), and
technologies (see the below RQ3. How Technologies Afford Information Practices and
RQ4. How Technologies Constrain Information Practices sections), in which they are
exercised. While Eva may not prefer search engines to maintain secrecy, other participants like
Kyle relied on them exclusively:
I [wasn’t] restricted [in researching my transgender identity] because I had my own
computer. I wasn’t afraid someone would find my search history and I would have
consequences for that. I always felt free to type in whatever I needed or whatever
question I had.
Comparing these two accounts demonstrates that information resources cannot be mapped
definitively onto information practices. There exists no one “good” resource for a group of

136
individuals, whose individual, social, and cultural contexts are subject to such variance. Instead,
judging the quality of resources selected can only be made by analysis of all three contextual
levels.
Participants may also engage in a type of secrecy referred to as covering. Covering
entails working either individually or in concert with others to lessen the visibility given to
one’s LGBTQ+ identity or elements of it (Goffman, 1963, p. 124-127). For instance, Autumn
engaged in covering to be recognized by her parents as having a non-binary, non-cisgender
identity with the least amount of enforcement mechanisms applied:
I started identifying as genderfluid before I started saying I was trans. It was a term I
could use with my parents that they didn’t understand. When I say “transwoman” to
them, they think “tranny,” “transvestite.” They think, “You’re going to end up as a
prostitute, selling yourself behind dumpsters.” I wanted to avoid having that
association put on me because it would increase the intensity of their reaction. I didn’t
want them to think I was going to start taking hormones. When they said, “It was just
a phase,” for me that was safe. It meant that they were trivializing it, and when they
were trivializing it, they weren’t taking drastic action.
Autumn negotiated the costs and benefits related to the risk-taking inherent in disclosing her
non-binary, non-cisgender identity (Chatman, 1996, p. 196-197). To minimize the cost of
disclosure, which Autumn interpreted as an “intens[e] reaction,” while maximizing the desired
benefit of identity recognition, she disclosed as genderfluid. Autumn’s awareness of strategies
facilitated her decision-making, given she knew that her parents would likely trivialize this
identity category, rather than take “drastic action” in response to a transgender one. The
following 2014 Question-Best Answer pair provides another example of covering:
Q: I’m a closeted gay guy and met someone in college who is perfect for me. However,
I don’t know if he’s gay or not. How can I let him know I’m interested without outing
myself?
A: You need to be clever and give him a way to let you know if he’s interested without
putting him on the spot. Play a hypothetical “What if” game. Timing is important.
You’ll have to get him when he is open and wants to talk. When the time is right, ask:
“What would you do if you really liked someone, but were scared to approach them

137
because you were unsure how they felt?” At some point, he will get the idea that you’re
really talking about him. Once he figures that out and responds, that’s your answer.
In this account, the answerer carefully weighs the potential sanctions of disclosure against the
benefit of a relationship. The answerer employs their knowledge of strategies, specifically
regarding those governing interaction rituals (Goffman, 1967, p. 5-46), to create a hypothetical,
low stakes scenario, which will provide the asker with information while limiting the risk of
disclosure. This scenario also minimizes the extent to which the asker or the object of their
desire must acknowledge their LGBTQ+ identities.
A final facet of information control is deception, defined by Chatman (1996, p. 200201) as deliberately hiding one’s true condition by providing false or misleading information.
Data analysis suggests that deception does not always denote negative information outcomes.
Rather, individuals can engage in deception to ascribe new meaning to their identities.
Consider Jamie’s recollection of catfishing, a term popularized by a documentary and current
television series to describe “a person who sets up a false personal profile on a social
networking site for fraudulent or deceptive purposes” (“Catfish,” n.d.). When Jamie was
catfishing, he identified and was recognized by others as female, but wanted to explore a male
identity. He states: “[When] I was catfishing using male pictures, I would wake up and be like,
“Oh yeah, that’s not me. I can’t go to school and act the same way as at home [when
catfishing].” It was a lot of self-exploring, and figuring and finding out what [practicing a male
identity] was like.” Deception highlights how strategies render certain identities and
information as legitimate. Formal sources, namely the mainstream media, portray the practice
of catfishing as disingenuous and pathologized. The hosts of the recurring television series,
now entering its sixth season,32 play the role of detectives to sleuth out those who are

32. See http://www.mtv.com/shows/catfish-the-tv-show

138
catfishing, publically identify them on national television, and then pathologize some aspect
of their narrative, e.g., childhood trauma or bullying, to explain their motivations for catfishing.
But Jamie’s account does not suggest that he interpreted this experience as a negative one or
indicative of there being anything wrong with him. Rather, catfishing was a way for Jamie to
express his identity in response to the strategies and forbidden places that delegitimized it. By
catfishing, Jamie could attain embodied knowledge of what it was like to inhabit a male identity
and be recognized by others as male, without incurring enforcement mechanisms he would
encounter elsewhere.
Realness
Participants who assigned meaning to their identities based on their embodied knowledge
facilitated realness. Realness is defined as the process of individualizing an identity category in
a way that “embraces more hybrid possibilities for embodiment and identification” than the
authenticity demanded of the category by cultural and social group strategies (Halberstam,
2005, p. 54; Gray, 2009, p. 121-176).33 Realness represents a specific type of tactic (Knowledge
Claims 2.5). It not only appropriates, but also showcases the instability of identity categories
(see Butler, 1990). For instance, Kristen denotes taking pleasure from successfully passing as
straight: “Part of me likes to fly under the radar. I think I pass for straight pretty well and I
like that. Cause it’s like, ‘Oh surprise, you’re not what I want.’” Kristen appropriates the
authentic practice of passing, derived from a larger cultural strategy of heterocentricity, to
make visible the instability of a straight identity category. Kristen’s practice of realness

33. The phrase “realness” originates from the ball scene in 1980s New York, documented in the film Paris is Burning.
In this context, realness was defined as emulations of identity categories, such as executive realness and military
realness. As drag queen Pepper LaBeija explains: “To be able to blend – that’s what realness is” (Livingston,
1990). However, realness does not approximate performance nor an imitation. Rather, “it is the way that people,
minorities, excluded from the domain of the real, appropriate the real and its effects… the term realness offsets
any implications of inauthenticity… realness actually describes less of an act of will and more of a desire to flaunt
the unpredictability of social gendering” (Halberstam, 2005, p. 51).

139
demonstrates that “straight” does not represent an innate identity only available to cultural
insiders. Thus, realness represents a tactical practice that places the power of strategies and
insider/outsider dynamics into question (Knowledge Claims 2.10, 2.11).
Participants practice realness at both cultural and social group levels. While more
media representations exist of LGBTQ+ identities as compared to past decades, they do not
reflect all possibilities of LGBTQ+ identity expression (Gray 2009, p. 121-176). As discussed
in the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, strategies render certain
LGBTQ+ identities authentic and afford them visibility. Strategies also determine what
practices are indicative of an authentic identity category. Kyle interprets these practices as a
“short-order bill or shopping list,” indicative of his ability to be recognized as transgender by
others. Jamie describes some of these practices in his account of realness:
After a while I started trying to go about [exploring a transgender identity] by [asking],
“How do I do this right?” I’m very different from a lot of trans guys that I know and
have talked to. I’m not out there with it. I’m more laid back. A lot of people have
issues getting jobs and stuff and I haven’t. Even with “coming out”. Am I doing it
right? I did try and figure out a right way to do [my transgender identity], a wrong way
to do it. Eventually I realized my way was the right way for me, even if it wasn’t the
right way for somebody else.
The authentic practices for transgender individuals identified by Jamie include affording
visibility to one’s transgender identity expression by being “out there with it,” experiencing a
shared set of barriers like “hav[ing] issues getting jobs,” and disclosing one’s identity to others
by “coming out.” Initially, Jamie conformed to these practices, but over time decided they did
not fit his own embodied knowledge. Ultimately, Jamie concluded that there is no one “right”
way to practice a transgender identity. Instead, the knowledge Jamie derived from his own
embodied practices informed a unique, right way to be transgender, specific to him. In this
example, Jamie practices realness by adopting a transgender identity category while
simultaneously rejecting certain expected facets of it. Simply by existing, Jamie represents a

140
disruption to authentic transgender identity practices, which questions the salience of this
identity as monolithic.
Since participants rely on individual embodiment it can be difficult for them to
evaluate outside information since it does not fully match their lived experience (Knowledge
Claims 2.13, 2.14). Merton (1972, p. 13-16) refers to this phenomenon alternatively as
“extreme insiderism,” “extreme insider doctrine,” and “total insider doctrine,” and contends
that if one defines legitimate knowledge solely based on embodiment, it can shut off
information sharing and exchange. Chatman (1996, p. 205) also observes extreme insider
doctrinism within insider/outsider dynamics of the information poor: “Theorists debating an
insiders/outsiders worldview assume that it refers to ‘us’ against ‘them’ rather than an ‘I’ and
everyone else is ‘them.’” Data analysis suggests that participants recognize this tension and
approximate information provided by others to their own, unique context. Consider Rihanna’s
description of how she evaluates information related to queer identities:
What I look for is a depth of analysis and the ability to hold contradiction. An ability
to see how queer experiences [are] intertwined with lots of things like historical
contexts and class politics. [The] kind of stuff I look for is not just a description that
seems very closed or self-contained about someone’s experience or way of being in
the world, but is able to say something or do something or show something that
acknowledges complexity and opens up other questions.
This account suggests that Rihanna is not closing herself off to outside information, but rather,
her expectation for this information is to embrace the messiness of context rather than
condensing identities into a monolithic set of practices or a single solution. Since formal
information sources and cultural insiders do not fulfill this expectation (Knowledge Claims
2.7, 2.8), participants take it upon themselves to create meaning that captures this complexity.
Creating Meaning
Creating meaning denotes the tactical practice of using information to exercise ownership over
one’s reality (Chatman, 1996, p. 195). Individuals create meaning via production and

141
consumption. Production involves the creation and sharing of a material object, whether
physical or digital (for a discussion on digital materiality, see the below RQ3. How
Technologies Afford Information Practices section) representative of an individual’s
embodied knowledge. Participants perceive a gap in information that their embodied
knowledge can fill and produce information to fill this gap. Examples of such content
produced, described by participants, include comic books, Instagram pictures, Question-Best
Answer pairs, fan and slash fiction, and an LGBT archive. Consider Cole’s motivations for
and production of YouTube videos about female masculinity:
Instead of just viewing content, I started making my own content. On YouTube, I
didn’t find a lot of female masculinity [videos] so I was like, “I’m going to try and make
a video a week.” I ended up doing that for two years. Looking back and re-watching
[the videos I can] be like, “Oh yeah, I’ve evolved past that or I’ve taken how I think
about myself in a different direction.” It’s an interesting ongoing thing when I take the
time to re-watch [and] was super helpful to work through some stuff.
Cole not only produces content, but also consumes it (de Certeau, 1984, 1984, p. xxi-xxii, p.
166-175). Over time, Cole reinterpreted past experiences conveyed by her YouTube videos
with her present knowledge lens. By engaging in this practice of production and
(re)consumption, participants envisioned their identities as continuous. They did not go
through some radical change of being at one key moment in their lives, but rather are
constantly subject to a process of becoming (Dervin, 1999, p. 730, footnote 5; Dervin, 2003,
p. 116). As Rachel states: “There’s no such thing as fully transitioned. Let’s say I wanted
surgery. That’s not the end of me changing as a human being. We’re not static. I’m constantly
changing my worldviews when I get new information.” This observation has implications for
LIS research that envisions LGBTQ+ identity formation as proceeding in a series of static,
linear stages, with a set of predefined information needs (see Hamer, 2003). Instead,
individuals are subject to both the messiness of a context and constant (re)consumption and
(re)production (see Dervin, 2003). While it might not be possible to capture context since it is

142
not static, theoretical frameworks that account for the fluidity and messiness of context can
better address its complexity rather than condensing LGBTQ+ identities into a preordained
model.
Yahoo! Answers participants consistently produce and consume meaning by sharing
and exchanging information.34 Consider the following 2014 Question-Best Answer pair:
Q: I’m a 15-year-old girl who wants to be a man. After seeing gay male couples and
how they have sex, I’ve decided that I really want that. I find it so attractive to consider
myself a man who is in love with another man. The only problem is that I am a girl
and am not sure what to do. I’ve told my parents, but they say I shouldn’t be stupid.
A: The first step is to look for gender therapists in your area. There’s a user in this
thread that finds these questions and provides links. Here is one [provides link to
previous Yahoo! Answers thread]. Scroll down and look for [user name].
The asker indicates the importance of embodied knowledge in solidifying their desires, both
sexual and related to gender identity. By consuming the practice of gay couples having sex
(presumably in pornography), the asker produces meaning by desiring and wishing to be
desired as male. The answerer provides a series of “steps” or authentic practices that the asker
must undergo to adopt their desired identity, reiterating that strategies produce perceptions of
a “right” way to express an identity (see above Cultural and Social Group Strategies
section). The answerer also references another member of the LGBT thread who compiles a
list of resources for questions related to this topic. This practice denotes the importance of
formal sources, such as gender therapists, being reworked and reinterpreted by social group
insiders who share the same experiences and affinities to be considered trustworthy.
Social group insiders could also validate how participants produce LGBTQ+ identity
expressions. Eva describes a reddit thread discussing drag identities as: “Helping me get my

34. Sharing and exchange represent two distinct information practices. Sharing denotes an active offering or
distribution of information with no expectations for reciprocity, whereas with exchange this reciprocity is
expected (Burnett et al., 2014).

143
gay chops. I was able to talk about [my identity] so freely on my reddit.” Eva’s use of the
phrase “gay chops” suggests the importance of a shared sense of experiences and practices in
fostering her gay identity development. To some degree, Eva imagines this shared sense
(Sender, 2004, p. 5; Anderson, 2006). Certainly, not all information practices centered around
a gay identity can be distilled to a clearly articulated skillset of “chops.” However, Eva’s ability
to contextualize gay identity expressions within reddit threads helped her to practice “doing”
this identity by both consuming, i.e., seeing herself within, and producing, i.e., expressing her
identity, information (see Butler, 1990; Gray, 2009).
Social group insiders who shared common experiences were viewed by participants as
having more legitimacy than cultural insiders. Jamie exemplifies this finding when explaining
his participation on a Tumblr forum for transgender men: “It wasn’t a doctor who knew
nothing about [being transgender] giving you advice, it was people already living it.” Although
doctors represent cultural insiders who sign off on the authenticity of certain transgender
identity expressions, Jamie does not identify a doctor as a valued information source to consult
regarding issues related to transgender identities aside from providing access to resources.
Unlike Sierra’s experience with the library (see above Cultural and Social Group Strategies
section), Jamie does not necessarily mistrust doctors. Rather, he envisions them as devoid of
the collective experience produced and consumed within a male, transgender social group,
which would render them as relevant sources.
Summary of Key Findings
Findings indicate that participants do not passively adopt and conform to strategies. Rather,
participants represent active agents who locate opportune moments to creatively appropriate
and navigate strategies that achieve desired information outcomes. Such tactics include
embodied practice, in which participants locate knowledge within their experiences, feelings,

144
and bodies. They compare these embodied practices to strategies in establishing points of
difference, which then motivate them to explore sexual and gender identities outside of those
considered normative at the cultural and social group levels. By exploring such identities,
participants engage in realness by providing visible disruptions of strategies, challenging their
unquestioned assumptions. Because of embodied and realness practices, participants
recognize the messiness of context as it applies to individual identities and take it upon
themselves to create meaning that captures such complexity.
Participants create meaning via production and consumption, both of which are
active. To produce meaning, participants identify gaps in their current information landscape
that they contend their embodied knowledge can fill and then create information
representative of this knowledge. Participants also consume information, including their prior
experiences, as well as the experiences of others, and apply this information to their present
situation. Although participants recognize the complexity inherent to LGBTQ+ identities,
they did seek out interpersonal sources who shared a series of experiences and affinities. These
sources were viewed by participants as having more legitimacy than cultural insiders.
What information participants share about themselves and how they share this
information impacts what is visible and what can be accessed. Data analysis revealed four
practices of information control centered on sharing or not sharing: disclosure, secrecy,
covering, and deception. For each practice, participants had to negotiate between its costs and
benefits and choose the most appropriate response. Such negotiation influenced the language
participants used to describe themselves and their source selection. While research on risktaking related to disclosure or lack of disclosure has been framed as self-protecting
mechanisms (Chatman, 1996, p. 197, proposition 4), participants envisioned such information
management as facilitators of embodied practices; these information management practices

145
denoted participants’ knowledge of strategies as espoused by their ability to creatively and
deftly navigate them.
Back, Civil, and Forbidden Spaces
In addition to places, individuals produce spaces that afford alternate means for information
interactions. Space represents a “practiced place” (de Certeau, 1984, p. 117) representative of
the various actors, actions, systems, agendas, etcetera within. Given their temporality and lack
of proper place, spaces foster tactics. The place of Stephanie’s college becomes a space when
she refers to it as “queer central.” Suddenly, the physical infrastructure, which suggests certain
practices, disappears, and instead becomes a space characterized by the queer tactics exercised
within. Thus, individuals do not need access to infrastructure to change a space, but only need
the ability to practice tactics (Knowledge Claim 2.15).
Much like places, data analysis indicates spaces can also be described by Goffman’s
(1963, p. 101) typology of back, civil, and forbidden (Knowledge Claim 2.16). This finding
indicates that neither space/place nor tactic/strategy binaries are innately “good” or “bad.” In
some contexts, cultural strategies produce back places that affirm participants’ desired
identities, whereas in others, tactics produce forbidden spaces for certain identity expressions
(Knowledge Claim 2.17).
Back Spaces
Unlike places, spaces are not characterized by geographic location or access to infrastructure.
To typify a space, one must consider how well the practices characterizing the space align with
an individual’s desired identity expression. Consider Rihanna’s description of a back space:
“When I walk into a queer situation, the premise [is] that there’s like a lot less explaining [that]
I have to do. There’s a mutual understanding in a lot of senses, even though people come
from different backgrounds.” When describing this back space, Rihanna does not give it a

146
proper name or location. In the context of her quote, this space is merely ideological. It serves
as a representation for the shared characteristics of situations she has been in before that have
affirmed her queer identity. Therefore, spaces may not be “real” in the sense that participants
have experienced them or are currently experiencing them. Rather, they represent what
participants think might be possible for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. This statement
does not suggest that back spaces are merely illusory. As Eva’s discussion of “gay chops” and
Mark’s dreaming (see above) denote, what is ostensibly “imagined” sometimes constitutes the
“real.” This observation expands the notion of what represents “proper” information practices
and contexts in which these practices occur from reading in libraries to dreaming up queer
situations (Knowledge Claim 2.19).
However, this contention does not signify that back spaces are not actualized.
Examples of back spaces provided by participants include communal living spaces, themed
nights at bars or clubs, academic conferences, activism events, and retreats. Amina recounts
the importance of back spaces created by black queer women:
In [the place I used to live], I had some pushback on my identity and had to be closeted,
but it was also the space where I found the most queer community. [I joined] an
organization started by black queer women. They have a monthly group where they
get together and have a potluck. They put questions in a hat and you answer them, and
have food, party, and dance. Out of the places I [have] lived, [that was] where I found
the most community at the same time [I had] to tone down my sexuality.
Amina explores the duality of place and space in this account. Spaces are less subject to
strategies, giving them a key advantage over places. It is precisely because spaces do not have
well-defined boundaries due to their lack of geographic and physical structure that they can
exist, even within a forbidden place (Knowledge Claim 2.20). While Amina had to “tone
down” her sexuality in response to demands made by the forbidden place, she simultaneously
could explore her queer identity within a back space that appropriated the former’s location

147
and infrastructure. Like tactics, spaces are also creative, temporal and invisible, unless one
knows where to look (Knowledge Claim 2.21).
Back spaces also provide participants with serendipitous opportunities to engage in
information practices related to their LGBTQ+ identities. Casey recalls how entering a punk
subculture validated their genderqueer identity:
In high school, I came across no-wave, which were the Dadas of the punk world.
Really into performance art and experimental sound. Also, really fucking queer. When
I started to dress ugly, which is what I called it, I had a whole bunch of artists and
subcultures behind me who could support my desire to have short hair, and wear
cowboy boots, long dresses that were cut in weird places, and weird necklaces. Things
that didn’t match but I felt good wearing.
Casey’s description of their entry into punk subcultures parallels Pettigrew’s (1998, 1999; see
also Fisher, Durrance, & Hinton, 2004) theory of information grounds, which represent
temporary settings, e.g., a punk rock show, where individuals gather for purposes other than
information seeking. Within information grounds, individuals share information informally
and what and how information is applied depends on the participant’s specific context
(Pettigrew, 1998, 1999; Fisher, Durrance, & Hinton, 2004). Information grounds, therefore,
represent a space, rather than a place, given that the information produced within them does
not have a shared context, but rather one subject to individualized meanings and experiences.
In Casey’s account, these meanings and experiences manifested by the implicit social group
tactics of no-wave punk supporting Casey’s practice of “dressing ugly” to express their
queerness (Knowledge Claim 2.18).
Forbidden Spaces
Like the back spaces, forbidden spaces also operate on an ideological level. Consider how
Campbell defines forbidden space: “It was really hard when I was a kid to be queer. Someone
hadn’t created that space yet. The space that was created for me was tomboy. It’s not even
encouraged, but it’s accepted up until a certain point and then parents, strangers, and teachers

148
start putting their foot down.” Like Rihanna, Campbell envisions space to describe a horizon
of available identity expressions, rather than something specific or actualized. As discussed in
the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, strategies produce and are
produced within proper places. Unlike places, which are created and controlled by cultural
insiders, spaces are produced by tactics. These spaces belong to the individual, rather than the
institution. But strategies can produce spaces if employed by those who are personally invested
in maintaining them. A parent does not necessarily want their child to experience negative
enforcement mechanisms like ridicule for not presenting as their gender, for example. These
spaces are intellectual and philosophical, representing the social organization of knowledge.
Much like in Science and Technology Studies (STS), which blur the relationship between the
material, i.e., technology, and immaterial, i.e., sociocultural context (see discussion of speed
bumps, Latour, 1994, p. 38-41), the concepts of space and place also blur this relationship.
Civil Spaces
Like places, civil spaces only accept certain LGBTQ+ identities and identity expressions.
While the characteristics of spaces in some cases lend themselves to fostering more fluid and
affirmative LGBTQ+ identity options and expressions, the practices occurring within spaces
are fleeting and situational. There exists no guarantee that a specific space will reappear or, if
it does, that the dynamics within the space will be the same. For this reason, participants may
enter a space they thought would have back characteristics, but end up in a civil, or even
forbidden one instead. As Rose recalls:
I was talking to my friend who was involved with [gay straight alliance]. She said, “You
should come, it would be good for you.” I went to one of the meetings and the advisor
wasn’t there that day. There was this underclassman girl running the meeting and she
aggressively said, “Everyone go around and tell us your sexuality.” I felt that it wasn’t
the type of environment I wanted to be in and that I had to defend [or] explain to her
[who I was] when I didn’t even know myself. It didn’t feel safe.

149
Gay straight alliance (GSA) meetings do not have a proper location. Rather they occur within
places, such as in classrooms or auditoriums. While one could expect to attend GSA meetings
with some regularity, the spaces in which these meetings occur are subject to infrastructural
and institutional constraints, which could threaten to curb them at any moment. Since the
space in which a GSA meeting occurs lacks the regularity ascribed to a place, Rose experienced
a situation where the advisor was absent and the meeting was run by an underclassman. The
disclosure practices this underclassman advanced made Rose feel as if she might be putting
herself at risk if disclosing a fluid, rather than static identity category. This account also
exemplifies the finding that having access to LGBTQ+ resources, in this case interpersonal
ones, does not necessarily signify a positive information outcome. Instead, Rose was subject
to the temporal, fleeting nature characterizing spaces, which in that moment did not produce
an identity affirming context.
Summary of Key Findings
Unlike places, spaces lack access to a proper, geographic location and infrastructure. Instead,
spaces constitute a temporary and fleeting assemblage of practices. Such complementarity
exists between spaces and tactics given the ephemerality of the space and its lack of location.
In some cases, spaces constitute information grounds, which participants serendipitously
stumble upon and find to be identity affirming. In others, spaces temporarily appropriate
geographical and infrastructural resources, such as monthly queer activism meetings. Yet in
others, spaces occur in private places, such as one’s home. These characteristics allow spaces
to be (re)produced by participants and envoke desired meaning for their LGBTQ+ identities.
Given the fleeting and ephemeral nature of spaces, there is no guarantee that an
individual can locate the same space again. Further, since spaces are not connected to the
material, i.e., geographic location or physical infrastructure, they also may be immaterial

150
productions of ideological space. Such spaces represent horizons of possibility for individuals,
which in some instances can be identity affirming, while in others can close off certain identity
expressions if the space has not yet been created for them.
RQ3. How Technologies Afford Information Practices
This section discusses findings for RQ3, which asks: What is the role of technology, namely
social media websites, if any, in affording information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities? Although the researcher thought that social media websites would constitute the
predominant technology discussed among individuals with LGBTQ+ identities based on prior
research (see Hillier & Harrison, 2007; O’Riordan & Phillips, 2007; Bond, Hefner, & Drogos,
2008; Gray, 2009; Pullen & Cooper, 2010), data analysis revealed a major finding that
participants cited search engines as an important tool for their information practices.
Therefore, search engines along with social media websites, comprise the findings for RQ3
and RQ4 since interview participants exclusively mentioned these two online technologies.
Further, the researcher sampled the other data source, Question-Best Answer pairs, from the
social media site Yahoo! Answers.
Findings
The knowledge claims empirically derived from the data are listed below. The knowledge
claims for RQ3 are organized by etic and emic themes. For clarity, each time a knowledge
claim is introduced in the subsequent discussion, it is parenthetically cited. The knowledge
claims for RQ3 are:
3.1. Participants cite search engines as an important tool that affords their information
practices
3.2. What constitutes an affordance is based on what participants find as relevant and
meaningful within their everyday lives

151
3.3. What constitutes an affordance is rooted in sociocultural context
3.4. A key affordance of online technologies is connecting participants to others sharing
their LGBTQ+ identities
3.5. A key affordance of online technologies is features that allow participants to
consume and produce visual evidence of embodied knowledge
3.6. A key affordance of online technologies is that they provide access to sources
outside formal channels of peer production
3.7. A key affordance of online technologies is that they can be used by participants to
engage in embodied practices
3.8. A key affordance of online technologies is that they can be used by participants to
circumvent strategic demands for authenticity
3.9. A key affordance of online technologies is that they can assist participants in
controlling what information is shared about their LGBTQ+ identities
Table 11 (see next page) displays main themes and sub-themes coded as affordances.
Table 11. Affordance Themes and Sub-themes.
Affordance Themes and Sub-themes Total Sources
Affordance
31 (97%)
Linking to similar others
27 (84%)
Information access
22 (69%)
Identity expression
21 (66%)
Curation
17 (38%)
Anonymity
8 (25%)
Privacy
9 (28%)
Convenience
5 (16%)

Total Codes
200
86
60
51
26
16
11
7

Discussion
The immaterial characteristics of both places and spaces complicate their reduction to
bounded areas (see Graham, 1998). Both place and space (re)produce practices and take on
different meanings, i.e., back, civil, and forbidden, depending on the subject inhabiting them.

152
Geographic place can also be transcended by space. For these reasons, the relational elements
of both place and space must be considered as “articulated moments in networks of social
relations and understandings rather than as areas with boundaries around” (Massey, 1993, p.
66).
This section and the subsequent one, RQ4. How Technologies Constrain
Information Practices, examine another type of space: cyberspace. Cyberspace is defined as
“a multi-media skein of digital networks which is infusing rapidly into social, cultural and
economic life” (Graham, 1998, p. 165). To address RQ3 and the next question, RQ4, the
researcher employs a sociomaterialist viewpoint. This viewpoint adopts a middle-ground
between technological determinism, which purports that technology shapes society, and social
constructionism, which contends that society shapes technology, to suggest that technology
and society are inextricable and co-constituted (see Latour, 2005; Gillespie, Boczkowski, &
Foote, 2014; Leonardi, Nardi, & Kallinikos, 2014). The relationship between technology and
society is not bi-directional as this approach assumes that both actors have distinct influences.
Rather, the technological and societal engage in a “constitutive entanglement” of bodies,
objects, spatial arrangements, and practices (Orlikowski, 2007, p. 1437).
The concept of constitutive entanglement parallels the treatment of place and space in
the above Back, Civil, and Forbidden Places and Back, Civil, and Forbidden Spaces
sections. Findings indicate that bodies, objects, spatial arrangements, and practices intertwine
to determine the meaning participants apply to their LGBTQ+ identities. This section
explores how these concepts are (re)produced by technology using the lens of affordances.
Affordances constitute the materially-based construction and features of a technology that
suggest the use to which it should be put (see Norman, 1999; Latour, 2004; Gillespie,
Boczkowski, & Foote, 2014; Leonardi, Nardi, & Kallinikos, 2014; Baym, 2015). Affordances

153
can be actual and perceived (see Norman, 1999; Baym, 2015). For instance, an actual
affordance of the blogging site Tumblr is that one does not need to have an account to create
a profile. A perceived affordance of Tumblr is that one’s identity is anonymous on the site.
This affordance is perceived, rather than actual, since Tumblr and the other technologies used
to access it, such as one’s browser, collect information about an individual, which can
potentially be made visible by a data breach or if Tumblr voluntarily discloses this information.
Affordances, Linking to Similar Others
Data analysis denotes that participants envision online technologies as affording connection
with others like them (Knowledge Claim 3.4). This finding parallels prior research on
technology use for LGBTQ+ identity development (see Hillier & Harrison, 2007; O’Riordan
& Phillips, 2007; Bond, Hefner, & Drogos, 2008; Gray, 2009; Pullen & Cooper, 2010).
Consider Mark’s explanation for his preference of the photo-sharing site, Instagram
(https://www.instagram.com/)

and

video-sharing

site,

YouTube

(https://www.youtube.com/), compared to a library for practicing information related to his
transgender identity:
There’s something lonely about a library. I enjoy being able to go on social media and
having 400 people going through the same thing to use as resources instead of having
a book that can’t talk back. Having that video and visual evidence is much better.
[Using] social media, I’ve met up [in person] with a bunch of different trans guys. You
can’t find that in a library book. One of them is becoming my best friend. He’s my
resource. We can bounce stories off each other and sometimes it’s like, “Oh my gosh
that’s happened to my body, has it happened to yours?” and he’s like, “That’s ok that
happened to me too.”
A simplistic interpretation of this account would be that Mark prefers interpersonal resources
to the static, recorded information offered by the library. Such an interpretation discounts the
importance of features beyond the format of an object, such as practices, bodies, and spatial
arrangements. Considering the intersection of these factors, social media sites rely on social
networks through which to channel information flow. Features like the ability to “follow”

154
someone and recommendations of similar individuals to follow facilitate this affordance. Per
Mark: “Once you follow one person, [the site] comes up with more people you can follow.
You connect with them and that leads to more information.” These connections can be made
regardless of geographic location. Unlike libraries, social media sites are not necessarily
geographically bound,35 which circumvents some of the geographic dispersion of individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities and other physical barriers that might prevent them from convening
in person. However, Mark does not envision his engagement with other transgender men as
relegated to an online environment. Rather, he also envisions social media sites as affording
him the ability to connect with those geographically co-located. This finding echoes an
implication of Gray’s (2009) work: the boundaries between online and offline are blurred and
mutually reinforcing.
Photo and video-sharing sites like Instagram and YouTube afford Mark identification
with those who share similar embodied knowledge – a key marker of value among individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities (see the above Tactics section). Since Mark might have yet to
experience certain forms of embodiment, e.g., the effects of hormones, he can rely on a
diversity and variety of experiences from those sharing his male, transgender identity to feel
fully informed of the possibilities. Site features, such as the ability to upload evidence of one’s
embodied knowledge via videos and photos afford Mark the ability to determine whether one
represents a trusted source (Knowledge Claim 3.5).
The importance of verifying whether an individual represents a trusted source leads to
participant use of unexpected technologies in unanticipated ways. For instance, Sierra explains

35. Geographic place and online technologies can intersect, such as location-based dating applications like Grindr
(http://www.grindr.com/), a gay social network, or search engines used in a specific place, e.g., China, which
block the visibility of certain content.

155
why she used 4Chan (http://www.4chan.org/), an image-based bulletin board, to explore
information related to her transgender identity:
This is so weird because I hate 4Chan, they’re this misogynistic hellhole. [But] they
have an LGBT board and that board was useful. It was useful, but problematic. Since
everyone’s posting anonymously, you could have people who aren’t trans posting and
saying whatever it is they wanna say. You also have people who use tripcodes, which
[are] user names with passwords so that the person has an identity on the site. [It] is
weird for an anonymous site. But on that board and especially for the trans girls, there’s
more people with names than anonymous. Because it’s an image board, they’re posting
pictures of themselves in various stages of transition and often pre- and posttransition. That helps. It’s like, “Oh that looks like me or something I can do.” Their
stories carry more weight because even though it’s only one person’s experience and
they don’t have medical expertise, it’s still something that happened to them and it’s a
first-person source. That weighs a lot higher than anyone else.
Sierra’s account differed from the experiences of others who view 4Chan as an offensive site
(see Manivannan, 2013). Despite its reputation, 4Chan was considered useful by Sierra for
exploring information related to her transgender identity. 4Chan afforded the ability to post
pictures that documented embodied knowledge, making it so Sierra could consume these
pictures and recognize herself in them just as Mark had with other social media sites. 4Chan’s
tripcode feature also facilitated Sierra’s verification of people’s identities. Using this feature,
coupled with photos, Sierra could determine who constituted a trustworthy source, e.g., an
individual using a tripcode and posting pictures, versus an untrustworthy one, e.g., an
individual posting anonymously.
Aside from technological features, who used 4Chan’s LGBT board and how they used
it were also socially shaped. Certainly, other affordances of 4Chan can be used in the LGBT
board to render it unsafe or irrelevant for Sierra, such as individuals afforded anonymity on
the site posting vitriolic content to the board. However, the social group of “trans girls”
engaged in a shared set of information practices centered around collective conceptions of
meaning and relevance (Knowledge Claim 3.2). For this reason, participants reported that they
engaged with site features perceived to afford these practices, which became stabilized over

156
time. Thus, perceived and actual affordances can be mutually co-constitutive, rather than
mutually exclusive categories (Knowledge Claim 3.3).
Individuals who may not feel safe or compelled to disclose their LGBTQ+ identities
in offline contexts may disclose online due to the affordance of being linked to similar others.
Consider Amina’s rationale for her use of secret LGBTQ+ Facebook groups: “Of course it’s
not 100% safe, but you can find community with these different groups or pages that are for
specific facets of society.” Within Yahoo! Answers, both askers and answerers disclose
information about themselves, whether by creating a profile or providing an email address.
These practices are not safe, particularly since the LGBT thread is public. Yet rather than
attribute these practices to a lack of privacy literacy, one could also rationalize these practices
as necessary risks to capture the affordance of linking to like others.
Affordances, Information Access
Participants identified online technologies as affording access to information not found in
formal sources (Knowledge Claim 3.6). Stefan explains their preference for Google to access
information authored by individuals with LGBTQ+ identities:
I go to Google because that’s where people [are] writing. People who are writing on
queer stuff are queer people and you’re going to have an income and access problem.
You’re going to find stuff on blogs, Tumblr, [and] more niche sites because there’s not
the access to publishing to a research study, etcetera.
Unlike formal channels of production, such as a peer review system for research studies,
Google does not discern what it indexes.36 It thus affords an individual with access to
variegated information types, including information that exists outside of these formal
channels. Since individuals with LGBTQ+ identities do not have access to resources, e.g.,
economic and social capital, which would lend visibility to the information they produce, they
36. Aside from content indicated as not to be indexed, such as websites containing a robots.txt file.

157
can rely on self-publishing online using blogging platforms or image and video-based sites,
and disseminating access to, and visibility of, this information across social networks and via
search engines. Therefore, Stefan’s account not only signifies the importance of online
technologies as affording information access, but also affording access to resources for selfpublishing and sharing of information.
Access to self-publishing also facilitates obtaining up-to-date information on
LGBTQ+ identities. The reason why participants appreciate current information can be
explained by the value they place on embodied practices. Such practices are individualized and
subject to context. What constitutes embodied practice changes over time as more individuals
share these practices and social groups debate the meanings ascribed to them. Given that
information produced by formal sources undergoes a publishing process, by the time the
information is available, it is already irrelevant. For these reasons, participants like Autumn do
not think that cultural institutions like the library are relevant to individuals with LGBTQ+
identities:
The reason why I wouldn’t go to a library [for information on LGBTQ+ identities] is
that I’d expect to find more forward-thinking works online. I [don’t] think the people
who work at libraries have an inherent bias, but people publishing things can put them
up online themselves. [There’s no] time in-between.”
Affordances, Identity Expression
As discussed in the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, strategies limit
participants’ awareness of LGBTQ+ identities as well as the ability to communicate and
express them. Search engines allowed participants to type in anything and get results
(Knowledge Claim 3.1). This affordance is useful for individuals who lack the language to
express their identities and might not be able to locate information in search systems requiring
an articulated query. As Rose states: “Google’s great because you can type in a whole question.
I put in “Are you gay if you kissed a girl?” Questions like that, [which] were specific based on

158
my own experiences [in the hope] that something might come up that was similar.” Since Rose
did not know whether the label “gay” would be appropriate to describe her identity, she relied
on a blank search box, which visually afforded the perception that she was not restricted in
formulating her search query. She could literally type whatever she wanted. As a result, Rose
relied on the natural language query, “Are you gay if you kissed a girl?” When the researcher
asked Rose if she remembered what this query returned, she stated: “Mostly Yahoo! Answers.
People putting in whole questions that usually weren’t very helpful because anyone can answer
them and not all people are very intelligent or nice.”
This account exemplifies a key difference between perceived and actual affordances.
Via its simple design, Google offers the perception that participants can freely express their
identities by typing whatever they want into the search box. Yet as Rose suggests, the retrieved
results are not necessarily relevant; they are not envisioned by Rose to be trustworthy and
might stigmatize LGBTQ+ identities. Given that Google’s algorithm37 relies, in part, on a
match between keywords, as well as semantic and syntactic structures, Rose encounters
information that shares a similar structure but not her desired meaning.
Online technologies also afforded participants new ways to express their identities
online by attaining new forms of embodiment (Knowledge Claim 3.7). Jamie’s practice of
catfishing, addressed in the above Tactics section, provides an example. By catfishing, Jamie
could escape strategies confining his physical body to an undesired, female presentation. Jamie
appropriated strategies of authentic practice, namely the importance placed on pictures as
indicative of one’s authentic identity, to represent himself as male. He could accomplish this
practice given the disintermediation between online technologies and bodies. When going

37. See https://www.google.com/insidesearch/howsearchworks/algorithms.html

159
online, one has the potential to escape the corporeal, the literal “meatspace.”38 Jamie could be
recognized as male, and practice being male, in a way not afforded by civil and forbidden
places where his body was made visible (Knowledge Claim 3.8). Thus, Jamie’s account
supports arguments made by cyberqueer scholars of the potential for online technologies to
reshape embodiment and embodied practices (see Haraway, 1990; Wakeford, 1997, 2000,
2002).
Affordances, Curation
Online technologies afford participants the ability to curate, or direct the kind of information
made visible to them. Participants employ features on social networking sites, such as
“following,” “blocking,” and “hiding” to determine information relevant to their LGBTQ+
identities. These features inform an algorithm, which learns what information to curate in
future interactions. As Sarah’s account demonstrates, establishing such relevance depends on
one’s interpersonal networks:
As far as [the social networking site] Facebook [https://www.facebook.com/] goes,
my feed is curated by the people and pages I follow that are posting all queer stuff. I’m
not following Trump [and] all this hateful right wing [content]. Everybody has that.
Even if it’s not someone consciously thinking, “I am curating this for myself,” we are
every day. I’m seeking out the things that feel fulfilling. By virtue of that, I’m actively
not interact[ing] with information that I don’t want or that doesn’t align with my
identity and politics.
Social media sites like Facebook display content from trusted, interpersonal sources. However,
Sarah does not experience total control in determining how and what content she sees. The
algorithm that directs what is visible in Sarah’s feed yields such control and is subject to the
editorial biases of those behind the scenes, engineering it (see Manjoo, 2016). What Sarah
deems relevant information is reinforced by the content made visible to her, indicating that

38. See https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/meatspace

160
the Facebook algorithm plays a key role in determining the meaning Sarah ascribes to her
queer identity over time. Therefore, Sarah’s ability to curate information is both actual and
perceived.
To curate often requires technical skill. Consider Rachel’s description of building her
own crawler, i.e., code that indexes a defined set of websites, to curate her search results:
I didn’t use Google because their search aggregation would throw you a billion links
and you’d have to search through and find the best one. I used my crawler longer than
most people because it would find the best links. There was a lot of trans porn that
was just demeaning, there [were] a lot of stories of people getting murdered. I had to
refine what I wanted to search and what I was looking for.
Rachel’s crawler afforded her control of what content the crawler returned, and she could
refine this content over time. Such curation can be difficult to achieve due to the technical
skill and infrastructure required. Rachel needed to build a crawler, which requires being
knowledgeable of coding languages, as well as having the infrastructure, including a computer,
internet connection, and server to run it. Given the vast amount of resources published online
and the frequency in which they are updated, the more comprehensive one’s crawler, the more
technical knowledge and infrastructure one needs.
Affordances, Anonymity
Participants reported using online technologies to manage the visibility of their information
practices (Knowledge Claim 3.9). As addressed in the above Tactics section, participants
engaged in tactics to manage information provided about their LGBTQ+ identities. Online
technologies afforded new ways to manage this information. For instance, software such as a
Tor browser (https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html.en), affords anonymous
seeking, searching, browsing, etcetera. In other instances, participants perceived anonymity
affordances. Consider Eva’s rationale for why she used the online classified advertisements

161
website, Craigslist (https://newyork.craigslist.org/) rather than online dating site, OkCupid
(https://www.okcupid.com/) to meet women:
I was too afraid to put myself on OkCupid because that felt really big. The idea of
putting my photo up terrified me. I would more comfortably look at Craigslist
“Women seeking women” [advertisements] before [using] OkCupid because I was so
scared of revealing myself. When in reality, Craigslist is much more terrifying.
Eva perceives her anonymity as compromised by OkCupid making her picture visible. Given
that Craigslist does not require pictures, Eva felt comfortable browsing without her identity
being revealed. Yet Craigslist does not necessarily afford anonymity. Eva’s browser might be
tracking her search history, Craigslist could get hacked, or Eva might provide information,
such as a phone number or email address, which can be used by others to identify her. Eva
may be unaware of these potential breaches to her anonymity or she might just perceive a
picture as indicative of her “true” identity. After all, she equates posting a picture with
“revealing” herself.
Both Eva and Mark’s accounts address a perception held by several other participants
that one’s “true” identity is expressed by their body. Certainly, this perception is not only held
by individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Shows like Catfish exemplify the equivalencies
between authenticity and the body made by strategies. Yet given the importance of embodied
practice among individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, the body may be valued as the primary
means by which individuals denote their trustworthiness. Therefore, when someone like Eva
desires anonymity, she must weigh this desire with the perceived consequence of potentially
engaging with information or individuals not considered trustworthy, which is “terrifying.”
Affordances, Privacy
Privacy differs from anonymity in that the latter signifies that individuals do not have to
divulge identifying features, such as pictures or real names, to access information. With
privacy, individuals might divulge identifying information, but it is free from public attention.

162
Features such as the ability to create private profiles and groups engender information sharing
and exchange among social group insiders. For instance, Stefan regards their private account
on Twitter (https://twitter.com/), an online news and social networking site, as “where me
and all my super queer friends hang out.” Privacy afforded in online spaces can mitigate
unwanted visibility to the LGBTQ+ identity expressions of participants in civil or forbidden
places. As Campbell explains:
Queer shopping [is] easy to [do] online and find things that are your size. You don’t
have to go to a suit shop where an old man will judge you. It’s hard to go to the boy’s
section at Target and avoid eye contact with these moms wondering what you’re doing
in the children’s section.
Yet online and offline cannot be dichotomized into private and public, as other participants
identify online technologies as constraining their privacy (see the below RQ4. How Online
Technologies Constrain Information Practices section). Affordances do not only
represent a natural property of a technology, but also, much like strategies, they have features
that can be appropriated to fulfill a given task or goal. This task or goal is subject to context,
produced by strategies and geographic and spatial organization, and subject to one’s embodied
knowledge. In Campbell’s case, the discomfort they experienced (i.e., embodied knowledge)
entering civil and forbidden places (i.e., geographic and spatial organization) to shop for
gendered and age-specific clothing (i.e., cultural strategies) could be alleviated by privacy
afforded by online queer shopping.
Affordances, Convenience
Within the LIS literature, convenience represents a key technological affordance shaping
information practices, such as seeking and use (see Connaway, Dickey, & Radford, 2011).
Therefore, it may be surprising that convenience was minimally reported among participants.
As findings from data analysis demonstrate, participants find it difficult to locate visible,
affirming information about their LGBTQ+ identities. Participants thus may not have the

163
luxury of engaging in information practices that maximize convenience. However, participants
occasionally mention convenience, such as Amina’s explanation for why she uses Twitter as
an information source:
I love Twitter so much. It’s just faster. If somebody posts [information] on Facebook,
somebody posted it to Twitter like two hours ago. I can be up to date in a second. I
just read an article about how fucking Indiana passed anti-LGBT legislation [that
allows] businesses with four or less employees to discriminate. [I also see] stuff from
Black Lives Matter and [what’s happening] on campuses with black organizers. [I’m]
learning all kinds of stuff.
Twitter affords the rapid sharing and dissemination of content since it limits posts to 140
characters and allows non-reciprocal relationships, i.e., an individual can follow someone even
if that person does not follow them back, among other features. Twitter has also become
recognized as an online environment for information that needs to be shared rapidly. Amina’s
account suggests that the rapidity of information sharing on Twitter proves well-suited for
information related to LGBTQ+ identities in the spheres of activism and organizing.
Therefore, Amina does not satisfice (Simon, 1956, p. 129) when seeking or scanning for
information on Twitter. Rather, she is discerning and only selects sources she thinks “are
pushing important work.” Therefore, convenience depends on context (Connaway, Dickey, &
Radford, 2011), including the meaning individuals with LGBTQ+ identities assign to
information.
Summary of Key Findings
Data analysis indicates that technological features and society are inextricable. It is difficult, if
not impossible, to parse technological features apart from the social and cultural contexts in
which they occur. For this reason, technological affordances only gain meaning as such when
a participant roots them within their own meanings and notions of relevancy. Participants
reported a key affordance of online technologies as linking them to others who shared their
LGBTQ+ identities. The value participants place on embodied knowledge constituted the

164
main reason why this affordance was reported to be so important. To determine whether one
has the requisite embodied knowledge to be considered a trusted source, participants asserted
that they depended on affordances offered by image and video sharing sites to provide visual
“evidence” of one’s embodiment and relevant practices.
Another affordance important to participants was access. Access allowed participants
to produce and consume up-to-date information subject to changing and contested embodied
and social group meanings. This information is unique given formal sources do not capture it,
since these sources provide select visibility to LGBTQ+ identities and are subject to the time
it takes to formally publish information. Since participants have limited awareness of
LGBTQ+ identities conveyed by formal sources, they rely on technological affordances, such
as a blank text box, to type in whatever they want and receive results. However, such
affordances may be perceived rather than actual given the logic a search algorithm determines
the results made visible. Participants also recognize that online technologies afford the ability
to identity test in ways they might not be able to offline due to constraints posed by their
physical bodies.
Since information about LGBTQ+ identities is less visible and stigmatized in both
online and offline contexts, participants rely on online technologies that afford information
curation. Social networks facilitate information flow from sources that participants trust and
manage what types of information are shared. However, for those who do not have social
networks that create and disseminate information about LGBTQ+ identities, or are rendered
as outsiders within these networks, such opportunities for curation may not exist. Further, to
practice curation requires technical skill and access to infrastructure.
Participants are not only concerned about what information is rendered visible to
them, but also to whom they are visible. For this reason, participants value affordances

165
promoting anonymity and privacy. Yet they recognize that few online technologies can fully
guarantee either and instead engage in a tactical selection of sources to maximize both.
Paralleling other research findings, participants report convenience as a desired
affordance of online technologies. However, this desire for convenience is contextualized to
the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Valued information sources
must capture the complexity of LGBTQ+ identities. Such complexity can be conveyed by
information that is consistently updated. Participants, in part, value convenience given its
property of timeliness, which can influence what online technologies they use.
RQ4. How Technologies Constrain Information Practices
This section answers RQ4, which asks: What is the role of technology, namely social media
websites, if any, in constraining information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities?
Findings
The knowledge claims empirically derived from the data are listed below. The knowledge
claims for RQ4 are organized by etic and emic themes. For clarity, the first time a knowledge
claim is introduced, it is parenthetically cited. The knowledge claims for RQ4 are:
4.1. Participants cite search engines as an important tool that constrains their information
practices
4.2. What constitutes a constraint is based on what participants find as relevant and
meaningful within their everyday lives
4.3. What constitutes a constraint is rooted in sociocultural context
4.4. A key constraint of online technologies is their lack of moderation-based features
4.5. A key constraint of online technologies is that search engines make visible strategies
that either erase or stigmatize LGBTQ+ identities

166
4.6. A key constraint of online technologies is that they flatten the full spectrum of
available and visible LGBTQ+ identity expressions
4.7. A key constraint of online technologies is that those using them expect embodied
authenticity from those with whom they interact, even if demands for authenticity
are not encoded into the technology itself
4.8. A key constraint of online technologies is that they collapse participants’ contexts,
which can render them unable to control how they are portrayed and to whom these
portrayals are made visible
4.9. A tension exists between the desire for the visibility of others when evaluating content
versus desired anonymity for oneself when seeking, sharing, producing, etcetera such
content
4.10. Online technologies are not designed for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
Table 12 displays main themes and sub-themes coded as constraints.
Table 12. Constraint Themes and Sub-themes.
Constraint Themes and Sub-themes Total Sources
Constraint
26 (81%)
Moderation
12 (38%)
Identity expression
17 (53%)
Curation
16 (50%)
Anonymity
11 (34%)
Privacy
7 (22%)

Total Codes
214
140
41
38
23
10

Discussion
Whereas affordances suggest the use to which a technology should be put, constraints are
actual or perceived restrictions for how a technology can be used (Norman, 1999; Latour,
2004; Gillespie, Boczkowski, & Foote, 2014; Leonardi, Nardi, & Kallinikos, 2014; Baym,
2015). For instance, Facebook poses an actual constraint to identity expression by requiring

167
individuals to use their real names.39 This policy disproportionately affects marginalized users
whose real names are not considered legitimate.40 Groups impacted by this policy include
Native Americans, whose names may not conform to the expectations of authenticity held for
names by Western cultures; transgender individuals, who experience barriers to legally
changing their names; drag queens, who have more than one online identity; and survivors of
intimate partner violence, who would be in danger if their real names were made visible.
Participants perceive Facebook as constraining their ability to express LGBTQ+
identities due to the visibility these expressions would be afforded. Rose explains why she
avoids Facebook to express her queer identity: “[I have] family friends on Facebook. If I ever
shared or posted anything that would indicate my sexuality, I would feel uncomfortable.” Over
time, Facebook has become perceived as a site in which one’s social networks are collapsed
into one context where “the lack of spatial,

social, and temporal boundaries makes it

difficult to maintain distinct social contexts” (boyd, 2011, p. 249; see also Duguay, 2016).
Facebook also affords such collapse by offering features such as “People You May Know”41
and “Ticker,”42 which lend visibility to those who might not be in one’s immediate social
network, but are tangentially linked, e.g., a friend of a friend. Although Facebook has features
that afford individuals control over how their content is shared and to whom it is made visible
these features are perceived by Rose to be: “Too complicated. It would be too much of a
hassle to block certain people.”

39. Although this constraint is actual in the sense that one must use their real name on Facebook, this constraint
is also perceived given that those with authentic names are not likely to be reported for violating the real-name
policy, whereas those who do not have authentic names are more likely to be reported. See
http://www.businessinsider.com/facebook-apologizes-for-real-name-policy-2014-10
40. See https://www.facebook.com/help/112146705538576
41. See https://www.facebook.com/help/501283333222485
42. See https://www.facebook.com/help/ticker

168
Constraints, Moderation
In the previous section, RQ3. How Technologies Afford Information Practices,
participants did not envision online technologies as affording moderation, as indicated by the
small number of sources and references coded with this theme (n=7, 22%; 9 total codes).
However, data analysis indicates that a lack of moderation online significantly constrained the
ability of participants to locate information they considered relevant and meaningful
(Knowledge Claim 4.4). Moderation is defined as content mediated by a set of appointed
individuals for contributions that may be offensive or off-topic. This lack of moderation was
pervasive within the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers.
As discussed in the Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, some content
within the LGBT thread of Yahoo! Answers ostensibly and intentionally stigmatizes
LGBTQ+ identities. In other instances, application of such stigma may be unintentional. For
instance, some questions dealt with taboo themes such as pedophilia, zoophilia, and incest.
While these questions may have been asked to pathologize LGBTQ+ identities, it remains
possible that askers perceived their questions to be marginalized and, therefore, most relevant
within the LGBT thread. The presence of subcultural content within the LGBT thread denotes
a potential risk of exposure to inappropriate or undesirable content, which could deter
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities from utilizing Yahoo! Answers as an online resource
(Hamer, 2003; Staksrud & Livingstone, 2013).
Participants within the LGBT thread recognize the prevalence of stigmatized content.
Some askers sought to preemptively mitigate such stigma by specifying the content they
wished to receive. Consider the following examples excerpted from questions asked in 2014
and 2016:
•

I’m serious, please no evil answers.

169
•

Can I support homosexuality as a Christian? Please don’t answer with, “God doesn’t
exist.” That doesn’t help.

•

I appreciate everyone’s answers, but when you capitalize them it makes it seem like
you’re yelling and telling me I’m wrong. No one wants to be told they are wrong.

In these examples, the askers recognize that with a lack of moderation comes the potential for
content that may stigmatize their identities or be considered irrelevant. For this reason, they
attempt to regulate how and which content should be returned.
To ameliorate the spread of stigmatized content, participants also band together to
create a shared sense of insider/outsider dynamics. Per the following 2016 Question-Best
Answer pair:
Q: Who is the biggest troll in the LGBT thread?
A: I would say [user name 1], with [user name 2] in second place. Whereas [user name
2] is both stupid and homophobic, [user name 1] is mean, homophobic, and mentally
sharp, which makes for a worse combination. Then there’s a new one called [user name
3] who is religious and ignorant. As soon as we get rid of one, another takes over.
What can you do? There’s millions more homophobic people than gay people.
In this account, the asker seeks to make visible an insider/outsider dynamic denoted by the
information practices in which one engages – those defined as insiders who share relevant
content, defined here as non-homophobic, and those defined as outsiders, or “trolls,” who
share non-relevant, homophobic content. The answerer reinforces the asker’s definitions by
rendering certain users within the thread as visible, calling them out by name. Further, the
asker assigns additional, negative characteristics to these outsiders, specifically that they are
ignorant and religious.43

43. As discussed in the above Cultural and Social Group Strategies section, by not considering the
intersectionality of LGBTQ+ identities, the answerer closes off the ability for those who identify as religious
and LGBTQ+ from being considered legitimate within the thread.

170
The asker implies lack of moderation as a perceived constraint when discussing the
influx of outsiders within the LGBT thread. Although social group insiders have gotten rid of
outsiders in the past, either by relying on Yahoo! Answer’s moderation policy (see above
Cultural and Social Group Strategies section) or through implicit strategies, such as naming
specific individuals as outsiders in Question-Answer content, the answerer recognizes that
these actions are not sustainable since the number of outsiders outnumber insiders.
Technological features of Yahoo! Answers including the ability for anyone to view and post
content, the visibility of the LGBT thread in search results, and the lack of moderation
guidelines contextualized for each thread produce an environment where individuals must
navigate stigmatizing, irrelevant information in hopes of locating something meaningful and
relevant.
However, it can be difficult to determine an individual’s intentions, particularly if they
do not have the means to share their information needs in a manner comprehensible to social
group insiders. Consider the following (condensed) exchange from the 2016 LGBT thread of
Yahoo! Answers:
Q: What happens if a woman gets pregnant, has gender confirmation surgery, and
decides to have the baby post-op? She gets the surgery before she knows she’s
pregnant. What would doctors do? It would be impossible for her to give birth without
a C-section, right? I hope this question does not sound stupid.
A: [Provides some detailed medical information]. I realize you’re probably trolling this
thread, but I wanted to give you a serious answer. I can’t imagine what you describe
ever occurring unless the person sought medical care to become pregnant and it was
all planned.
In this example, the question could have been asked by someone purposefully undermining
transgender identities by contending that someone who is authentically male cannot become
pregnant. Or perhaps the question is genuine and asked by someone who does not have access
or visibility given to transgender health resources. Regarding the latter, research on transgender

171
health issues may simply not exist, or it may be in such a nascent state that definitive
conclusions about certain topics cannot be drawn.44
Although this example may seem more extreme than some of the other naïve questions
recalled by participants or asked within Yahoo! Answers, it illustrates that an individual given
entry to a social group does not signify their insider status, nor that their information needs
are taken seriously.
Constraints, Identity Expression
In some instances, online technologies permit LGBTQ+ identity expressions, but they can
also reinforce strategies that condense these identities into monolithic categories (Knowledge
Claim 4.6). Jessica describes how the self-presentation of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
on YouTube falls into these categories:
People that are offline have real world experiences and you get to see all the sides of
it that the internet condenses. All the YouTubers [with] their video editing, fit their
whole story into five minutes. I think it takes a lot longer to explain parts of it. They
can cut out the bad things and all the confusion that they went through. They seem a
lot more confident in their identities than people I know that are offline. Some of them
are still trying to find out who they are and it’s more relatable to go through that with
them than to see these people that are confident and know [who] they are.
Jessica perceives the video editing features offered by YouTube as allowing individuals to
condense their identities into a shared set of sensibilities, or metanarratives, characterizing the
“normal” LGBTQ+ experience (see Pullen & Cooper, 2010). Individuals may be limited in
determining how to express and share their identity expressions once these features bolster
strategies suggesting an approved, or “right” way of conveying these expressions.
Individuals may also experience regulation of their identity expressions due to the
visibility required to make them. As Rose explained above, a combination of online

44. A good overview of the current state of health research related to transgender individuals who wish to
medically
transition
is
provided
by
the
following
PBS
Frontline
documentary:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/film/growing-up-trans/

172
technologies and sociocultural norms can collapse the contexts individuals can better maintain
offline, such as between back and forbidden places (see Goffman, 1963; de Certeau, 1984;
boyd, 2011, p. 249). Due to this collapse in context, individuals lack control over who can use
an online technology, what types of content are shared, and to whom their identity expressions
are made visible. Such lack of control can prevent participants from engaging in identity
expressions for fear of negative enforcement mechanisms (Knowledge Claim 4.8). Consider
Sage’s explanation for why they consider Tumblr as problematic for engaging in identity
expression related to their queer, genderqueer, and non-binary identities:
I’ve had issues [on Tumblr] where I’d tag a post and someone I didn’t know went
through the tags and jumped on me for it. There’s certainly an expectation that you
may have social justice warriors on one hand and men’s rights activists on the other
and never the twain shall meet except by slinging mud at each other. There’s this sense
of picking through a minefield, which is very, very difficult and scary. You’re balancing
a lot. There’s a difference between [Tumblr] and an old-fashioned message board
where you don’t reply instantly and you can clearly see conversations. One of the
problems with Tumblr is that it’s easy to pull conversations out and to quote different
parts so you’ll have a million different versions of the same post going around and it’s
easy for people to dogpile on one person.
Sage identifies several features of Tumblr that constrain identity expression. One feature is
social tagging. In some instances, such tagging can be envisioned as an affordance for locating
certain discourses, such as those of social justice warriors. Yet in other instances, the tagging
feature can constrain identity expression given it allows those outside the discourse, such as
men’s rights activists, to also identify and access this content. Further, the synchronous nature
of communications means that content is disseminated more rapidly than can be controlled
or managed by the original poster. Combined with the ability to re-post content or portions
of it devoid from its initial context, Tumblr’s features contribute to Sage lacking control of
their ability to manage how their identity expressions are recognized, interpreted, and
responded to, which can lead to negative emotional outcomes.

173
Through discussion of these examples, it becomes apparent that the role technologies
play in affording and constraining information practices is not determining. What affords and
what constrains is subject to individual interpretation and shaped by strategies (Knowledge
Claims 4.2, 4.3). Like Jamie (see the above Tactics section), Stefan perceived features of
internet sites, such as asynchronous communication and the ability to be separated from one’s
physical body, as affording the practice of multiple identity expressions. They inhabited two
identities within the same site:
I was pretending to be a boy on the internet, but I was also [user name 1] at the same
time. I was two people on the same forum. And when it came out and I outed myself
that [user name 1] and [user name 2] were the same person there was a lot of drama.
Some people were like, “We’re never talking to you again.” Other people reached out
with valid resources about gender, would talk to me about it, and would let me talk
about it. Then I kind of got scared and completely backed off.
Many platforms encode demands for authenticity, such as a real names policy. However, even
if platforms do not encode these demands, authenticity often constitutes a normative
expectation within online social groups, and as a result, participants who break these norms
experience negative enforcement mechanisms (Knowledge Claim 4.7). Some members of the
social group in which Stefan interacted envisioned Stefan’s inhabiting more than one identity
and, further, an identity that did not align with the ways Stefan’s body presented, as deceptive
and subject to negative enforcement mechanisms. These expectations of authentic practice
could be a result of cultural strategies. However, it is also possible that such expectations
emanated from the value of embodied practice within LGBTQ+ social groups. Given that
Stefan’s identity expressions belied their physical body, it is possible that those who never
spoke to Stefan again did so because they rendered Stefan as an untrustworthy source.
Constraints, Curation
Data analysis indicates that participants identify online technologies as constraining their
ability to curate information about LGBTQ+ identities. Participants indicate that the search

174
engine Google constrains their ability to curate information, given they cannot control what
information is made visible. Rihanna compares Google to Facebook regarding how well each
affords curation:
[It is] difficult to find information I want from a Google search. I think part of the
reason I have relied so much on Facebook is because other people are doing the
finding. I’ve even tried finding stuff I know exists using Google and haven’t been able
to find it. [I] have to go back through the conversations I’ve had with people to find
stuff.
Rihanna’s issue does not constitute an access problem, but rather a visibility problem given
she cannot locate known items. It is possible that Google may not have indexed these items.
More likely, Google’s ranking algorithm does not present the known item within the first page
or two of results. Since Google constrains Rihanna’s ability to locate known items, she instead
uses sites like Facebook, which present information curated by a known set of intermediaries.
There exist several means by which Google’s algorithm may occlude visibility of
LGBTQ+ content. Since Google does not publish its algorithm, there is no way to know all
the technological features that produce a rank list and how they interact to do so. Even those
who design the algorithm cannot predict precisely which results will be returned for a given
search query and in what order; the algorithm makes machine learning decisions that render it
impossible to determine (LaFrance, 2015). Instead, one can only consider what type of content
the algorithm does show and make inferences regarding its logic.
Participants infer that, like other formal sources, internet technologies were not
created for them (Knowledge Claim 4.10). Per Joanna: “The internet is made for only white
men.” Given that most individuals in information technology fields reflect Joanna’s

175
demographic description,45 it stands to reason that online technologies like algorithms do not
possess logics complementary of LGBTQ+ relevancies or meanings. Rather, algorithms
(re)produce social strategies, meaning that information made visible on marginalized groups
communicates stigma discourses (see Noble, 2013). Consider Joanna’s comparison of how a
“Queer Google” would differ from its current version:
It would be exactly what I see on Google except when you would look for information
on safe sex, you would find stuff outside [of] “Penises should wear condoms because
that’s the only type of safe sex there is.” Everything related to identity or self or these
kinds of things would not [be] centered around a certain kind of identity, but everyone.
It would be amazing if the first results would be queer people. If you’re looking up the
history of Russia, have a queer person be the first search result. I’m not into
censorship, but it would be nice if you could put a blocker onto any violent things or
hate speech. That’s one of the biggest challenges with data science. How do you know
what’s hate speech? That would be amazing. To have a Queer Google. Where you’d
put in “swim suit,” and just see images of swim suits, rather than images of women
wearing them.
This account signifies how Google constrains Joanna’s ability to locate desired information
(Knowledge Claim 4.1). They attribute such constraints to several technological features. First,
search engines rank results based on their popularity, determined in part by the number of
clicks a result receives (see Gillespie, 2014). For this reason, “budding” resources, if yet
indexed by the search engine, may not be rendered visible given they are nascent and have not
received a requisite number of clicks. Since popularity is determined by the number of people
that click on a link rather than who clicks on it, the type of identity representations made visible
reflect cultural strategies espoused by the majority (see Noble, 2013), e.g., the “toxic” trans
porn encountered by Rachel when not using her crawler. Participants like Sebastian are aware
of this logic: “Groups [which are] very heavily underrepresented in media and mainstream
culture [won’t] come up on Google cause no one’s talking about it in the mainstream.” Instead,

45. See https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/reports/hightech/

176
what results do “come up” reflect cultural strategies, such as heterocentricity, biological
determinism, and stigmatized portrayals of individuals who do not conform to them
(Knowledge Claim 4.5). Further, such results are devoid of historical context. For instance,
one might Google “transgender” and be presented with results related to “going stealth,”
despite participants no longer envisioning this practice as relevant.
Joanna recognizes that context is lost upon automation. What one might consider
“hate speech,” for instance, depends on the individual and is shaped by strategies.46 Joanna
perceives machines as further complicating this determination given that the definition of hate
speech is left to the system designers, as well as the algorithm’s automated learning and
subsequent decision-making. Therefore, automated curation of content by search engines
constrains participant’s ability to determine what content is relevant and meaningful since they
are unaware of the parameters shaping the algorithm’s ranking decisions.
Constraints, Anonymity
Due to the importance participants placed on embodied knowledge as a marker of information
value, anonymity was not a desired feature of interpersonal sources. Consider Cole’s
explanation for her preference of YouTube for interpersonal sources related to butch lesbian
identity expression: “I could physically see myself in people on YouTube channel[s] instead of
having to imagine [them]. Also, anybody could write anything on a blog. It could be like, a
ninety-year-old super feminine gay man that’s writing it. You don’t know who it is behind the
keyboard.” To Cole, there exist individuals who deceive others and technological features
afford them with anonymity to facilitate such deception. Cole provides the antithesis of a
valuable information source: someone of a different generation who desires men and presents

46. See https://www.buzzfeed.com/shannonkeating/hate-in-america

177
as feminine. These traits are embodied and derived from experience, again signifying their
importance to participants as markers of relevancy and trustworthiness.
This example questions what constitutes an intentionally deceitful act, meant to do
others harm. As exhibited by the accounts of Jamie and Stefan, an individual with embodied
knowledge and characteristics that belie demands for authenticity imparted by strategies are
considered deceptive by others. In many instances, this deception is interpreted negatively, as
exemplified by the enforcement mechanisms Stefan experienced when revealing their “true”
identity. But can there be instances where such deception can elicit positive information
outcomes for an individual and not harm others? Perhaps the ninety-year-old, feminine gay
man Cole envisions has been questioning both their desires and gender identity, and uses
technological features that afford anonymity to facilitate this exploration.
Regardless of the multiplicity and fluidity of LGBTQ+ identities, participants have
less tolerance for online technologies that afford such identity expressions. Sierra’s description
of tripcodes exemplifies this point (see the above RQ3. How Technologies Afford
Information Practices section). Although the actual and perceived affordances of 4Chan
render it an anonymous site, social group insiders within the thread, the “trans girls,” used
tripcodes to subvert such anonymity. This subversion of anonymity countered the girls’
mistrust of outsiders, defined as “people who aren’t trans posting and saying whatever it is
they wanna say.”
There exists a tension between participants desiring technologies that afford their own
anonymity while viewing the anonymity of others as constraining their ability to evaluate
information. Stefan recognizes this tradeoff:
I look for resources created by the voices I’m looking to represent. As opposed to
cisgender, straight people. At the same time, this is a research problem for me, it’s not
necessarily safe to disclose. I can’t necessarily ask people to disclose to know whether
their research is something I’m going to consider more valid.

178
Strategies complicate visibility for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities and online
technologies afford them the ability to manage this visibility. However, anonymity prevents
Stefan from knowing whether a source can be trusted. How participants define insider status
within social groups – by whether an individual is visibly LGBTQ+ – shapes Stefan’s inability
to evaluate information. Expectations for LGBTQ+ visibility at the cultural and social group
levels complicate information outcomes for participants. Participants wish to manage
disclosure of their identities, but expect, or at least hope, that others will disclose. The tension
between these conflicting expectations produces an information landscape where the visibility
of identity expressions is both avoided and desired (Knowledge Claim 4.9).
Constraints, Privacy
Online technologies constrain participants’ privacy by inhibiting their ability to control what
information is being shared about them within a specific context (see Nissenbaum, 2004). As
Amina recounts:
I was the executive director for an organization funded by Catholics. I gave a
workshop at a gender and sexuality conference. That’s public online. If you Google
my name you’ll find that. The watchdog of this Catholic group and some conservative
bloggers wrote about me and how I was this homosexual activist and took screenshots
of this conference. They put red circles, BDSM, and all this deviant, crazy shit [in their
posts] and [said], “Now she’s the director of this non-profit.” [My job] they wrote back
[to them] and they clarified that I wasn’t employed when I went to that conference.
They told me [to] not be super visible because at the end of the day, [I] represent the
organization.
In this instance, information shared about Amina online impacted her life offline by regulating
how she could express her identity both within and outside of the workplace. Amina could
not control what could be posted about her online and by whom. Her identity was conflated
with other practices considered deviant to portray it in a negative light. Further, Amina’s
preferred identity labels were dismissed to reinforce this social group strategy of rendering her
identity as pathological. As Amina states: “I don’t even identify as homosexual.” Although

179
Amina attended the gender and sexuality conference before working for the organization,
certain features of the online technologies that made her attendance visible collapsed the
contexts in which Amina could manage her various identity expressions.
By posting her name to a conference program published online and indexed by
Google, anyone who searched for Amina’s name could view this result. After the researcher
spoke with Amina, she Googled her name to see if any of the results Amina mentioned would
be visible. One of the first results was a blog created by a conservative group with the exclusive
purpose of trying to get Amina fired. The posts made by this blog reflect what she described.
Of interest is the fact that the group acquired screenshots of content Amina had “liked” and
events she indicated “attending” on Facebook. Amina may not have been aware that such
metadata was visible given Facebook’s complicated and consistently changing privacy policy,
or she may have known that this metadata was visible, but did not consider that anyone other
than her friends would be able or care to see it. Social networking sites like Facebook and
search engines like Google thus have features that flatten the various contexts in which
participants have everyday information interactions. Flattening such contexts can lead to
participants feeling devoid of the ability to engage in identity expression online since they lack
control over what visibility is given to these identities, as well as how these identities might be
reinterpreted.
Summary of Key Findings
Data analysis indicates that online technologies constrain the information practices of
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities in several ways. A lack of moderation-based features,
including explicit community guidelines, leads to an information landscape replete with
stigmatized, inappropriate, and undesirable content that deters both use of a given online
technology, as well as further exploration of one’s LGBTQ+ identity. Within Yahoo! Answers,

180
such lack of moderation shapes practices at a social group level to regulate how answer content
should be presented and to identify those considered outsiders and, therefore, mistrusted
sources. However, it can be difficult to determine if those sharing content viewed by insiders
as irrelevant or stigmatizing have malicious intent or merely lack the shared relevancies and
meanings of insiders since they are new to exploring LGBTQ+ identities. Search engine
algorithms also make visible strategies that either erase or stigmatize LGBTQ+ identities. Due
to the presence of stigmatized content within online technologies lacking moderation,
participants depend on social networking sites for information related to their LGBTQ+
identities since these sites facilitate information curation by trusted intermediaries.
This question of who represents an insider and, therefore, a trusted information
source, becomes further complicated by technological features that constrain the full spectrum
of LGBTQ+ identity expressions. Features such as video editing may help to produce
monolithic metanarratives of LGBTQ+ experience that limit the visibility of alternative
identity expressions. This finding has consequences for LGBTQ+ insider/outsider dynamics
since the most visible source often signifies the most legitimate and trusted one as well. Such
visibility is often tied to the body – a physical marker of one’s information practices and
authenticity as an insider within a given social group. For those whose bodies do not conform
to these social group strategies, such strategies prevent these expressions from coming to
fruition, even if online technologies afford multiplicities and fluidity to one’s identity
expressions.
Participants also identify social group strategies as regulating their identity expressions
by means of context collapse. Although the visibility of LGBTQ+ sources is important for
those needing them, to whom such content is made visible often cannot be managed.
Technological features such as social tagging and the ability to re-blog content devoid of its

181
original context signify that participants are subject to their information becoming re-purposed
in contexts that do not fulfill their intentions or wishes. For this reason, and because of
strategies, participants may desire anonymity online. However, the tension between the desire
for the visibility of others when evaluating content versus desired anonymity for oneself when
seeking, sharing, producing, etcetera such content, signifies, in Stefan’s words, a “research
problem” for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities.
Regardless of the capabilities online technologies afford participants, the constraints
they experience when using these technologies address a larger fact, which is that these
technologies are not designed for them. Features like “People You May Know,” which serves
to render one’s social network into a “global village” (see McLuhan & Powers, 1989) by
connecting individuals to weak network ties (see Granovetter, 1973) might benefit an
individual trying to find an old high school classmate. However, this feature is less helpful to
someone like Amina, when these same weak ties consist of conservative organizations looking
for evidence of Amina’s queerness to demonize her publically within the first page of Google
search results. For this reason, it is not only important to consider affordances and constraints
as contextualized to individual accounts, but also as reflective of the cultural and social
strategies that suggest who they were designed for and their uses.
Conclusion
This chapter concludes by restating the key findings for each research question. Findings for
RQ1. How Sociocultural Context Shapes Information Practices indicate that:
•

Cultural strategies shape what information is accessible to participants

•

Cultural strategies shape what information is visible to participants

•

Cultural strategies benefit certain individuals with LGBTQ+ identities over others

182
•

Cultural strategies denote who gets recognized as having an LGBTQ+ identity based
on whether an individual convincingly engages in authentic practices

•

Cultural strategies are disseminated via formal sources

•

Cultural strategies are disseminated via cultural insiders

•

A special type of cultural insider is the wise

•

Participants mistrust formal sources

•

Participants mistrust cultural insiders

•

Insider/outsider dynamics are recursive at the cultural level

•

At a cultural level, all LGBTQ+ identities are considered outsider identities

•

Individuals have multiple, intersecting identities and may have other insider identities
despite identifying as LGBTQ+

•

Social group strategies shape what information is accessible to participants

•

Social group strategies shape what information is visible to participants

•

Social group strategies help participants locate identity-affirming resources

•

Social group strategies are disseminated by informal sources

•

Social group strategies are disseminated by interpersonal sources

•

Social group strategies are influenced by cultural strategies

•

Insider/outsider dynamics are recursive within social groups

•

Social group strategies render individuals with certain LGBTQ+ identities as insiders

•

Social group strategies benefit certain individuals with LGBTQ+ identities over
others

•

Social group strategies denote who gets recognized as an LGBTQ+ identity based on
whether an individual convincingly engages in authentic practices

183
•

Strategies are inextricable from place

•

Place can be typified into back, civil, and forbidden

•

The place types (i.e., back, civil, forbidden) are context-dependent

•

Participants cited back and forbidden places as most influential in shaping their
information practices

•

Libraries were most often given the designation of civil places by participants

Findings for RQ2. How Information Practices Shape Sociocultural Context denote
that:
•

Tactics cannot exist without strategies

•

Participants are not passive consumers of information

•

Participants are active agents in determining the relevance and meaning of their
information landscapes

•

Participants engage in tactics by appropriating strategies to achieve desired
information outcomes

•

Key tactics identified by participants are embodied practice, realness, and
information control

•

Embodied practice inspires participants to explore sexual and gender identities
outside those considered normative

•

Participants view information from formal sources as irrelevant to their embodied
experiences

•

Participants view information from cultural insiders as irrelevant to their embodied
experiences

184
•

Interpersonal sources who share participant experiences are considered more
legitimate than formal sources

•

Realness visibly disrupts strategies

•

Realness interrogates insider/outsider dynamics

•

Information control denotes participants’ knowledge of strategies as espoused by
their ability to creatively and deftly navigate them

•

By engaging in tactics, participants envision information practices as contextdependent

•

By engaging in tactics, participants envision information practices as individualized

•

Spaces constitute a temporary assemblage of practices

•

Spaces can be typified into back, civil, and forbidden

•

The space types (i.e., back, civil, forbidden) are context-dependent

•

Information grounds constitute back spaces

•

Spaces are immaterial

•

Spaces are overlaid on places

•

It is difficult for participants to locate certain spaces given they lack physical and
geographical permanence

Findings on RQ3. How Technologies Afford Information Practices posit that:
•

Participants cite search engines as an important tool that affords their information
practices

•

What constitutes an affordance is based on what participants find as relevant and
meaningful within their everyday lives

•

What constitutes an affordance is rooted in sociocultural context

185
•

A key affordance of online technologies is connecting participants to others sharing
their LGBTQ+ identities

•

A key affordance of online technologies is features that allow participants to
consume and produce visual evidence of embodied knowledge

•

A key affordance of online technologies is that they provide access to sources
outside formal channels of peer production

•

A key affordance of online technologies is that they can be used by participants to
engage in embodied practices

•

A key affordance of online technologies is that they can be used by participants to
circumvent strategic demands for authenticity

•

A key affordance of online technologies is that they can assist participants in
controlling what information is shared about their LGBTQ+ identities

Findings on RQ4. How Technologies Constrain Information Practices indicate that:
•

Participants cite search engines as an important tool that constrains their information
practices

•

What constitutes a constraint is based on what participants find as relevant and
meaningful within their everyday lives

•

What constitutes a constraint is rooted in sociocultural context

•

A key constraint of online technologies is their lack of moderation-based features

•

A key constraint of online technologies is that search engines make visible strategies
that either erase or stigmatize LGBTQ+ identities

•

A key constraint of online technologies is that they flatten the full spectrum of
available and visible LGBTQ+ identity expressions

186
•

A key constraint of online technologies is that those using them expect embodied
authenticity from those with whom they interact, even if demands for authenticity
are not encoded into the technology itself

•

A key constraint of online technologies is that they collapse participants’ contexts,
which can render them unable to control how they are portrayed and to whom these
portrayals are made visible

•

A tension exists between the desire for the visibility of others when evaluating content
versus desired anonymity for oneself when seeking, sharing, producing, etcetera such
content

•

Online technologies are not designed for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities

These findings yield significant implications for theory, research, and practice by challenging
some of the assumptions inherent to extant work in the LIS field. Yet the metatheoretical and
methodological orientations of the research also limit the scope in which the reviewed
knowledge claims can be applied. The next chapter outlines these limitations and provides
directions for future research to both address these limitations and develop the knowledge
claims.

CHAPTER 5
Limitations, Practical and Theoretical Implications, and
Future Research Directions
Introduction
When establishing the relationship between information practices and context, one must be
prepared to make a mess. Dervin (2003) deems context an “unruly beast,” after all. The
ideation of context in the social science literature indicates its movement from distinct
conceptual categories connected by defined relationships to fragmented, decentered subjects
with elusive connections between them (Dervin, 2003, p. 126-128). This research embraces
the latter, amorphous treatment of context since more rigid ones assume ways of being that
do not correspond with the lived experiences of participants. Accounting for this messiness
opens new avenues for Library and Information Science (LIS) research employing information
practices as an umbrella concept (Savolainen, 2007). Yet it also yields significant challenges,
discontinuities, and struggles. This section addresses these challenges and accomplishments
by reviewing research limitations, as well as implications and avenues for future research.
Limitations
The limitations of this research relate to its design, comprised of three elements: methodology,
strategies of inquiry, and methods. A key limitation from each area is identified, and the below
Future Research section frames these limitations as future research directions.
Per Dervin (2003, p. 129), there exists no “foundational stable logic” that can bridge
the gaps between metatheory, theory, and method. The best a researcher can accomplish is to
establish conceptual coherency. Thus, limitations at the methodological level represent
instances where such coherency requires development. The researcher’s adoption of a

188
conceptual framework that uses analytical binaries to describe information practices
constitutes one limitation, e.g., space/place, tactic/strategy, insider/outsider. These binaries
do not capture the fluidity and multiplicity of LGBTQ+ identity expressions, particularly those
opposing binary logic, e.g., gender non-binary. Establishing these binaries represents a
difficulty inherent to qualitative research, which entails the identification and application of
conceptual categories to data. Having a methodological toolkit of articulated conceptual
categories pushes forth the research agenda in advocating for individuals with LGBTQ+
identities, yet it also subjugates participants to these categories. This issue parallels a central
dilemma of queer theory: destabilizing identity categories has positive effects when combatting
cultural oppression, yet negative ones when facing institutional oppression (Gamson, 1995, p.
403).
Methodological reflexivity frames this limitation as a key tension within the work.
While defining the contours of these practices proved appropriate for initial research the
researcher must better delineate the movement within them moving forward, even if such
movement introduces more messiness into the work. Such messiness will be welcomed. Rather
than envision a participant’s place among binary categories as absolute and polarizing, the
researcher should instead capture the interstices of lived experience, or what Dervin calls the
“in between” (2003, p. 130). For a discussion of one method to capture the “in between,” see
the below Future Research section.
At the strategies of inquiry level, the researcher incorporated a mixed methods
approach by combining analysis of two data sources – interviews with 30 participants who
identify as LGBTQ+ between the ages of 18 and 38, and content scraped from the LGBT
thread of Yahoo! Answers. The researcher made this decision since each source represents
social group and cultural contexts respectively, and these contexts act in concert rather than

189
constitute separate entities. Yet such an approach limits the granularity of findings that can be
distilled from either source given both must fit into the same conceptual framework. For
instance, in prior research of Question-Best Answer pairs from the 2014 LGBT thread of
Yahoo! Answers, the researcher uncovered the topical subjects of questions to develop a
typology of information needs within the thread (see Kitzie, 2015). Such information proves
valuable since it identifies themes that participants envision as relevant and meaningful not
addressed by formal sources. Yet this thematic granularity was not incorporated by the
researcher into the coding scheme (see Appendix F: Final Codebook) since it did not fit the
other data source: participant interviews. Given that this research focuses on an undersaturated area, there exist so few avenues for further exploration that not capturing them all
seems like its own limitation. Future research could address this limitation by focusing on one
data source using the overarching conceptual framework, then refining this framework using
emic coding to fit these data. See the below Future Research section for further discussion
of this potential.
Finally, limitations at the level of methods concern generalizability of findings. Since
generalizability is not a goal of this exploratory research, findings cannot be applicable to other
identity categories beyond LGBTQ+. Even within this category, findings only pertain to
specific identity intersections given the limits of convenience and snowball sampling. Most
interview participants were from urban areas and had access to both higher education and
online technologies from which to explore their LGBTQ+ identities. Most were able-bodied
and white. Thus, findings from data analysis of interviews reinforce visibility given to
dominant insider identities. One of the ways the researcher accounted for this limitation was
by quoting participants who did not possess some of these insider identities more often (e.g.,
Amina, Sebastian, Sage, Stefan). By engaging in this strategy, the researcher does not suggest

190
that one participant’s voice carried more weight than others, but rather interrogates her own
assumptions inherent to using a conceptual framework that was, in part, etically derived. In
the case of Yahoo! Answers data, the researcher has limited knowledge of participant
demographics. However, like interview participants, those contributing Question-Best Answer
pairs have access to online technologies. An important future research direction is to further
incorporate the voices of those who present contradiction and diversity to this framework and
its premises. The matrix of domination (see Collins, 2000, p. 227-229) undergirding identity
intersections could be applied to the data, specifically participant interviews where these
intersections were articulated, to envision how the multiplicity of one’s cultural and social
group memberships constitute a unique system of oppression and domination, and how this
system shapes information practices (see the below Future Research section for further
discussion).
Certainly, other limitations for this research exist. At the methodological level, this
research did not focus on political economy to the same degree as social and cultural
hegemony. Yet political economy has relevance in the lives of individuals with LGBTQ+
identities. At the methods level, this research did not use participant observation, which can
capture practice and embodiment from a constructivist metatheoretical perspective in ways
not addressed by the constructionist analysis of recorded text from participant interviews and
Question-Best Answer pairs. Yet these observations do not represent limitations so much as
future research directions. As Dervin (2003, p. 128) contends, only by envisioning work
outside one’s metatheoretical perspective as oppositional would render lack of outside
research as a limitation. Findings from a research study cannot be all things to all people.
Rather, such outside work should be envisioned as “in dialectic” with one’s work and “thus
inherently relevant” (Dervin, 2003, p. 128). It is to this dialectic that this chapter now turns,

191
in both exploring how some of the limitations outlined can be addressed in future work, as
well as the potential for metatheoretical stances outside of the one adopted by this research to
understand the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities.
Future Research
Findings from this study inform several areas of future research. This section first overviews
areas derived from the study limitations (see the above Limitations section). Then, a move is
made outward from the metatheoretical and subsequently methodological contours of this
research to explore synergies with other research perspectives.
Areas Informed by Study Limitations
At the methodological level, a key research limitation concerns the binary application of
concepts. While these conceptual categories may be necessary for qualitative research, namely
to group like concepts and identify patterns, their inherent messiness must be recognized.
Given that these categories have been developed and substantiated by research findings, the
messiness existing within these categories should be addressed in future work. Adopting
mapping as a data collection tool represents one way to capture such messiness. The mapping
proposed parallels a technique used by the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) in their
Visitors and Residents (V&R) project.1 This technique presents individuals with a map
containing two, cross-cutting axes: visitor and resident behavior, and personal and institutional

1. See: http://www.oclc.org/research/themes/user-studies/vandr.html.

192
context.2 A similar technique can be used in presenting participants with cross-cutting axes
that represent multiple planes of being. Figure 6 depicts how such a map would look.

Insider
Participant
Space

position

Place

Outsider
Figure 6. Example of Participant Mapping on Two Cross-cutting
Axes.
Using the critical incident technique (CIT) (Flanagan, 1954) and the “total time-line”
(Dervin, 1983, p. 3), participants can indicate their positionality within these planes at a given
point in time, and then mark how this positionality changed over time. Use of this mapping
technique accepts the need to qualitatively describe data while also recognizing that such
characterizations operate within a spectrum (and in terms of queer theory, perhaps not so
much a linear spectrum as one that accommodates multiple planes of being). Asking
participants to characterize their information practices using visual tools that account for this
fluidity will facilitate capture of richer data, which can be used to supplement the conceptual
framework developed.

2. See: http://www.oclc.org/blog/main/mapping-the-role-technology-plays-in-your-life/;
http://www.oclc.org/blog/main/visitors-and-residents-different-roads-different-maps/.

193
At the strategies of inquiry level, future research should both generalize and refine the
conceptual framework to specific data sources and analytic methods. Generalization advances
the development of middle-range theories (see Merton, 1959, p. 108), which Chatman (1996,
p. 193) envisions as necessary to advancing the LIS field. Rather than solely build conceptual
frameworks specific to a given data source, Chatman (1996, p. 193) contends that researchers
must identify prior assumptions within the field, then test and modify them. These actions
lead to theory building necessary for a nascent field sans a tradition that “focus[es] on
normative problems in which we can approach a line of inquiry with some measure of
certainty” (p. 193). Thus, testing the conceptual framework developed within this dissertation
and informed by prior research generalizes the claims it can make by determining the
consistencies among multiple modes of data collection and analysis.
Testing the conceptual framework on different data sources also refines the framework
by specifying how it can be applied within different contexts and the granularity of findings
that can be achieved. Such refinement addresses some of the shortcomings inherent to middlerange theory development. While Chatman’s (1996) middle-range theory of information
poverty makes a salient and important contribution to the LIS field, this theory is limited by
its use of propositions, which suggest a list of conclusive statements that can be applied to all
groups defined as “information poor.” Recognizing how a conceptual framework may be
generalized into a theory while also refining the fit of this framework to specific contexts
further fleshes out its conceptual scope and determines its boundaries for use. Therefore,
generalizability and refinement do not represent two separate areas for future research, but
rather interrelated goals to strengthen the framework into theory.
At the methods level, a future research direction is to incorporate the voices of those
who present contradiction and diversity to the conceptual framework and its premises. Such

194
incorporation can be achieved, in part, via recruitment. Namely, the researcher sees the need
for future work to continue its use of purposive sampling to capture underrepresented voices
within marginalized groups, e.g., transgender, female-identified, and black. Yet purposive
recruitment partially addresses the challenge of incorporating intersectionality into any
research project given that intersectionality does not represent the sum of a given set of
identity categories, but rather a system of intersecting oppressions, subject to individual
experience (Crenshaw, 1989, 1991). Collin’s (2000, p. 227-229) matrix of domination
represents one approach to capture intersectionality. This matrix organizes intersecting
systems of oppression along four domains of power – structural, disciplinary, hegemonic, and
interpersonal – and roots these interrelated domains within a specific historical and social
context (Collins, 2000, p. 271-290). Using this matrix bridges the tension between how
intersectionality contextualizes individual experience, while also recognizing the common
structural components shaping it. The researcher envisions this matrix of domination as
complementary to the conceptual framework, rather than additional. Future work can
integrate this matrix into the larger thematic category of social types by asking the following
research question: What can the matrix of domination (Collins, 2000, p. 227-229) contribute
to our understanding of insider/outsider dynamics (Merton, 1972; Chatman, 1996, 1999;
Burnett, Besant, & Chatman, 2001) given that individuals possess multiple and intersecting
identities?
Areas Informed by Other Research Perspectives
Now that areas identified as limitations have been translated to future research directions, this
section establishes synergies with other research perspectives. These perspectives operate at
different levels of scope and address research area, theory, and methods.

195
Information practices centered on health constitute an area for future research.
Inspiration for pursuit of this area was derived from data analysis as well as recent research. A
report recently issued by the Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) and Human
Rights Commission (HRC) gathered data from interviews with 92 individuals with LGBTQ+
identities, aged 15 to 19 years, about their health-related information practices (Steinke et al.,
2017). Findings indicate that participants could not relate to information presented by formal
sources due to the information being isolating, irrelevant, and stigmatizing. Participants turned
to the internet and friends to get information instead. However, internet use did not
deterministically lead to positive information outcomes. Rather participants found that digital
resources did not adequately reflect their experiences; they were too technical or not medically
accurate. Findings from Steinke et al. (2017) bolster those from data analysis, particularly that
participants do not envision formal sources as meaningful or relevant to their everyday lives
since these resources do not evince their embodied knowledge.
Data analysis also informed selection of information practices centered on health as a
future research area. When reviewing Question-Best Answer pairs, the researcher observed
sharing of medically unsafe health information. For instance, participants asked and received
advice on how to bind one’s breasts using materials from their home and get hormones
without seeing a doctor. Participants engage in medically unsafe practices to mitigate visibility
afforded to them. Binding one’s breasts using materials from home avoids a package arriving
at the doorstep that mom or dad can pick up. Getting hormones without a doctor means not
having to attain parental consent if under 18 years of age. Considering the health practices of
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities from the perspectives of risk-taking (Chatman, 1996, p.
196-198) and information control (Goffman, 1963, p. 114-127) captures a sociocultural
dimension not identified in work that only assesses the quality of the source. Simply because

196
participants can access a quality source does not signify they will use it. Future research may
focus on the health practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities employing this dimension
to garner an in-depth perspective of information practices beyond needs and use. Findings
from such research can also suggest opportunities for health interventions by libraries to
address the sociocultural properties of information not found in typical interventions, such as
sex education programs.
Other future research directions are theoretical and incorporate salient theories that
extend the conceptual framework. One of these theoretical areas concerns Goffman’s
concepts of face-work (1955, 1967) and stigma (1963), specifically the typology of back, civil,
and forbidden spaces (p. 101). Extended integration of these concepts into the framework
could further articulate the relationships between places and spaces, and the roles individuals
adopt within them, as well as support the metatheoretical approach of social constructionism
espoused within this research. To the best of the researcher’s knowledge, the concept of place
and space envisioned through Goffman’s (1963) lens of back, civil, forbidden, has not been
applied within the LIS field. While face work has been employed in LIS to study reference
interactions (see Radford et al., 2009; Radford & Radford, 2017), it has not been applied within
the sub-area of Human Information Behavior (HIB). These concepts have salience for future
exploration given that they capture the fluidity of context and its relationship to social roles
and information practices.
Another theoretical area for future research concerns concepts of authenticity and
realness as they relate to information practices. Savolainen (2008, p. 5) adopts a social
phenomenological perspective to understand the individualization of social and cultural
meanings. This approach could address questions such as, how closely does realness
approximate the “real” (Žižek, 2006, p. 26; see also Radford, Radford, & Alpert, 2015)? If

197
information is real to an individual, what does that indicate about its value? Perhaps a return
to this approach is necessary to explore realness. Yet the related concept of authenticity
denotes a constructionist approach. Savolainen’s (1995, p. 264-266) initial development of
information practices was influenced by habitus, which examines how banal and habitual
practices individuals perform daily are socially constructed (Bourdieu, 1977, p. 72-95; Giddens,
1984, p. 21-23). The concept of habitus lends lending visibility to the strategies underlying
these everyday life practices (Savolainen, 1995). Savolainen’s (2008) later treatment of practices
from a social phenomenological lens was critiqued for not capturing the habitual (Wilson,
2008). This critique resulted due to Savolainen’s (2007) phenomenological focus on the
subject, rather than the intersubjective constructions of their practices. Returning to Dervin’s
(2003, p. 128) contention that alternate metatheoretical positions are not oppositional, but
rather dialectic, a future research direction for exploring realness and authenticity would be to
examine each area using both constructionist and social phenomenological perspectives,
comparing both analyses.
Participant observation constitutes a method to be employed for future research. The
researcher chose not to engage in participant observation given this method could not capture
recollection of critical incidents (Flanagan, 1954) and “total time-lines” (Dervin, 1983, p. 3)
relevant to one’s identity expressions. For future research, however, participant observation
provides a salient method from which to extend findings, particularly regarding the embodied
nature of information practices. Such embodiment is not only expressed in offline contexts,
but also in online ones. Therefore, a related direction for future research is to observe
participants in both online and offline contexts, noting how these contexts intersect. Methods
such as think-alouds (Lewis, 1982; Lewis & Rieman, 1993) and diaries could also be used to
triangulate data collection.

198
Implications
Findings from this study have theoretical, research, and practice-based implications. From a
theoretical perspective, implications denote how the research has contributed to development
and application of theories used in the conceptual framework. From a research perspective,
implications question some of the assumptions underlying prior LIS research, as well as the
explanatory power of the conceptual framework when applied to individuals with LGBTQ+
identities. From a practice perspective, implications relevant to information agencies,
specifically libraries and online technologies, are then addressed. These implications bridge the
larger theoretical implications of this research to what can be actualized in practice within these
agencies.
Theoretical Implications
This work contributes to the development and application of several theories employed in the
conceptual framework. These theories are situated both within and outside of LIS.
Within LIS. This work bolsters the theoretical salience of information practices in a
field historically characterized by information behavior approaches. Despite their increasing
sociological turn, such approaches still focus on active and intentional behaviors like
information seeking and searching (see McKenzie, 2003a, p. 19). As indicated by data analysis,
participants do not always have an articulated information need in mind from which to guide
seeking (see the Cultural and Social Group Strategies section from the previous chapter).
Instead, they experience alterity based on the information they “discover” in everyday life
(Wilson, 1977, p. 36-37) and the embodied desire to ascribe meaning to these feelings. This
gap between what individuals are socially and culturally inculcated to desire versus what they
actually desire cannot be realized by asking the right question or being given the right resource.
Rather, this gap must be consistently negotiated by participants over time, based on their

199
interactions with information sources – whether interpersonal, embodied, technologically
mediated, recorded, etcetera. Thus, practices constitute a salient theoretical concept given they
encompass banal activities contributing to participants’ meaning-making, often by means
which are less obvious, visible, and/or measurable than having an articulated need. As Dervin
(1999, p. 730, footnote 5) notes, such meaning or sense-making constitutes a process of
becoming rather than a static situation frozen in time-space. A practice approach facilitates
capture of such becoming by not presuming to know what types of information or actions
taken toward information are important. This lack of presumption proves relevant for
marginalized individuals who do not have the opportunity to define their own realities, but
instead have these realities imposed on them via cultural and social group strategies.
Research findings also complicate the study of how marginalized identities and
information practices intersect. In prior research, marginalization has been framed as an access
problem (see Yu, 2006, 2010, 2012), defined as “the presence of a robust system through
which information is made available” (Jaeger & Burnett, 2005, p. 465). LIS research envisions
such access as physical and intellectual (see Burnett, Jaeger, & Thompson, 2008). As data
analysis indicates, participants experience both types of barriers. Some participants cannot
access medical information without consulting a doctor or gender therapist, which may not be
an option for minors without parental consent, or for those without insurance; others cannot
couch their experiences of alterity within keywords or search terms. However, both physical
and intellectual barriers are produced by cultural and social group strategies, which determine
these barriers and who faces them. What one considers as economically and intellectually
viable is thus determined by those in power, who disseminate strategies via formal sources to
reiterate these power relationships, e.g., laws govern who can be covered by insurance,
information literacy initiatives codify the practices and competencies considered literate, as

200
well as encode them into systems (see Tuominen, Savolainen, & Talja, 2005). Therefore, social
access to information does not represent a third, distinct kind of access. Instead, the social
(re)produces the physical and intellectual. Rather than asking what constitutes the material and
intellectual benefits of knowledge, findings suggest that researchers must take one step back
to ask: What constitutes knowledge and who benefits from the knowledge legitimated and
disseminated by strategies?
These findings also complicate the (over) emphasis on access made by LIS researchers.
Information is not a “given.” Rather it reflects a certain organization of social reality. By
framing the intersection of marginalization and information as an access problem, researchers
make an implicit assumption harkening back to the transmission model of information (see
Shannon, 1948; Shannon & Weaver, 1949) – once the information is delivered, an individual
experiences a positive information outcome. Yet as data analysis indicates, information access
does not deterministically lead to “good outcomes” (Dervin, 1999, p. 740-741). Participants
could type something into Google related to LGBTQ+ identities and receive results. They could
go to the library and find books with LGBTQ+ themes. Their ability to perform these actions
does not signify the “goodness” of information retrieved. Participants might find such
information to be irrelevant, myopic, stigmatizing, etcetera. Thinking that an information
transmission always proves successful “privileges outcome over process” (Dervin, 1999, p.
740). Such privileging leads to studies that envision certain resources as deterministically
“good” for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities and, more importantly, also define what these
outcomes are, e.g., “coming out” (Hamer, 2003). LIS studies that assume desired information
outcomes for individuals with LGBTQ+ identities fail to capture the process inherent to their
information practices. Per Sierra: “Even when [LIS studies] say, ‘These are the needs of LGBT
individuals,’ they don’t look at how they’re looking for information.”

201
Outside LIS. The conceptual framework adopted by this research also incorporates
theories outside LIS. A major contribution of this work for the field of Science and
Technology Studies (STS) is to further “de-center media as the object of analysis” (see Gray,
2009, p. 16-17) and instead contextualize this media within an information practices approach.
This de-centering extends the reach of STS from examining the content of information to
considering what people do with that information, and the interrelationship between content
and action. A sociomaterial approach complements information practices by not only
envisioning media as affecting, but also as being effected by sociocultural context.
The conceptual framework also extends theoretical development within sociology,
particularly in furthering work on insider/outsider dynamics (Merton, 1972). These dynamics
refute insider doctrinism on the basis that it does not support collective organizing. Yet when
such dynamics are applied to contexts outside of organizing, insider doctrinism can prove
useful to participants in assessing information via embodied practice.3 By situating
insider/outsider dynamics within the matrix of domination (see the above Future Research
section), researchers can denote instances when insider doctrines benefit one’s information
practices versus when they constitute a barrier. In this way, insider doctrines are not envisioned
as inherently negative, which the researcher purports to be counterproductive.
By framing information control (Goffman, 1963, p. 114-127) as an active, tactical
practice, rather than a passive response to strategies (de Certeau, 1984), this research advances
how the LIS field understands this concept. Acts like secrecy and deception do not solely yield
negative outcomes. Instead, such acts can be reinterpreted as tactical practices employed by
participants to better understand themselves and their surroundings. These practices indicate

3. This finding also advances Chatman’s observation of insider doctrinism as “an ‘I’ and everyone else is
‘them’” (1996, p. 205) by contending that such doctrinism can yield positive information outcomes.

202
participants’ knowledge of strategies required to decide whether, when, and how to disclose
one’s identity. Further research can further tease out the relationship between information
control and the tactic/strategy binary to advance understanding of both concepts and
challenge assumptions related to the relationship between structure and agency.
All three implications for the development of outside theoretical perspectives were
derived from the cross-disciplinary conceptual framework. Comparing theories within the
framework to one another facilitates insight into how any one theory might be reinterpreted.
These reinterpretations illuminate the shortcomings of any one theory and suggest theoretical
advancement their conceptual engagement with one another.
Implications for LIS Research
Findings have several implications for LIS research. One implication is to recognize the
importance of embodiment as an information practice. Individuals do not passively consume
information, but rather actively produce meaning. Such meaning is produced via the
appropriation of strategies, which calls attention to their instability; this appropriation is
embodied as participants creatively live within the confines of strategies. The importance of
embodiment as an information practice has only recently been explored within LIS (see Lloyd,
2010; Olsson, 2010; Godbold, 2013), yet such information represents a key way that
participants come to know the world and their place in it. Learning how to do an LGBTQ+
identity cannot be captured by a handbook, despite participants’ wishes otherwise.4 Rather
such doing is embodied in practices such as dreaming (Mark), binding (Jamie), and dressing
ugly (Casey). Research within LIS research must frame embodiment as a legitimate
information practice, rather than an irrelevant one since it is not recorded.

4. It is worthwhile to return to Eva’s quote: “I wish there was a handbook you get [on gay identities] because
it’s hard to know where to look.”

203
This focus on embodiment can be difficult to adopt since certain embodied practices
might be stigmatized. For instance, interview participants mentioned practices such as
watching pornography (n=11, 35%; 53 total codes) and engaging in sexual experiences (n 22=
69%; 260 total codes) as formative to their identity development.5 Few LIS studies focus on
either practice (see Keilty, 2012 as an exception). Since participants often consider formal
sources as irrelevant to their information practices, LIS research must be open to studying
sources traditionally considered illegitimate by allowing participants to define such legitimacies
for themselves. Explorations of embodiment in LIS also denote the importance of qualitative
methods to elicit participant voices and ethnographic methods to garner thick descriptions
(Geertz, 1973, p. 6-7) of the contexts in which these practices occur and are communicated.
The ability of participants to deftly navigate the interstices between strategies and
tactics, as well as between places and spaces denotes a kind of sociocultural knowledge.
Participants must be aware of cultural strategies to which they live in opposition, the strategies
of social groups to which they are members, and how to embody strategies in a way that is
real to them. Participants are, therefore, not “information poor.” They have the agency to
change their situations using tactics despite the barriers against them. This conclusion does
not imply that participants do not incur significant, sometimes deadly barriers to exercising
realness,6 but rather to recognize that not all positive information outcomes manifest as a
“coming out” narrative (Hamer, 2003; Gray 2009, p. 18-19). Rather, some of these other,
positive, information outcomes are rendered invisible by current LIS research confined to
examinations of information seeking and access.

5. Since participants voluntarily disclosed these practices, there may be others who considered them important,
but chose not to disclose.
6. See http://www.glaad.org/blog/glaad-calls-increased-and-accurate-media-coverage-transgender-murders

204
Another related implication is the importance of engaging with research
methodologies and methods that showcase participant voices while maintaining researcher
accountability. The constructionist tradition presents an overarching methodological position
amenable to work on marginalization based on its focus on meanings constructed between
participants and the researcher. Attaining such focus derives research that exercises “general
compassion that these are lived experiences and it’s just not statistics on a diversity page”
(Sage). Yet qualitative and quantitative inquiries are not incompatible. Rather, quantitative
research can be employed much like a drunk person uses lamp posts – for support rather than
illumination (Lang in Chambers, 2005, p. 488). Regardless of the methods chosen, researchers
must exercise accountability when inventorying the overarching claims inherent to these
choices and their limitations. One way to maintain such accountability is to adopt a mixed
methods approach that leverages the weaknesses and strengths of each method to bolster
findings. Therefore, a related another research implication is to adopt a mixed methods
approach when advancing exploratory research to solidify, over time, its legitimacy as middlerange theory.
Research adopting an information practice approach must envision practices as not
only informing the individual, but also informing others about the individual. To practice
information is to also communicate something about oneself. Data analysis indicates that some
participants do not engage in certain practices or pursue specific information sources given
their fear of being subject to negative enforcement mechanisms. On the other hand,
participants may disclose their identities within LGBTQ+ social groups since such disclosure
can influence what information they are privy to and how others value them as an information
source. But participants are not in full control of these disclosures. Rather, strategies and the

205
places they create establish a “panoptic presence,” (de Certeau, 1984, p. 36) which determines
who is visible and how.
Given the importance of visibility as related to identity, future research should place
less emphasis on access and more on visibility. Individuals access information about LGBTQ+
identities not made available via formal sources using tactics rendered invisible by current
theoretical and methodological lenses. Rather than assuming the information individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities cannot access constitutes the information they need, LIS research should
instead investigate why the information and practices of these individuals are rendered less
visible than those of cultural insiders, and how varying degrees of visibility shape information
outcomes. Further, by emphasizing visibility rather than access, this research does not purport
censoring of certain sources at the practice level. Instead, a focus on visibility highlights the
strategies undergirding works the library makes visible and privileges versus the ones it hides
(see Radford & Radford, 2003). By bringing these invisible strategies to the forefront, research
examining visibility can highlight what the library communicates to its users with LGBTQ+
identities.
Finally, research findings indicate that information practices cannot be typified into a
series of categories. The pilot study adopted and applied McKenzie’s (2003) typology of
information practices, ultimately concluding that this typology was limited in its ability to
describe the information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities (see Pilot Study
Findings, and Research Questions). This finding has been supported by recent research
(Barriage & Searles, 2016; Yeoman, 2010), which contends that while McKenzie’s (2003)
typology is not without merit, it requires testing on other populations, in other contexts to
determine its explanatory power. Taking this implication one step further, perhaps the
explanatory power of McKenzie’s typology is better-suited to studies that do not position

206
marginalization as central to understanding information practices. Trying to fit the experiences
of marginalized groups into a typology developed for insiders can lead to gaps in visibility of
relevant information practices to the former.
Instead of typifying information practices, researchers should instead inventory the
structures shaping them. In this research, such structures were viewed through the lens of
tactic/strategy and space/place, however alternate conceptual models can be tested (see the
above Future Research section). What the researcher ultimately suggests is rather than adopt
a top-down analysis that typifies practices based on the core assumptions undergirding an
information behavior tradition, researchers should invert this analysis so it proceeds from the
bottom up. Such analysis captures practices relevant and meaningful to participants within
their everyday lives and interprets these practices using a lens that strikes a balance between
structure and agency.
Practical Implications
Study findings also yield practical implications for information agencies and systems. Given
that the research design elicited participant accounts related to libraries and online
technologies, implications for these two areas are addressed.
For libraries. One caveat to be made before offering implications is that libraries
cannot be everything to everyone. This finding is exemplified by the recursive nature of
insider/outsider dynamics at both the cultural and social group levels. To have an insider
cultural or social status, there must outsiders. For this reason, a library considered a back place
to some may be considered forbidden by others.
This argument is not synonymous with defunding libraries since they cannot serve all
individuals. Those served may attain immense social and cultural benefit, particularly if the
goal of libraries and within the LIS field is to connect people with information relevant and

207
meaningful within their everyday lives (see Bates, 1999). An exciting challenge for libraries is
to acknowledge the existence of varied relevancies and meanings beyond those made
accessible and visible at a cultural level, and change their strategies to support these relevancies
and meanings. By adopting this approach, libraries have the potential to extend the number
of people served and further demonstrate their value as inclusive, cultural institutions.
Research findings denote several implications and recommendations for how libraries
can better serve individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, which bolster those made by prior work
(see Greenblat, 2010; Jardine, 2013). First, recognize the importance of experiential and
embodied knowledge. While information professionals play an important role in “looking for
the red thread of information in the social texture of people’s lives” (Bates, 1999, p. 1048),
these professionals may not have experienced the social textures to which participants are
privy. The lack of visibility afforded to identity affirming information may very well cast off
the assumption that such a thread would be red and, therefore, easy to see. It is important for
librarians to exercise awareness regarding how their assumptions of LGBTQ+ experiences
may color the services they provide, or perhaps inhibit services they could provide. After all,
librarians may easily locate the red thread of “coming out” or gender confirmation surgery
metanarratives, without realizing that the users they serve may have no desire to engage with
them.
Libraries can be more open to the multiplicity and fluidity of embodied knowledge by
continuing to make collection development decisions that showcase multiple modes of being.
Such a decision might manifest as a librarian purchasing books that, as Mary suggests, “tell a
lot of stories.” Telling a lot of stories recognizes the complexities inherent to any identity
expression as opposed to bolstering the perception that there exists only one way to be a
specific identity category. Further, certain information mediums may feel too overwhelming

208
for participants, such as Eva, who was “too scared of books.” Although libraries have
collections in diverse formats, those alternatives to recorded text may not be promoted or
suggested enough. Affording visibility to these collections can be achieved by illuminating
strategies inherent to libraries to determine when and how they implicitly prefer print
collections, such as within catalog search results. Engendering such complexity of LGBTQ+
identities within collection development decisions may change the perspective of someone
like Sebastian, who feels that she cannot visit the library for relevant information on
transgender identities since “the best I’d [get] is a box set of [the TV show] Orange is the New
Black.”
Another way that libraries can incorporate embodied knowledge is to recognize
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities as experts. This observation has implications for what
kinds of knowledge libraries value. Librarians need to think beyond what is considered a
“formal” source to the everyday practicalities and barriers of living an LGBTQ+ life. Such
informal resources may include topics like how to locate clothing exchange programs, safe
facilities, and dating resources. Librarians are encouraged to increase outreach among
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Such outreach can grow visits to the physical library as
well as use of virtual services to provide a deeper level of privacy and anonymity. As Autumn
suggests:
Turning the library into a community space that’s welcome to queer people can [be] a
start. It suddenly becomes a place that … my image of it shifts from texts that are
already be” coming out” of date to this is where things happen now. You can literally
go there and talk to people, and listen to people talk about their experiences. How can
you be more up to date than that?
Through outreach, the library can engage what Mary describes as “human libraries,”
comprised of individuals that have embodied knowledge of what it means to be LGBTQ+.
Like collections, the selection and acquisition of interpersonal sources should account for the

209
diversity and complexity of these identities. Some ways outreach can be achieved is by hosting
movie nights, clothing exchanges, meditation, book clubs, and speed dating. Since not all
libraries have resources to support such multifaceted programming efforts, co-located libraries
should collaborate in sharing programming and outreach efforts. For instance, academic
libraries host movie nights while public libraries host book clubs. Librarians can also determine
what local LGBTQ+ community organizations exist and the programming they offer.
Reaching out to these organizations, such as by providing free meeting space, ensures that the
library is not duplicating effort while also offering physical infrastructure to groups that might
lack it.7
A specific implication for school libraries is to partner with those setting the
curriculum (e.g., administrators, curriculum coordinators) to develop inclusive health and sex
education programs. This partnership can include library interventions for different health and
sex education units, with collections focused on LGBTQ+ experiences. It is important that
digital collections are also available for students to access privately in the library as well as from
their mobile devices. Further, all libraries, not just those in schools, should be aware if using
web filters of what terms are subject to filtering, as some of them may limit visibility to
LGBTQ+ information, particularly related to sexual health.
Despite their promise, these implications may not be a reality in geographic places not
inhabited by many individuals with LGBTQ+ identities or where revealing these identities is
forbidden. It is further complicated by the visibility required to serve as an interpersonal
resource in an established place – the library. For these reasons, librarians ought to maintain a

7. As an example, the researcher has been volunteering with a queer and transgender persons of color mental
health initiative to fundraise enough money for the group to host meditation nights at the Brooklyn Pride Center.
The Center cannot afford to donate its space to local groups during off hours, so charges a fee. If the library
could offer free space to this group, it would provide an invaluable service to them.

210
sensitivity to context, particularly given that cultural insiders mobilize physical and
geographical resources.
Developing online spaces circumvents some of these geographic and infrastructural
barriers, as well as affords connection to valued information sources produced outside the
formal publishing system. Libraries can create online collections and resources that combine
the formal sources held by the library with those informally produced by individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. These collections could also be made available and visible for individuals
who may not have access to online technologies at home. To develop these resources, libraries
could solicit the expertise of those with embodied knowledge. Consider how Rachel shares
information with other transgender individuals: “I’ll post links to websites that have answers
that can do more than me, but I’ll try to paraphrase it in my reply. I’ll give you a summary of
it, but if you want more information, here are some great sources from PhDs.” This account
sounds like the role a reference librarian plays. Yet unlike a reference librarian, Rachel is viewed
as a trusted source whereas a reference librarian may not be trusted. Librarians might consider
reaching out to individuals with LGBTQ+ identities to identify those acting as interpersonal
sources and ask for their assistance in developing, organizing, and presenting LGBTQ+
resources in offline and online contexts, such as digital libraries. Librarians can also
crowdsource this resource development, such as asking individuals with LGBTQ+ identities
to submit their own collection metadata in the form of social tagging and user-generated
reading lists.8
The library culture that promotes makerspaces could also support LGBTQ+ making.
One way to support such making could be to fund an LGBTQ+ creator in residence, such as
8. These features are afforded by software such as BiblioCommons, currently used by the New York Public
Library. See https://www.bibliocommons.com/; https://www.nypl.org/press/press-release/2011/06/20/newyork-public-library-and-bibliocommons-partner-create-new-innovati

211
the Boston Public Library (BPL), whose newest recipient is writing a queer, young adult novel.9
For libraries sans BPL’s resources, providing programming and materials to assist in selfpublishing could also be instrumental. For instance, Will wants to publish a memoir, but is it
is less marketable due to his gay identity. Having a session at the library directed at marketing
LGBTQ+ novels, whether published or self-published, could be of assistance to someone like
Will, as well as other LGBTQ+ makers.
Mindfulness needs to be paid in valuing embodied knowledge without exploiting
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities. Just because someone identifies as an identity category
does not signify their knowledge of all factors that might impact someone living as this identity,
nor that they wish to share their knowledge with others. Providing such knowledge can be
exhausting. It is why (in an ideal world) information mediators like librarians earn
commensurate wages for their work. For this reason, librarians are encouraged to develop an
outreach plan, ideally consulting with individuals who identify as LGBTQ+. One way to locate
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities who have both embodied knowledge and mediation
expertise is by hiring librarians with LGBTQ+ identities. Four interview participants work as
librarians, another maintains an archive. The American Library Association (ALA) has a Gay,
Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender Round Table (GLBTRT) where job postings can be made.10
For potential or current library school students, visibility should be afforded to LGBTQ+
identities as a viable lens from which to conduct research and practice. Diversity and inclusivity
initiatives could counteract some of the library strategies curtailing the work of those who are

9. See http://www.bpl.org/general/associates/childrensres.htm
10. See http://www.ala.org/glbtrt/

212
both librarians and LGBTQ+, such as Stefan (see the Cultural and Social Group Strategies
section from the previous chapter).
Beyond hiring librarians with LGBTQ+ identities, it is further recommended that
library strategies are adapted to support LGBTQ+ identity expressions, ensuring that when
individuals get to the library, they feel recognized and supported. One important strategy to
adopt is workplace learning, or opportunities to attend workshops, retreats, and consultations.
However, such learning cannot be condensed into a single diversity training workshop.
Instead, workplace learning must function as a consistent intervention that fosters cultural
competency, defined as “a highly developed ability to understand and respect cultural
differences and to address issues of disparity among diverse populations competently”
(Overall, 2009, p. 176). While a developed framework exists for cultural competence beyond
the scope of this dissertation (see Overall, 2009; Cooke, 2017), a key component of cultural
competence is that it “does not end with knowledge about diverse cultures. It begins a lifelong
process of learning about cultural differences to effectively reach those who would benefit the
most from library services” (Overall, 2009, p. 2000). Therefore, librarians must commit to
developing cultural competency in the workplace that extends beyond workplace learning to
being inculcated in daily practice.
Another implication regards visibility. Participant accounts support an argument made
by Rothbauer (2008, p. 101-116) that libraries should not assume everyone wants LGBTQ+
resources hidden. It is worthwhile to return to the quote by Joanna here: “Don’t put us in the
basement. It just ties into this whole thing of like, go to the basement where nobody wants
you.” Circulation statistics do not tell the whole story. Even if individuals do not check out
books from the LGBTQ+ display, this practice does not signify the visibility of these resources
goes unnoticed. As Sierra states:

213
I think visibility and the idea that [the library] is a safe space is important. Even if you
just have the poster with rainbow colors [that] says “Safe space” or “Hate-free place.”
You see that in a library and go, “Oh this is cool. Maybe there’s no stigma here. Maybe
the resources are here that I need.” Some people don’t even consider that. [Instead
they think] this is a topic that’s not in libraries. Just throw in LGBT books in your
book displays, in your book talks. For example, you have your Valentine’s display, your
summer reading display, just have the queer books in with the straight ones. Because
that signifies to people that the library has these resources and they’re friendly enough
that they want to display [them].
Sierra’s account denotes the importance of libraries working to overcome that perception that,
like other formal sources, they are not as relevant to the everyday lives of individuals with
LGBTQ+ identities. The only way to overcome this perception is to promote LGBTQ+
visibility, with the caveat that not all places allow it. One way libraries can navigate the latter
issue is through social steganography (boyd, 2011, 2014; boyd & Marwick, 2011). Such
steganography manifested in Diane’s account (see the RQ3. How Technologies Afford
Information Practices section from the previous chapter) of her Facebook practices related
to controlling information about what elements of her identity are visible and to whom.
Specifically, Diane encoded her presentation of being in a relationship with another woman
that those in the know would recognize as LGBTQ+. On the other hand, those not in the
know do not attach the same relevancies or meanings to these information practices.
Librarians in places that forbid LGBTQ+ visibility can use social steganography to signal that
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities are welcome, while hiding this message in plain sight
from social group outsiders. One example of how social steganography can be employed
derives from a situation, in which GLBTRT Advocacy Committee members, including the
researcher, are designing a sign to be displayed by libraries. This sign espouses the sentiment
that the library is open or welcome to all. One issue in designing this sign is related to people
in mainstream culture complaining about statements like “All Genders Welcome.” A way to
circumvent this complaint is through the poster design, which uses visual, symbolic imagery

214
more recognizable to individuals with non-dominant gender identities,11 while keeping the
language used by the poster broad.
This suggestion is not perfect. It requires significant knowledge of LGBTQ+ social
group information practices to which those for whom the steganography is targeted might not
be aware. This implication, like the others, was crafted with the messiness of context in mind.
These implications and recommendations are offered to provide librarians with an idea of how
they can get started to promote inclusivity of LGBTQ+ identities, keeping in mind that actual
strategies adopted are contingent on the specific institution.
For technologies. Implications from this research also exist for designers and
creators of online technologies. These implications center on a key ethic of design within the
field of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) – recognizing “stress” cases (Meyer & WachterBoettcher, 2016, p. 2). Stress cases are defined as technological features ostensibly created to
fulfill specific functions yielding different relevancies and meanings from the creator’s intent
that impact a small number of people. An example would be Facebook’s “People You May
Know” feature. While this feature may have been designed to expand the social networks of
people with weak ties, it takes on a different meaning for someone like Amina, where this
same feature may have been used to surveil her (see the RQ4. How Technologies Constrain
Information Practices section from the previous chapter). Therefore, stress cases exemplify
that while affordances and constraints may not take on the same meanings for everyone, they
do disseminate dominant sociocultural discourses. When stress cases are anticipated, the
benefits emanate outward. Picture a sidewalk ramp. Most people do not require it however
some do, e.g., people with disabilities. But this ramp does not just benefit them, it benefits

11. See http://www.advocate.com/arts-entertainment/art/2014/11/12/smithsonians-queer-collection

215
everyone else as well. Caregivers with baby carriages use the ramp, runners use it, cyclists use
it, etcetera.
Designing for stress cases requires identifying them, which can be difficult when
designers belong to similar lifeworlds (Habermas, 1992, p. 108-109) and, therefore, have
uniform ideas of the way things are. Incorporating a diversity of perspectives among designers
challenges these taken-for-granted assumptions of who will use a technology and how they
will use it. For instance, straight, white, cisgender male designers might not consider offering
gender identity options beyond male or female within the online technologies they create. But
put an individual with queer, non-binary identities on the team and this feature becomes a
stress case.
Stress cases give users autonomy over their interactions with online technologies. For
instance, a potential solution to the stress case of “People You May Know,” might not be
getting rid of the feature, but rather giving individuals the ability to decide whether they are
made visible in search results as a person someone else might know. Stress cases promote
transparency. By uncovering the assumptions inherent to a technological feature, stress cases
render these assumptions visible, and, in the process, give participants autonomy to decide
whether and how to use a feature. These two properties of visibility and autonomy reflect
tactics. Specifically, stress cases call attention to social strategies and offer a way to appropriate
them for one’s own purposes. Therefore, stress cases as ethical design interventions align with
research findings and the conceptual framework.
One example of a stress case is the lack of moderation experienced by participants on
social media sites such as Yahoo! Answers. Designing tools for those subject to vitriol and
harassment, such as the ability to block users, does not stifle the free speech of those spewing
such vitriol and harassment; to make such an argument insults those who have fought for

216
freedom of expression online (Penny, 2014, p. 183). Rather, these tools provide those
marginalized by such speech with the autonomy to control what information they see, which
further empowers them to locate sources they consider to be relevant and meaningful.
Stress cases can also be identified in search engines like Google. By employing a
vertical rank list, these search engines impart visibility to a certain set of results, reflective of
larger cultural strategies. While this ranking mechanism works well for most, it might not
consider marginalized groups who may find the search results as stigmatizing (see Noble,
2013). To address this stress case search engines could provide more options for individuals
to curate the display of search results. Rather than present results vertically, as in a rank list,
search engine providers could present results horizontally, clustered around certain topical
themes. This feature would give those who do not know the language the ability to see the
discourse centered on certain search terms and select those terms representing identityaffirming discourses.
Conclusion
When people read, they seek to find themselves in the text (de Certeau, 1984, p. 166-175;
Rothbauer, 2004, p. 90). If dissertation participants were to read extant work on the
information practices of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities, would they be able to locate
themselves? Findings from this dissertation suggest not, since prior work may condense these
information practices into a series of monolithic needs and behaviors that can be addressed
by library-sanctioned collections, many not authored, developed, or organized by individuals
with LGBTQ+ identities (Rothbauer, 2004, p. 105-106). This observation does not suggest
that collections are not vital to individuals with LGBTQ+ identities or that participants did
not indicate the importance of works by Audre Lorde, bell hooks, Rita Mae Brown, Raymond
Chandler, and Nancy Garden (to name a few) to their identity development. Instead, data

217
analysis indicates that participants want to know what it is like to adopt an identity, fraught
with visibility and questions of what constitutes authentic practice. They value information to
address this need derived from their own embodied knowledge as well as from those with
similar experiences. Further, many participants need to address these desires and values within
information landscapes that visibly disrupt or deny the legitimacy of their existences. Thus,
envisioning a book as being instrumental to one’s LGBTQ+ identity development only holds
if supported by an individual’s sociocultural context. For these reasons, this research
introduces a new lens via its conceptual framework from which to interrogate the assumptions
of past research. This lens employs a sociocultural perspective from which to envision both
information and how individuals, seek, share, use, avoid, mistrust, etcetera, it.
Findings from this research indicate that information and information practices cannot
be typified into a neat series of categories such as seeking, sharing and use. Instead, practices
encompass the gamut of human experience, whether such experience is produced by
intersubjective understanding, or garnered by an individual’s responses to such understanding.
Nor can information be considered as formal, recorded sources, passively consumed. Rather,
participants’ preferred information sources are often unsanctioned, embodied, and emotional.
There is a reason why implications from the PPFA and HRC study on health information for
individuals with LGBTQ+ identities (see the above Future Research section) include the
importance of considering the mental health of individuals when they interact with this
information (Steinke et al., 2017).
On one hand, these findings are exciting. They further understanding of both
information practices as an umbrella concept within LIS (Savolainen, 2007), as well as the
unique challenges and triumphs of individuals with LGBTQ+ identities within a practices
perspective. These findings challenge concepts often taken-for-granted within LIS, such as the

218
importance of information access. Implications from these findings have the potential to
render significant impact within the communities in which they are instantiated. However,
such findings are also inherently challenging. Harkening back to the above Introduction
section of this chapter, incorporating sociocultural context is messy. It does not provide the
holistic, generalizable results many hope for, such as a representative survey of transgender
information needs (nor does it suggest that such a survey is not needed, only that it should not
be the sole means through which to envision the experiences of transgender individuals). What
this research does accomplish, however, is interrogating the assumptions behind the design
and creation of such a survey in terms of who is represented and what constitutes a need. Such
interrogation has identified areas for future research that might not have been captured before;
not to serve as an oppositional mandate for the field in its treatment of marginalized groups,
but rather as an inclusive dialectic (Dervin, 2003, p. 128) that incorporates the voices of those
who have yet to be heard.