HEALTH INSURANCE LITERACY:
HOW PEOPLE UNDERSTAND AND MAKE HEALTH INSURANCE PURCHASE DECISIONS

Emily Johanna Vardell

A dissertation submitted to the faculty at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the School of Information and
Library Science.

Chapel Hill
2017

Approved by:
Claudia Gollop
Barbara Wildemuth
Mary Grace Flaherty
Jeffrey Huber
Andrew Barnes

ABSTRACT
Emily Vardell: Health Insurance Literacy: How People Understand and Make Health Insurance Purchase
Decisions
(Under the direction of Claudia Gollop)
The concept of health insurance literacy, which can be defined as “the extent to which
consumers can make informed purchase and use decisions” (Kim, Braun, & Williams, 2013, p. 3), has
only recently become a focus of health literacy research. Though employees have been making health
insurance decisions for many years, the Affordable Care Act has brought the issues of health insurance
literacy to the spotlight. For the large number of adults with lower levels of health literacy, their ability
to procure appropriate levels of health insurance coverage and interact with the health care system
successfully may be limited. While a considerable amount of literature has focused on studying health
literacy in general, the information seeking and decision-making process regarding health insurance has
not been studied as thoroughly. If this process is studied in a sample group of users, their information
needs and use might be better understood.
This qualitative study explores how individuals understand health insurance concepts and make
health insurance purchase decisions. This study used semi-structured interview questions supplemented
with a demographic questionnaire and the Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (HILM) developed by
Paez et al. (2014). The study was conducted with newly hired employees at a large university in the
southeastern United States.
The collected data formed the foundation for the construction of a model of the health
insurance decision-making process. This study identified information tactics used by individuals when
evaluating health insurance materials, such as comparing plans side-by-side, calculating costs, and

iii

eliminating irrelevant information. The findings also shed light on the personal reflection individuals
undertake when making their health insurance choices, including past experience with health insurance
and forecasting their needs for the next year. The participants in this study characterized their health
insurance choice as a shared decision, consulting others during their decision-making. The HILM,
coupled with discussions during the semi-structured interviews, identified demographic implications of
individuals’ health insurance literacy skills. In addition, the information needs and preferred information
sources identified in this study will be of interest to human resources officers and other information
professionals providing assistance with health insurance enrollment.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
1.1

Health Insurance in the United States
This introductory section traces the history and development of health insurance and health

care reform in the United States. This evolution demonstrates the competing interests at play in how
health insurance should be and is organized and what information should be and is made available. The
different types of health insurance coverage that have evolved over many decades (e.g., employersponsored insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and high deductible health plans) require varying levels of
involvement and literacy skills of enrollees. This discussion underpins the importance of health
insurance literacy skills in navigating the health care system.
1.1.1

Traditional Model of Private Insurance: Employer-Sponsored Insurance
Employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) is the most common type of health insurance in the United

States, with over 150 million Americans procuring their health insurance through their employers every
year (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015). ESI has been the foundation of the United States (U.S.) health
care system since the 1930s and 1940s. In the U.S., health insurance began during the Great Depression,
where hospitals would offer prepayment plans to employment-based groups to ensure that patients
would pay their bills. The health insurance system continued to develop as a product of wage freezes
during World War II (Glied & Borzi, 2004, p. 404). The federal government imposed price and wage
controls on employers, and, in response, savvy companies began offering health insurance to combat
the wage freeze and entice employees.
Private health insurance is a mechanism by which individuals can protect themselves from the
tremendously high costs of medical care due to severe illness or accident (Kaiser Family Foundation,

1

2008). When an individual has health insurance, the person can use this coverage to subsidize the cost
of a visit to their physician. In the case of a physician visit, the insurance company will pay a portion of
the cost (sometimes dependent on whether the physician is in the insurance company's preferred
network) and the individual will pay a remaining portion (i.e., a copay).
ESI is an economically effective system in that it allows companies to have a diverse group of
people (often of mixed ages and health statuses) and provides a convenient risk pool. This reduces
administrative costs and allows employees to cancel out each other’s risk. Because insurance comes
through an employer, health insurance companies also see it as a reliable way to be paid. Premiums paid
via payroll deductions are a much more reliable way to fund coverage than requiring each individual to
pay for their insurance separately.
Some of the benefits of ESI are that individuals do not have to spend their time managing their
insurance benefits, an employer screens plans and administers them for the employee. The ESI system
also plays into cultural attitudes in the United States about work. Rather than a national system (such as
the systems in Europe) where everyone has coverage regardless of how “deserving” they are of
coverage (i.e., whether or not they have paid into the system), the U.S. health care system requires that
individuals be employed to receive health insurance coverage.
1.2

Health Insurance and Health Disparities
Access to health insurance and health care coverage are vital in addressing health status

disparities. A recent study of citizens in Massachusetts demonstrated overall improvements in
individuals’ self-assessed health following Massachusetts’ health care reform which required universal
coverage of all citizens and which is an antecedent model for the Affordable Care Act (Courtemanche &
Zapata, 2014). Physical health, mental health, joint disorders, and body mass index were all
demonstrated to improve following health care reform. In addition, the improvements were strongest

2

for people with lower incomes, nonwhites, and near-elderly adults, many of whom have been shown to
be more greatly affected by health disparities.
This initial study by Courtemache and Zapata demonstrates promise for health care reform as a
method for reducing health care disparities. Health insurance information seeking is an important
precursor to effective health care reform. As summarized by the Department of Health and Human
Services (2008), “the success of health system reform will depend in large part on the capacity of
individuals, families, and communities to make informed decisions about their health” (p. 7).
1.3

The Politics of Health Care Reform
The first attempt at health care reform in the United States was launched prior to World War I

by progressives who sought to fight governmental corruption (Starr, 1982, p. 244). Between 1883 and
1913, many countries across the world were establishing national health care plans and the timing
seemed fruitful for reform. Originally, special interest groups such as the American Medical Association
(AMA) were in favor of universal health insurance. However, in a short amount of time, as debates and
discussion grew, state chapters of the AMA took issue with national leadership and demanded that the
association take a stand against national, universal health insurance in 1916 (p. 247-248).
In the end, this turning of the tide was a key factor in the defeat of reform. The AMA was joined
by labor unions (who did not want to sacrifice power) and insurance companies. This coalition against
universal coverage was far more vocal and stronger than any group lobbying in favor of universal
coverage.
This inequity in lobbying power between those against universal coverage (i.e., the AMA, labor
unions, insurance companies, and employers; p. 249-253) and those in favor of universal coverage
would prove to be a recurring theme throughout 20th century American politics. While well-funded,
politically-astute, and powerful groups rallied against universal coverage, and there was not a strong

3

voice in favor of it. The uninsured are a diverse group with nothing but their lack of coverage in
common. Pro-reformers were not able to gain the political heft to fight against powerful interest groups.
The push for universal coverage emerged again in 1934, following Franklin D. Roosevelt’s
election and The New Deal. However, the AMA, stronger than ever, continued to lobby against it and
universal coverage lost steam before it even had the chance to take off under Roosevelt’s watch.
Though Roosevelt was elected with an overwhelming Democratic majority, this issue was never
seriously pushed through during his administration (p. 280).
While a drop off in steam during a president’s term and redirected attention to foreign policy
would continue to be a theme throughout the pursuit of universal coverage, special interest group
politics would continue to play a leading role. Perhaps the strongest example of this can be identified
during Truman’s term. Truman was the first president to run on the idea of universal coverage and his
election came as a bit of a surprise. As soon as he took office, he took steps toward constructing a
universal health insurance coverage plan. The AMA, however, was once again completely against this
agenda. They launched the most expensive lobbying campaign of the time, which strongly influenced
public perception and once again stopped the debate before it had the chance to start. That expensive
campaign, coupled with the anti-Communist propaganda that equated national, universal health
insurance with socialized medicine (p. 285), created a perception of universal coverage that is often
employed even in today’s discussions.
When Richard Nixon was elected in 1968, he also thought he might be able to establish a
national health care plan. However, the Nixon administration, too, would only see failure when it came
to passing his agenda for universal coverage, which the general public interpreted as a push for more
centralized government. During the early 1970s, the country was wary of centralized government and
strong governmental influence (solidified during the Watergate scandal; p. 404-407), and groups such as

4

the AMA and health insurance companies (stronger than ever before) were able to capitalize on these
concerns and thwart any possible health reform.
The final attempt of the 20th century was led by President William Clinton and First Lady Hillary
Clinton during President William Clinton’s first term, which began in 1993. Once again, the
administration was confident that they would be able to pass national health care reform and that the
timing was right. Their reform was centered on the idea of managed care, which would create an
intermediary gatekeeper between employees/patients and health insurance companies. The
gatekeepers were designed to address cost control issues that were plaguing the nation and to improve
quality of care by holding health care providers accountable for health care outcomes (Enthoven, 1993).
Under traditional insurance physicians had very little oversight and, therefore, little incentives to
control costs. This led to unnecessary tests and procedures and health care costs spiraling out of control.
Clinton’s managed care plan hoped to help curb unnecessary costs, but the creators of the plan
overlooked a key trend in health care reform named the Cosmic Law of Health Care by Reinhardt (2008):
health care costs and expenditures are someone else’s income and they will fight to keep them.
Large, strong, politically powerful special interest groups such as the American Hospital
Association (AHA), Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), the AMA, and
America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP, representing the health insurance companies) were completely
opposed to the idea of managed care and governmental interference and oversight of cost control
(Starr, 1995). While Clinton’s plans may have helped curb individual’s health care costs, this cost control
would also mean lower profits for the AHA, PhRMA, the AMA, and AHIP. These well-funded, politically
powerful groups were able to lobby successfully against Clinton’s plan, which eventually led to its
defeat.

5

Throughout 20th century American health politics, each attempt to reform health care was
defeated by special interest groups. This historical precedent confirms Quadrango’s assertion that these
groups have “used every weapon on hand to keep the financing of health services a private endeavor”
(2005, p. 205).
1.4

Medicare and Medicaid
An example of health care reform success during the past century is that of Medicare. Political

factors such as timing, political sympathies, partisanship, and special interest group politics all played
roles in defining the success of the 1965 legislation creating Medicare. Perhaps the biggest reason why
the Medicare legislation was so successful was that it focused on a very politically sympathetic
demographic group – the elderly (Oberlander, 2012).
First, older, retired Americans were uninsured through no fault of their own; most simply were
not eligible for employer-sponsored insurance. The fact that the elderly were uninsured due to age
(rather than due to being unemployed, for example) played a key role in Medicare’s success as it built
upon very American political ideas of earning. Instead of being seen as a system that would be giving
anything away unmerited, the program had working individuals pay into a Medicare account (building
on the model set by Social Security benefits). Then, once they had retired, they would have “earned”
coverage. The way this was constructed fought against the idea of government handouts. Since they had
paid in, they were eligible for coverage. This aspect appealed to both parties and ensured its passage
(Ball, 1995, p. 65).
It was also closer to true insurance in that, at the beginning, it only covered catastrophic events
such as surgeries and/or hospitalizations. It also required higher deductibles, which resulted in many

6

seniors enrolling in supplemental “Medigap” insurance1 from health insurance companies (this trend
continues today). This opportunity may have kept some special interest group opposition at bay.
Medicare was also particularly popular as it relieved the burden on children taking care of their elderly
parents’ medical expenses.
The legislation that created Medicare also created Medicaid. Medicaid was seen as a way to
cover some uninsured populations and fight the slippery slope to national health insurance (Oberlander,
2012). Special interest groups that represented physicians and hospitals were in favor of Medicaid as a
way to recoup costs. County hospitals are required to treat all patients and some are not able to repay
hospital bills. Having Medicaid meant that more services would be reimbursed, if not from the patients
themselves then through Medicaid coverage. This aspect secured support from physician and hospital
groups for this legislation.
This legislation was the first example of demographic incrementalism (Oberlander & Lyons,
2009). This technique was used to provide coverage demographic group by demographic group. It
started with the elderly (through Medicare), one of the most politically sympathetic groups in existence.
It then expanded to the medically indigent (those going bankrupt due to health care costs), people with
disabilities, kidney patients, pregnant mothers, and children. It was hard to argue against covering these
segments of the population.
Those who feared that Medicare and Medicaid were a slippery slope towards national health
insurance may have been right. Ultimately, Medicare became enormously successful with good approval
ratings and a nearly 100% enrollment rate. It also created a vocal and strong interest group – Medicare
enrollees. They like their coverage and will fight to keep it. In many ways the success of Medicare

1

As defined by Medicare.gov, a Medicare Supplement Insurance (Medigap) policy is sold by private companies and
is designed to help pay for health care costs not covered by original Medicare (e.g., copayments, coinsurance, and
deductibles). https://www.medicare.gov/supplement-other-insurance/medigap/whats-medigap.html

7

became a warning against further health care reform. Any discussion of health care reform must include
Medicare as part of the picture. This creation of a health care juggernaut made many politicians wary of
creating further, untouchable health care programs.
1.5

Consumer-Driven Health Care
Managed competition (MC), the model proposed under the Clinton Plan, and consumer-driven

health care (CDHC), the currently popular model, are examples of persuasive labeling in health care
(Marmor & Oberlander, 2012). They are named after what they aspire to be, but it can be difficult to
determine what they are and are not. They are also difficult to disagree with, as both names sound like
rational things that most people should agree with.
Both represent ways of fighting against traditional insurance models and the inequities,
inefficiencies, and cost control issues that accompany them. In traditional insurance models, physicians
were subjected to very little cost control oversight. This led to unnecessary tests and procedures being
performed, exacerbating cost issues currently confronting the industry. Both MC and CDHC seek to
reduce unnecessary costs and improve quality of care.
MC and CDHC also vary in their approaches to addressing health care issues. MC is a set of
strategies and guidelines that seek to provide oversight of health care delivery (Enthoven, 1993). MC is
characterized by neutral intermediaries between patients/employees and health insurance companies.
It would require health insurance companies to be more transparent. They would have to have a
standard set of coverage options for everyone. Then, people would be able to select an insurance option
solely based on cost and quality. This is designed to reduce inequalities and offer fair access to standard
coverage (this would especially reduce the concerns of people with preexisting conditions and people
with higher medical bills).

8

The largest concern that people have with MC is determining who would be the neutral
enforcers. What unbiased group could effectively mediate between patients and insurance companies
without being swayed by the special interests in either group? In addition, managed competition creates
more work for employers. Employers prefer to work with a small number (often one) of insurance
companies to reduce administrative burden. Access to more insurance options would require greater
administration by employers, as they would be working with multiple companies.
CDHC also strives to improve quality and reduce costs. The hallmark of CDHC is that it seeks to
encourage active participation in health care. Patients are encouraged to become active consumers and
price shop their health services. They also generally have access to more providers with fewer plan
limitations. The idea would be that more information on cost and quality would be available to make
informed decisions.
Unfortunately, this kind of information (e.g., exact costs of procedures, medications, tests at
different facilities under the supervision of different health care providers) is currently not widely
available. For example, if an individual wanted to find out how much it would cost to have an appendix
removed at three different local hospitals, it would be difficult to locate the exact costs at each of the
three institutions. In addition, this reliance on the active consumer can exacerbate inequality issues.
Many people do not have the health literacy and financial literacy to navigate CDHC (Miller, 2007). If
they are not able to make effective decisions, their health care outcomes and costs may be adversely
affected. A similar concern is that of the frame of mind of sick people. When a person is ill, she or he
may not have the wherewithal to be able to shop around for the most cost-effective option.
Managed competition and consumer-driven health care seek to address cost control issues in
health care and to make the industry more transparent with a focus on quality of care. Whereas MC
requires an intermediary between a patient and the health insurance company, CDHC relies on

9

individual consumers to make informed health care decisions and is of particular interest when studying
health insurance literacy concerns. In other words, how prepared is the general public to make these
decisions?
1.5.1

High Deductible Health Plans
One example of CDHC is the use of high deductible health plans (HDHPs), sometimes also called

consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs). HDHPs are designed to put the control in the consumer’s
hands and make health care costs more transparent. HDHPs are characterized by low monthly
premiums but high deductibles at the point-of-care. This, too, is designed to encourage patients to shop
around for good quality and low cost services, but so much of this information is unavailable.
HDHPs may also lead to lower use of preventative care. In a large study conducted by the RAND
Corporation, they randomly sorted people into different kinds of health plans. Those in HDHPs went to
the doctor less frequently (Beeuwkes, Haviland, McDevitt, & Sood, 2011). While this may reduce
unnecessary costs, it may also reduce preventative care, which can exacerbate health problems and
possibly lead to treatment at an emergency room. The ACA may have addressed some of these
concerns, as it requires coverage of some types of preventative services.
HDHPs can also weed out the healthy people from an insurance plan’s risk pool. Generally,
people attracted to HDHPs are healthy, young people who do not require a lot of health care
interventions. If the young, healthy people are not present to offset costs in a large risk pool, the
traditional models that feature diverse risk pools may cease to be financially viable when monthly
premiums are not being paid at the level that could balance the costs of less healthy individuals who
require more health care interventions.

10

1.6

The Affordable Care Act
The most recent major development in the history of health care reform came on March 23,

2010, when United States President Barack Obama signed into law the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (P.L. 111-148) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (P.L.
111-152), commonly referred to as the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court
rendered a final decision to uphold the ACA. At its core, the ACA extends health care coverage to all
people. The individual mandate included in the law requires all individuals to obtain health insurance. If
an individual elects not to obtain coverage, they must pay a tax penalty. Subsidies are available to help
cover the costs of coverage for those individuals whose earnings are below a threshold. In addition,
even though many people had health insurance before the Act, the ACA also offers services and
coverage that exceeds previous options. For example, the ACA lengthens the amount of time a child can
be covered by her parents' health insurance. Children can now be covered under their parents’
insurance until the age of 26. In addition, plans may no longer deny coverage to individuals based on a
preexisting condition.
The ACA also called for the creation of Health Insurance Exchanges. The Exchanges are designed
to make it easier for the average individual to select the health care plan best for him/her. The
Exchanges are available through http://healthcare.gov, where people can go to find information about
health insurance options and purchase their preferred plan. Insurers bid to have their plans included in
the online Exchange portals. The information available for each plan includes a summary of benefits and
detailed descriptions of coverage for two common groups: women giving birth and individuals with
diabetes (see Figure 1 for a sample version from the Healthcare.gov website).

11

Figure 1: Summary of Benefits and Coverage for Childbirth and Type 2 Diabetes (Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, 2014)

These coverage example vignettes show what the health care costs would look like for
individuals in these two groups and are designed to make the coverage options more relevant to the
reader. If a reader does not fit into one of the two groups, he or she will be required to look deeper into
the insurance materials to make comparisons. Users must review the options available to them and
select their preferred coverage. The health insurance mandate provided by the law is requiring many
Americans to make health insurance decisions for the first time, providing fertile ground for exploring
issues of health insurance literacy.

12

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
This literature review builds on the overview of health insurance in the United States, beginning
with a discussion of health information behavior, with a focus on the information seeking models and
decision-making theories that are most relevant to health insurance literacy research. Next, general
health literacy research, health literacy measurements, and health insurance literacy research is
discussed. This is followed by a discussion of choice in health insurance decision-making and the
research that has been done in this area. Finally, since semi-structured interviews were used in this
study, the chapter concludes with a discussion of health insurance literacy research that has been
conducted using semi-structured interviews.
2.1

Health Information Behavior

2.1.1

The Health Information Consumer
In recent years there has been an increase in the importance of the patient role. Whereas in the

past the physician and health care team often had the final word and would even conceal information
from patients, now the onus is often on the patient to consult multiple information sources to make the
ultimate treatment choice. In addition, the patient is often expected to locate and evaluate information
sources on their own either before or after consulting with a physician; in other words, “today’s world is
one of active information seeking rather than passive reception” (Johnson & Case, 2012, p. xiii).
In fact, a patient’s ability to consult information sources and make the final decision is often
now seen as a right. In a discussion of information policy, Thorelli and Engledow (1980) highlight the
trend that “consumers’ freedom to choose, to be informed, to be heard, and to be safe seem to be
accepted as classic rights. The right to choose assumes an open market and a true open market assumes

13

informed consumers” (p. 10). The responsibility and right of individuals to remain informed consumers
echo throughout health information seeking research. The examples that will be used in this section will
draw attention to how health information behavior research relates to health insurance information
seeking and use.
2.1.2

The Consumer Movement
This recognition of the rights of the consumer is termed the consumer movement. The rise of

the consumer movement in the United States is credited to Ralph Nader, who brought to light car
manufacturers’ resistance to safety features. First in an article from The Nation in 1959, and then in his
book Unsafe at Any Speed in 1965, Nader ignited the consumer movement, beginning with safe cars and
followed by increased demands by consumers across the board.
Jacoby and Hoyer (1987) identify a speech given by United States President John F. Kennedy in
1962 as solidifying the consumer movement’s national prominence. In this speech Kennedy articulated
four basic consumer rights: to be informed, to choice, to safety, and to be heard (redress). The idea of
intelligence as capital also came to light during the consumer movement and led to increased patient
demand for health information (Huber, Shapiro, & Gillaspy, 2012). The demand for information, coupled
with the right to be informed and the right to choose, resounds through health information research.
These rights have also been upheld by the health provider and health administration
communities. Hibbard and Weeks (1987) underscore this agenda and write that “current efforts to
contain health care costs include a variety of strategies aimed at the users of health services. These
approaches attempt to encourage users to be more cost-conscious and to shop for lower-cost services
and more efficient health care plans” (p. 1019). This idea is echoed in consumer-directed health plans
(CDHPs) that ask patients to research their most cost-effective options and take a strong role in
determining their course of care (see the previous section for a further discussion of the CDHPs). The

14

access and use of this information is both constrained and enabled by the information channels and
fields available to consumers.
2.1.3

Channels
“Knowing who knows what is a fundamental issue in communication networks” (Johnson &

Case, 2012, p. 100). This question rings particularly true in the space of health insurance information
seeking. It is likely that an individual cannot turn to just one information source for effective health
insurance decision-making. First, the individual may need to talk to a human resources officer to
understand his/her options. Then, the individual may be advised to contact the insurance company
about a specific inquiry. Finally, the individual may need to discuss the particulars with a spouse, parent,
or child to evaluate the information for his/her particular health and financial situation. Individual
preferences for channels of health insurance information have not yet been studied and present an
opportunity for future research.
The uses and gratification theory (Katz, Blumler, & Gurevitch, 1974) posits that information use
is goal-oriented, with users selecting different media and content to fulfill needs. It also shows this as a
process initiated by individuals, indicating that people are active information seekers. In addition,
communication channels must compete with other channels for satisfying information needs, with
individuals selecting channels based on “normative images those channels are perceived to possess”
(Perse & Courtright, 1993, p. 501). The motivation for selecting a librarian, for example, as a desired
information channel may indicate that the individual perceives librarians as being helpful and a source of
authoritative information assistance.
Dervin, Jacobson, & Nilan (1982) demonstrated that information seeking in health settings was
designed to bridge gaps in knowledge. They posit that individuals ask questions directly related to their
current information need. For those making health insurance decisions in the Health Insurance

15

Marketplace, the individual is faced with a certain number of coverage options from which to choose.
The individual can then employ their own information seeking strategies to determine which choice is
most appropriate for them, including asking a human resources officer and/or librarian for help with
enrollment. Their choice of channels will be directly related to their information need. It is unlikely, for
example, that they would continue to locate information about health insurance information or the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) that is not directly relevant to their own needs.
Individuals seeking health insurance information do not usually have a multitude of channels
from which to select. Generally, users are given a summary of benefits and coverage information
brochure written by a health insurance company and provided by employers. Health insurance
information beyond that can be difficult to obtain. While there may not be multiple channels, the uses
and gratification theory may suggest that users may select different content to fulfill needs and the
information gaps model proposes that they will only select those that are directly related to their own
needs. They may only read through the portions of the distributed health insurance information that
most closely pertains to their needs. For example, a young woman interested in starting a family may
review maternity coverage closely, whereas an older employee may look at prescription coverage for
maintenance medications.
It may even be true that when individuals seek information from outside channels, such as the
mass media, the information contained therein may present conflicting information (potentially even
misinformation). As health insurance coverage has been in the spotlight following the implementation
of the ACA, many media outlets have covered health care reform. Those interested in health insurance
information may be exposed to channels with unrelated information and not realize that the
information may or may not pertain to their situation.

16

Johnson and Case (2012) argue that “face-to-face, interpersonal communication is the preferred
mode of communication for information seeking” (p. 163). Interpersonal communication channels may
be a more frequently called upon and used channel in health insurance information seeking. Most new
employees meet (either one-on-one or in a group) with human resources managers who detail the
health insurance coverage options at their institution. “Characterized by its intimacy and the awareness
of other’s needs” (p. 67), interpersonal communication about health insurance may be targeted to
specific information needs. The content-heavy Healthcare.gov or health insurance information packets
may be daunting; a one-on-one session with a librarian or benefits manager may be a more satisfying
information seeking session than left to one’s own devices. Communication channel preferences might
be quite interesting to explore with health insurance information seeking. In addition to asking
individuals to list their sources of information for health insurance, it may also be helpful to inquire
about which sources are preferred or most helpful.
An individual’s social network comprising of family, friends, and colleagues may be one
preferred source of health insurance information. A 26-year-old purchasing health insurance for the first
time may turn to her parents for guidance on which plan to select. A new employee may survey his
colleagues to see which health insurance options have worked best within those office’s options. In a
study of information seeking of job opportunities, Granovetter (1973) demonstrated that weak ties, or
less-developed relationships, might actually be greater sources of information. Individuals in that study
expressed that the most helpful information came from people in their extended networks (e.g., casual
acquaintances or friends of friends). For newly-hired employees, new colleagues may be an effective
source of information as they are not as emotionally invested and may be able to provide an outsider’s
perspective.

17

Daft and Lengel’s (1986) media richness theory argues that individuals will select a channel that
matches the “level of uncertainty reduction they feel is required in any one information-processing task”
(Sitikin, Sutcliff, & Barrios-Choplin, 1992). The more complex the information need, the richer the
desired channel. Richer media channels (e.g., face-to-face consultations with human resource managers)
may be the most appropriate for health insurance information, often seen as complex and convoluted.
In evaluating different channels of information, many individuals may make their selections
based on the “costs” of information seeking, including psychological, temporal, and material. “Most
seekers appear to assume it is better to rely on easily obtained information (they have an answer after
all) no matter how dubious, than to spend the effort necessary to get complete information” (Johnson &
Case, 2012, p. 165). The effort and time required to collect additional information may be too great a
cost for casual information seekers. Many have suggested that the principle of least effort may explain
why individuals consult a limited number of information sources (Broadbent & Koenig, 1988).
In a study of young adults (ages 18 to 30), Wong et al. (2015) asked participants to identify
whom they spoke with regarding their health insurance options and which communication channels
were pursued. The two most popular channels of health insurance information identified by their
participants were their parents (61%) and their friends (52%). Additional sources of information included
Internet searches on Google.com (45%), the HealthCare.gov call center (24%), health insurance
company websites (24%), a federal navigator or certified application counselor (18%), and news articles
on HealthCare.gov and the ACA (18%). This initial study demonstrates the wide range of information
sources individuals pursue when seeking to understand health insurance information and their available
coverage options.

18

2.1.4

Information Fields
Selected information channels make up an individual’s information field(s). Johnson and Case

(2012) identify an individual’s information field as a space “within which the individual is embedded, …
[which] encompasses the carriers of information an individual is normally exposed to and the sources an
individual would normally consult when confronted with a problem” (p. 28). Their research has shown
that “people seem to construct their information fields so that channels are segmented and specialized
as to the functions they perform” (p. 92). Through repeated use of different information sources and
their related successes and failures, individuals establish information seeking and use patterns for
particular situations. While individuals may be able to “arrange … elements of their information fields to
maximize their surveillance of health information” (p. 29) for general health information needs, the
same may not be true of health insurance information needs. The paucity of information resources on
health insurance information underscores this point.
In addition to formal information resources, “individuals are embedded in a physical world that
involves recurring contacts with an interpersonal network of friends and/or family” (p. 97). It could be
argued that this piece of the information field is a strong indicator of an individual’s information
behavior for health insurance information. Health insurance information seeking is generally an
infrequent event most often pursued at the beginning of new employment, sometimes pursued during
annual enrollment, and perhaps further explored when an individual is confronted with a new health
condition. Because the information need is infrequent and the available information so different from
most general health information, an individual’s existing information field may be the first place he/she
will turn. The individual may start with friends, family, and colleagues to determine the best choice.
To that end as information seeking becomes more focused, individuals change their information
fields to support specific information related to the needs at hand (Kuhlthau, 1991). Once the individual

19

has exhausted resources from their standard information field, they may begin collecting further
information specifically related to their health insurance information need. This may include summary of
benefits and coverage forms and other insurance provider materials. It may also include information
materials packaged by the individual’s employer.
There are limits in the information available within an individual’s information field. To start,
“the arrangement of an individual’s information field limits the degree to which that individual can act
on his/her predispositions” (Johnson & Case, 2012, p. 28). In the context of health insurance information
seeking, an individual’s information field is limited by the information offered by their insurance
provider (e.g., employer) and insurance company. This information may be incomplete and the
information seeker is limited in outside resources that may further elucidate any remaining questions. In
addition, the information provided may be written in a way to make the insurance provider/company
appear favorable and may not be free of bias. Research has shown that the information provided by
insurance companies is not written at a reading level appropriate for most audiences (McCormack,
Bann, Uhrig, Berkman, & Rudd, 2009; Pati et al., 2012; Vardell, 2013; Wallace, DeVoe, & Hansen, 2011).
Models of information seeking may shed further light on the process users experience as they navigate
through their information fields.
2.2

Models of Information Seeking
Kuhlthau (1991) developed the Information Search Process model with students conducting

research projects. Kuhlthau’s model (see Figure 2) is unique in that it includes the affective aspects of
information search in addition to specific thoughts and actions. The stages outlined in her model,
including task initiation, topic selection, prefocus exploration, focus formulation, information collection,
search closure, and starting writing are supplemented with three layers: feelings, thoughts, and actions.
Many of the affective aspects addressed in the model, including uncertainty, confusion, frustration,

20

doubt, clarity, and relief may relate to the variety of emotions that individuals face when making health
insurance decisions.

Figure 2: Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process Model (Kuhlthau, 2004, p. 82)

2.2.1

Health Information Acquisition Model
The Health Information Acquisition Model developed by Freimuth, Stein, and Kean (1989) uses a

flow-chart-style model to track acquisition and evaluation of health information (see Figure 3; the model
does not include use of the information). The figure begins with a stimulus which requires an individual
to evaluate his/her current information. The stimulus for health insurance information seeking might be
the need to select a coverage option from a limited number of choices offered by an employer or a
television advertisement for health insurance. Individuals needing to select a coverage option would
begin by evaluating existing information (e.g., perhaps the summary of benefits and coverage form from
the human resources office or the ACA site, http://www.healthcare.gov). Depending on whether the
individual evaluates that information to be adequate, he/she will either stop searching for further
information or set additional information goals to locate further information.
The information goals will be informed by a cost/benefit analysis, where the individual will
decide whether to engage in an active search or pursue other options (e.g., speaking directly with a
human resources officer). If the individual decides to engage in an active search, her/his search
behaviors may include intrapersonal (internal), interpersonal, or mass mediated (external sources). For

21

example, an individual may consider previous experiences with health insurance (intrapersonal); meet
with a librarian (interpersonal) to discuss how a website works, what the insurance terminology means,
and/or how to begin enrolling searching a health insurance company’s website; or search a health
insurance company website (mass mediated).
The model depicts this process with feedback loops, indicating that an individual may constantly
be evaluating his/her information need. The model includes information evaluation following search
behavior. In this piece of the model, individuals consider each information source (intrapersonal,
interpersonal, and mass mediated) in comparison with prior information to assess the cost-benefit ratio
(p. 11). The process continues until the individual reaches her/his desired level of certainty. While this
model focuses on an individual’s information acquisition, information mediators may also play a role in
supporting the information seeking and searching process.

Figure 3: Health Information Acquisition Model (Freimuth, Stein, & Kean, 1989, p. 8)

22

2.2.2

Risk Information Seeking and Processing Model
Perhaps one of the most relevant models of health information seeking to health insurance

information is the Risk Information Seeking and Processing (RISP) Model developed by Griffin,
Dunwoody, and Neuwirth (1999) to model how individuals respond to information regarding health risk.
While the RISP Model was written with such topics as seatbelts, recycling, healthy diets, and other riskreduction topics in mind, the relationship between insurance choice and risk tolerance suggests that a
model which includes perceived hazard characteristics may relate well to health insurance information
seeking. The model was reformatted by Griffin, Dunwoody, & Yang in 2012 and is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Risk Information Seeking and Processing Model (Griffin, Dunwoody, & Yang, 2012, p. 23)

The RISP Model shows several factors influencing the extent to which a person would seek out
risk information, including which channels and the amount of effort used to critically analyze the
information (see Figure 4). Motivation, including informational subjective norms and information
insufficiency, describes the amount of information individuals indicate is necessary to understand and
manage a risk in their own lives. For example, some individuals may seek out a lot of information on

23

health insurance options, while others may seek out very little. Perceived information gathering capacity
relates to an individual’s own assessment about his/her ability to learn more and understand the risk
involved. This aspect seems particularly apt in the field of health insurance, as so many people are
unfamiliar with health insurance terms (Blumberg, Long, Kenney, & Goin, 2013) and seem to resign
themselves to an inability to fully understand their options. Lastly, relevant channel beliefs describes the
individual’s beliefs about relevant information sources (e.g., concern about bias in the information
provided by health insurance companies).
These three factors in the RISP Model are in turn impacted by affective response to risk,
subjective and/or social norms about information gathering related to the risk, perceived hazard
characteristics, and characteristics of the individual (e.g., demographics, political leanings, relevant
hazard experience, etc.). Affective response to risk, for example preoccupation with worry, may
certainly cloud the insurance decision-making process, while the perception that others believe
knowledge gathering is important (i.e., subjective normative component) may play a strong role in
health insurance selection. When individuals are responsible for selecting the health insurance choice
for their entire family this additional weight of responsibility may factor in considerably. Lastly,
individual characteristics clearly play a role in personal views about the characteristics of a given hazard
(e.g., previous illness, social status, etc. will most likely impact the selection of health insurance).
In a meta-analysis conducted by Yang, Aloe, and Feeley (2014), the RISP Model was shown to be
most effective in explaining information seeking when the risk information is familiar or particularly
relevant to an individual. In studies where the risk information was less familiar to participants, the RISP
Model was not as effective in explaining information seeking and systematic processing.

24

2.2.3

Comprehensive Model of Information Seeking
The Health Belief Model (HBM) provided foundational elements for the Comprehensive Model

of Information Seeking (CMIS) developed by Johnson and Case (2012; see Figure 5). Johnson and Case
posit that while the HBM “assigns a passive role to individuals…, the CMIS… recognizes individuals as
more active in seeking and processing information” (p. 42). This active information seeker (who can be
characterized by her/his health-related factors) operates within the available range of informationcarriers to perform information seeking actions. In the case of requesting librarian assistance, the
librarian may be a potential information-carrier as well as the receiver of an information seeking action.

Figure 5: Comprehensive Model of Information Seeking (Johnson & Case, 2012, p. 40)

As demonstrated in the CMIS, health-related factors, such as demographics and personal
experience, are antecedents to information seeking. These background factors “often affect the choice
of communication channels for information seeking” (p. 46). Because there are not many choices of
communication channels in health insurance information seeking, personal experience may play a key
role here. For example, a young, newly hired employee may recall her parents sharing advice on health
insurance. She may select to use interpersonal sources as a possible channel, based on her
demographics (i.e., age) and personal experience. An individual who has experience asking for help

25

filling out a job application at the library may turn to a librarian for help with navigating the Health
Insurance Marketplace.
One of the Personal Relevance Factors included in the CMIS is salience, the degree to which
information is valued (Evans & Clarke, 1983). The ACA’s requirements for all health insurance companies
(including those that are the source of employer-sponsored insurance) to include vignettes in coverage
descriptions (e.g., for a middle-aged woman with diabetes or for a pregnant woman, this is what the
coverage would look like) is a step forward to increasing the saliency of health insurance information.
Many individuals who are healthy may assume that they are not in need of health insurance or require
only very basic coverage. While the ACA requires that all individuals obtain health insurance, these case
scenarios may provide more context to the information, therefore increasing its value or saliency to the
individual. This information may be built upon by a human resources officer and/or librarian providing
individual assistance. By focusing on the most salient information, the individual may have a more
enriching information exchange.
2.3

Types of Information Seekers
While models present larger trends in information seeking, it may also be useful to explore

differences in individual behavior. Through the International Consumer Information Survey, Thorelli and
Engeldow (1980) identified a “fairly homogeneous and cosmopolitan group of information-sensitive
consumers” (p. 12) who can be characterized by higher socio-economic class, high education, high
ownership of durable goods, high sensitivity to information, high confidence in product tests, skepticism
about the purchase process, and likely to be an opinion leader. Interestingly, Thorelli and Engeldow’s
research demonstrated that information seekers often acted as vigilantes, who “search diligently,
complain vigorously, join organizations, pinpoint fraud and deception, and generally police the market”

26

(p. 14). It would be interesting to see if this trend could also be identified in a small subset of health
insurance information seekers.
Miller (1987) classified people’s stress coping styles. Her research identified two types of
information seekers: monitors seek out information to help them cope, while blunters avoid
information. While this was written with individuals faced with the possibility of electric shock, the same
styles of information users may be also true in the realm of health insurance information. Some
individuals may monitor health insurance information closely, while others may blunt information about
health insurance and make decisions that are not as informed.
2.4

Health-Related Decision-Making
Once the health information consumer has gone through the information seeking journey,

consulting different information channels and fields, that individual must make use (or not) of the
information that they have obtained. Patients are confronted with medical decisions that must be made
at all steps along the medical treatment path. The process by which patients make health decisions has a
tremendous impact on health outcomes. As emphasized by Fowler, Levin, and Sepucha (2011), “highquality medical decisions require that patients be fully informed and involved in the decision-making
process” (p. 699). Individuals are often not left on their own to make health-related decisions. As
discussed previously in this chapter, individuals often make health insurance decisions after consulting
with other people (e.g., human resources officer, librarian, colleagues, partner, etc.).
2.4.1

Decision-Making Theories
Several theories have been used to explore decision-making patterns. One example is the fuzzy

trace theory (Brainerd & Reyna, 1990), which argues that people form two kinds of memory
representations, verbatim and gist, and that they rely on the fuzzier version to reason and make
decisions. This theory has been used to explore physician decision-making that relies on intuition

27

(Spring, 2008) but could also be used to explore health insurance decision-making. Additional models
such as the Transtheoretical Model, which models stage-of-change thinking, and the Theory of
Reasoned Action, which posits that individual’s intention to perform a behavior is the best indicator of
motivational readiness, focus on behavioral decision-making and are not as relevant to health insurance
decision-making.
Bettman’s (1979) Information Processing Theory of Consumer Choice connects the information
seeking process with the decision-making process. Klinkman (1991) and Saintfort and Booske (1996)
developed frameworks to model the health plan decision-making process and are most relevant to
studying health insurance decision-making. This theory and these two frameworks will be outlined
below with close attention to how they relate to health insurance decision-making.
2.4.2

The Information Processing Theory of Consumer Choice
The main elements in Bettman’s theory are processing capacity, motivation, attention and

perception, information acquisition and evaluation, use of memory, decision rules and processes, and
consumption and learning (see Figure 6). Processing capacity is built on the body of research that shows
that individuals have a limited capacity to take in new information and carry out more than one task at a
time, “affect[ing] the kinds of strategies or rules that are feasible for consumers to use in various choice
situations” (p. 18). One common effect of limitations of processing capacity is the heuristics that
individuals develop to help them deal with complex situations.

28

Figure 6: The Information Processing Theory of Consumer Choice (Bettman, 1979, p. 17)

Bettman’s motivation variable is driven by the desire to accomplish certain things through the
choices individuals make. The attention variable refers to both voluntary, the “conscious allocation of
processing effort to activities related to current goals or plans” (p. 25), and involuntary attention, the
“allocation of effort to stimuli based more upon automatic mechanisms.” In the information acquisition
and evaluation piece of the theory, individuals may retrieve information from their memory or may seek
out additional information to aid in their choice. Because the “goals being pursued will clearly influence
the direction of attention and hence the information examined” (p. 28), this variable is heavily
influenced by motivation, attention, and perception (as seen in Figure 6). The major piece of the
decision processes variable is comparison and selection of alternatives. Finally, after an alternative is
chosen, the “outcomes experienced can serve as a source of information to the consumer” (p. 35) and

29

are reflected in the consumption and learning processes variable. This more generalized theory of
consumer choice is unique in that integrates information seeking and use within the theory, and,
therefore, may shed some light on the health information seeking and decision-making processes.
2.4.3

The Process of Choice of Health Care Plan
Klinkman (1991) proposes a model of health insurance decision-making (see Figure 7) that

begins with the contract between employer and guarantor. An employer will contract with an insurance
company to select a set number of health care plans to offer their employees. The employer must weigh
the costs of the different available options and what that will cost the institution (as most employers
subsidize the cost of insurance for their employees). This understudied area is outlined in Klinkman’s
framework where the guarantor will offer plans with a focus on the costs, comprehensiveness,
monitoring options (available to employers), and quality. The employer will focus on the costs, quality,
stability, and acceptability of the available options from the guarantors and will make a choice, resulting
in a menu of vendor options.

30

Figure 7: Klinkman’s The Process of Choice of Health Care Plan Framework (Klinkman, 1991, p. 312)

The second stage, of greater interest to health insurance literacy researchers, outlines the
interactions between the menu of available choices, the consumer, and the consumer’s ultimate choice.
Klinkman outlines the consumer’s decision-making processes through three questions (each with
subsections, outlined in depth in Figure 8):
1. What is our ideal plan?
a. What can we afford?
b. What do we need? (This factor is defined by Klinkman as a mix of the consumer’s
perceived health risk, demographics, and health beliefs.)
c. What would we like? (e.g., desired provider attributes, desired plan attributes)

31

2. What are our choices?
a. Freedom of choice, convenience of use
b. Financial characteristics of plans
c. Service characteristics of plans
3. After a choice is made, how satisfied are we?

Figure 8: Klinkman’s The Consumer’s Choice of Health Care Plan Framework (Klinkman, 1991, p. 317)

The final question above reflects a feedback loop that Klinkman includes to suggest adjustments
that individuals may make in their coverage. As this is a decision that is made annually, individuals may
reflect on their satisfaction with their plan over the past year and make adjustments as needed. As
Klinkman himself notes, “In the real world the … process is nowhere nearly as clear or rational as that
described; it is difficult to picture a human being proceeding through the steps on this pathway” (p.

32

319). However, the factors identified by Klinkman may be used as variables in a research study on this
topic and may enhance understanding of consumer information processing.
2.4.4

Conceptual Framework of Consumer Selection of Health Plans
Sainfort and Booske (1996) built on the work by Klinkman and other health insurance

researchers to create a conceptual framework of consumer selection of health plans that features a
hypothesized relationship between background variables, choice elements, and information (see Figure
9).

Figure 9: Sainfort and Booske’s Conceptual Framework of Consumer Selection of Health Plans (Sainfort & Booske, 1996, p. 37)

As Sainfort and Booske state, “background characteristics are likely to influence the amount and
type of information that individuals desire in selecting a health plan” (p. 37). These background
characteristics include common demographic characteristics, as well as health-specific characteristics
and the variables specific to the health plan (e.g., coverage type, health plan knowledge, etc.).

33

In the study where Sainfort and Booske tested the relationship between choice elements and
information, there was a clear relationship between information amount and plan choice. Individuals
who looked at a greater amount of information were more likely to change their choice. In addition,
individuals felt greater satisfaction with their selections after viewing detailed information (p. 51).
2.4.5

Decision Psychology
As stated by Fowler et al., “… a core principle of shared decision-making is that the value of

benefits and risks should be determined by those who have to live with them” (p. 700). Because many
medical decisions are “’preference sensitive,’ where the best choice depends on the values a specific
patient places on relevant outcomes” (Ubel, 2010, p. 5), many researchers have turned to decision
psychology to explore the contextual factors that may influence medical decision-making.
Whereas most research has focused on individuals’ cognitive capacities to make decisions,
Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, and Welch (2001) argue that “emotional reactions to risk situations often
diverge from cognitive assessments of those risks, [and] when such divergence occurs, emotional
reactions often drive behavior” (p. 267). This risk-as-feelings hypothesis argues that emotions and affect
play a strong role in decision-making. Previously many decision scientists assumed that when a patient
made an “error” and selected a treatment option that was not ideal, it was caused by cognitive
limitations that led to biased decision-making. In a study conducted by Ubel (2010) to explore this topic,
participants selected the less ideal treatment option because they felt the other treatment option was
preferable. As Ubel summarizes “risk information is rarely received dispassionately, but is usually
processed by people in affective and intuitive ways, too. Risks create feelings” (p. 7). Exploring the role
of feelings in health insurance decision-making is supported by these findings.
Risk is perceived and acted upon in two ways: risk as feelings (“our instinctive and intuitive
reactions to danger” (Slovic & Peters, 2006, p. 322)) and risk as analysis (“bring[ing] logic, reason, and

34

scientific deliberation to bear on risk assessment and decision making” (p. 322)). As an extension of this,
Slovic and Peters argue that individuals understand reality in two fundamentally different ways, “one
labeled intuitive, automatic, natural, nonverbal, narrative, and experiential” (based in affect) and “the
other analytical, deliberative, and verbal” (p. 322). Research in this area has indicated that “affect
influences judgment directly and is not simply a response to a prior analytic evaluation” (p. 323). It is
clear that rather than focusing solely on individuals’ intellectual capabilities for processing health
information, it is also necessary to explore the role of affect in health-related decision-making.
Heuristics have emerged as another aspect that may explain less than ideal decision-making.
Heuristics are “efficient cognitive processes, conscious or unconscious, that ignore part of the
information” (Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011, p. 451). With health insurance information, it is very
possible that some aspects of coverage are ignored by individuals as they select their preferred health
coverage option. While it had been widely assumed that using heuristics led to greater errors, research
has shown that, in fact, ignoring part of the information can lead to more accurate judgments.
In conclusion, decision psychology and shared decision-making research shed light on the
medical decision-making process and demonstrate areas for potential future research. The role of affect
and feelings in decision-making, as well as situations in which patients select less-than-desirable options,
are potential areas for future research on the health insurance decision-making process.
2.5

Health Literacy
“Health care has changed signiﬁcantly over the last few decades, with a greater emphasis on

self-management for long-term health conditions and personal responsibility for maintaining good
health” (Smith & Duman, 2009). Navigating the American health care system requires several skills of a
patient. The patient must be able to schedule appointments, discuss sensitive health issues effectively
with a health care professional, determine appropriate medication dosages, and decipher insurance

35

bills. The ability to execute this array of skills effectively is referred to as health literacy, and the success
of such interactions with the health care system can have a direct effect on an individual’s health
outcomes.
A systematic review of health literacy research demonstrated that much of the population in
fact, has low health literacy, or limited ability to comprehend medical information (Paasche-Orlow,
Parker, Gazmararian, Nielsen-Bohlman, & Rudd, 2005). Studies conducted by Cho, Lee, Arozullah, and
Crittenden (2008); McCormack, Bann, Uhrig, Berkman, and Rudd (2009); and Sentell (2012) have shown
that minority populations and those with less health insurance coverage in particular have exponentially
lower levels of health literacy. The combination of low health literacy and greater responsibility to
manage one’s health can have “dire individual consequences” (Kilker, 2000, p. 2) and result in poor
health outcomes.
This literature review will present a review of the evolving definition of health literacy and
assessments of health literacy. The review will then explore the health literacy demands users face in
the health care system as well as summarize tested health literacy interventions.
2.5.1

Defining Health Literacy
The definition of health literacy has evolved and expanded over time. The term “health literacy”

was first published in the proceedings of a health education conference (Simonds, 1974). In this
publication, Simonds argues that health education is a social policy issue affecting the health care
system, mass communication, and the education system. However, the efforts to address health literacy
concerns predate its official nomenclature; the military recognized the need for plain-language materials
for returning World War II veterans in the 1940s (Huber et al., 2012).
In 1985, Doak, Doak, and Root published the book Teaching Patients with Low Literacy Skills,
which provided practical advice for nurses and other health care providers on how to work with patients

36

with limited literacy skills. The Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine (REALM) was created in 1991
(Davis et al.). The term “health literacy,” however, did not appear in the published medical literature
until 20 years after Simonds work when, in 1995, Parker, Baker, Williams, and Nurss developed the Test
of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (TOFHLA). Their preliminary results demonstrated a deficiency in
health literacy skills and a need for future research.
One of the TOFHLA researchers, Ruth Parker, went on to chair the American Medical
Association’s Ad Hoc Committee on Health Literacy for the Council on Scientific Affairs (1999), where
health literacy was defined as the “constellation of skills, including the ability to perform basic reading
and numerical tasks required to function in the health care environment … [including] the ability to read
and comprehend prescription bottles, appointment slips, and other essential health-related materials”
(p. 553). In the Healthy People 2010 initiative, the Department of Health and Human Services adopted
Ratzan and (Ruth) Parker’s (2000) definition: “the degree to which individuals have the capacity to
obtain, process, and understand basic health information and services needed to make appropriate
health decisions” (p. vi); this is also the definition of health literacy that is included in the Affordable
Care Act. These definitions view health literacy as “competence in a set of skills” (Paasche-Orlow, 2011,
p. 1123) that enable individuals to acquire and use information as they interact with the health care
system.
The Medical Library Association recognized the importance of an individual identifying an
information need before being able to find, evaluate, and use information in their definition of health
information literacy. The Medical Library Association Health Information Literacy Task Force defined
health information literacy as ‘‘the set of abilities needed to recognize a health information need,
identify likely information sources and use them to retrieve relevant information, assess the quality of
the information and its applicability to a specific situation, and analyze, understand, and use the
information to make good health decisions’’ (Rambo, 2004). This definition is unique in its connection of

37

health literacy to information literacy as well as its emphasis on the individual as someone with agency
who must identify an information need before taking action.
The impact of improving individual’s access and use of health information is echoed in the
World Health Organization’s definition of health literacy as “the cognitive and social skills which
determine the motivation and ability of individuals to gain access to, understand and use information in
ways which promote and maintain good health” (Nutbeam, 1998, p. 357). This definition focuses on
health literacy interventions as “critical to empowerment,” connecting the personal and social benefits
of a health-literate population. This definition of health literacy, as well as the Medical Library
Association definition, emphasize the ethical imperative of improving health literacy for the greater
good (Huber et al., 2012, p. 437). Studies that focus on individual’s abilities and information needs, such
as the research study described in this document, may support the idea of an individual as an agent of
change, rather than the traditional top-down approach that is characteristic of many health literacy
reports and efforts (Huber, 2012).
While some view health literacy as a set of individual capacities, others view ability as a dynamic
state dependent upon “the characteristics of both the individual and the health care system” in a health
care encounter (Baker, 2006, p. 878). In this case, the medical condition, the health care providers, and
the health care system providing the care may impact an individual’s health literacy. These outside
factors were identified by the Institute of Medicine’s Committee on Health Literacy members NielsenBohlman, Panzer, and Kindig (2004), who cited culture and society, health system(s), and education
system(s) as both influencing factors and opportunities for public health intervention (see Figure 10).

38

Figure 10: Potential Points for Intervention in the Health Literacy Framework (Nielsen-Bohlman, Panzer, & Kindig, 2004, p. 6)

While health literacy is considered by some to be a set of skills or dependent on a health care
encounter, yet others identify “health knowledge as a part of health literacy” (Baker, 2006, p. 878). This
is exemplified by the Institute of Medicine’s expert panel, which divided health literacy into cultural and
conceptual knowledge, oral literacy, print literacy, and numeracy (Nielsen-Bohlman et al., 2004). A
researcher’s perspective on health literacy dictates the measurements of health literacy considered
most useful. If a researcher considers it dependent on an individual, then tests of an individual’s
comprehension may be appropriate. However, if a researcher considers it a dynamic state dependent on
the health care encounter, “measures at the individual level are inadequate” (Baker, 2006, p. 878). In an
effort to address these multiple layers, Baker created a conceptual model (see Figure 11) that is oft-cited
(according to Scopus, 414 times).

39

Figure 11: Conceptual Model of the Relationship between Individual Capacities, Health-Related Print and Oral Literacy, and
Health Outcomes (Baker, 2006, p. 879)

As expressed in Baker’s model, individual capacity is comprised of two parts, reading fluency
and prior knowledge. An individual’s capacity then dictates an individual’s health literacy, both print and
oral. While these two are separated in Baker’s model (see Figure 11), it is difficult to measure the
concepts separately (Baker, 2006) and most health literacy research conflates the two. The aspects of
reading fluency and prior knowledge as components of health literacy are the most often explored
concepts in health literacy research. For a further discussion of the research on the complexity and
difficulty of printed and spoken messages, please see the Readability of Health Insurance Materials
subsection in the Health Insurance Literacy section, which follows this Health Literacy section.
Paasche-Orlow (2011) explored the factors that contribute to health literacy and expressed
them in another model (see Figure 12). While Paasche-Orlow’s definition of health literacy in the figure
focuses on an individual’s capacity, his inclusion of contextual factors acknowledges the multi-faceted
nature of health literacy as described by Baker’s description of health literacy as a dynamic state
dependent on the health care encounter.

40

Figure 12: Factors that Contribute to Health Literacy (Paasche-Orlow, 2011, p. 1124)

Paasche-Orlow articulates that an individual’s background and characteristics may impact health
literacy. He names aspects that are often explored in health literacy research such as culture, race,
ethnicity, language proficiency, health insurance, and employment/occupation, as well as factors that
are not as well-researched including social support, neurosensory capacity, and cognitive capacity.
Paasche-Orlow emphasizes the importance of determining “patients’ specific barriers to health literacy,
and [designing] interventions … [that] match a patient’s particular issues” (p. 1124). These
underexplored aspects present opportunities for further research.
Rather than view health literacy as a patient’s individual responsibility and concern, the Institute
of Medicine’s 2004 report stresses that health literacy should be viewed as a challenge and an
opportunity for improving communication skills among health care practitioners and public health
professionals (Nielsen-Bohlman et al., 2004). Public health expert Ilona Kickbusch (2009) emphasized the
universal importance of health literacy by stressing that “it can empower and enable people to make
sound health decisions in the context of everyday life – at home, in the community, at the workplace, in
the health care system, in the market place, and – above all – in the political arena” (p. 132).

41

2.5.2

Assessing Health Literacy
The first text readability formulas were created in the 1920s (Zakaluk & Samuels, 1988), followed by

Flesch (1946), who argued for using word count, sentences, affixes, and personal references to assess written
materials. The first tool to measure health literacy specifically appeared in 1991, and researchers have been
toiling at this effort for many years since then. A comparison of the available tools to measure health literacy
can be found in Table 1. This table is based on Mancuso’s (2009) integrative review of health literacy literature.
Instrument
Rapid Estimate
of Adult Literacy
in Medicine
(REALM; Davis
et al., 1991)

Test of
Functional
Health Literacy
in Adults
(TOFHLA; Parker
et al., 1995)

Summary
Rapid-screening,
reading recognition
test to assess how
well patients read
common medical and
lay terms.
Administered orally,
patients are tested on
pronunciation.
Consists of 125 words
arranged in four
columns according to
number of syllables
and difficulty level.
Words were selected
from patient
education materials
and intake forms.
Measures a patient’s
ability to perform
health-related tasks
that require reading
and numerical skills.
Consists of a 12minute, 50-item
reading
comprehension
section and a 10minute, 17-item
numerical ability test.

Advantages
Quick and easy to
administer and score.
“Acceptable to patients
in a health-care setting
because they use healthrelated words”
(Mancuso, p. 84).
Well-established
criterion validity and
highly positively
correlated with other
standardized reading
recognition tests.

“Considered ‘gold
standard’ of health
literacy testing”
(Mancuso, p. 84).
Strong reliability and
validity data.
14-point font print
version available.
Measures reading,
numeracy, and
comprehension skills.
Enhanced content
validity from using actual
hospital medical texts.
Spanish version is
available.

Limitations
Does not measure
understanding or
words but rather
sight-reading ability.
Only assigns grade
range equivalents.
All three versions are
only available in
English. Test may not
be as relevant in
health insurance
literacy research, as
individuals may be
able to pronounce
health insurance
terminology (e.g.,
copay) but may have
no idea what it means.
22 minutes to
administer could lead
to participant
frustration.
No validity data for
the Spanish version.

Additional Versions
Shortened REALM
(Davis et al., 1993)
Consists of 66
words in three
columns
REALM-R (Bass et
al., 2003)
Consists of eight
words

TOFHLA-S (Parker et
al., 1995)
-Spanish version
-excellent reliability
but criterion validity
has not been
established
S-TOFHLA (Brief;
Baker et al., 1999)
-7 minute, 36-item
reading comprehension section
and 5 minute, 4item numerical
ability test
S-TOFHLA (Short;
Baker et al., 1999)
-Only consists of a
reading
comprehension
section, no
numeracy

42

Citations*
446 citations
(Davis et al.,
1991)
1330
citations
(Davis et al.,
1993)
252 citations
(Bass et al.,
2003)

1455
citations
(Parker et
al., 1995)
1059
citations
(Baker et al.,
1999)

Instrument
Medical
Achievement
Reading Test
(MART; HansonDivers, 1997)

Newest Vital
Sign (NVS;
Weiss et al.,
2005)

Short
Assessment of
Health Literacy
for SpanishSpeaking Adults
(SAHLSA; Lee et
al., 2006)

Summary
Terminology literacy
test.
Consists of 42
medically-related
words.
Scored on correct
pronunciation.
Scoring correlated
with grade level.
Designed with three
common “excuses” in
mind to help patients
feel less intimidated to
express difficulty.
English and Spanish
screening tool.
Consists of a nutrition
label and 6 related
questions.
Literacy is determined
by a range.

Advantages
Based on the Wide
Range Achievement Test
(WRAT), a test with
strong validity and
reliability.
Quick to administer,
scoring in 3-5 minutes.
Unthreatening
appearance.
More precise in gradelevel placement; places
respondents into exact
grade levels.

Limitations
Only measures
recognition of words
by sight and not by
understanding.
Small sample size; not
generalizable to a
greater population.
Assumption of content
and criterion validity;
further students are
needed.

Additional Versions
none

Citations*
57 citations
(HansonDivers,
1997)

Easy to administer,
scoring in 3-5 minutes.
Sensitivity in both
English and Spanish.

Criterion validity for
both English and
Spanish was
poor/unacceptable.
Reliability of Spanish
version was low.
Scoring descriptives
are imprecise.
Questionable criterion
validity.
Does not recognize
the heterogeneity of
the Spanish language,
including idiomatic
expressions that differ
across Latino
populations.
Measures only word
recognition and
comprehension; no
numeracy section.

none

1005
citations
(Weiss et al.,
2005)

none

150 citations
(Lee et al.,
2006)

Spanish test.
Easy to administer,
Consists of 50 words
minimal training
each on a flash card to required for those who
test for
administer the test.
comprehension.
Scoring in 3-6 minutes.
Based on the 66-item
Good reliability.
REALM. Terms were
translated into
Spanish.
Requires participants
to read aloud from a
list of 50 medical
terms and associate
similar terms.
Scores <37 indicate
inadequate health
literacy.
Table 1: Comparison of Health Literacy Assessment Instruments
*Google Scholar citations recorded on March 16, 2017

All of the health assessments evaluated above focus on medical terms or informational
materials commonly found in medical settings. This indicates that the assessment may not be as
applicative to other areas of health literacy. The instruments, for example, may not be as applicative to
health insurance materials, as the terms used in those documents may include words not restricted to
the medical domain (e.g., beneficiary, deductible, etc.). In addition, because these tests are conducted in
medical settings, participants may be experiencing confounding variables that affect their performance.

43

For example, ill health or unease in medical situations may cause poorer performance in the
assessments.
2.5.3

Assessing Health-Related Materials
In addition to assessing patients’ literacy levels, health care professionals and health educators

are also encouraged to assess the literacy levels of their materials. Doak, Doak, and Root (1996)
recommend three possible options for assessing the difficulty and suitability of patient education
materials: a checklist of attributes, analysis via readability formulas, and analysis using Suitability
Assessment of Materials (SAM), with each subsequent method increasing in both rigor and time
commitment.
Their proposed checklist asks practitioners to evaluate the organization, writing style,
appearance, and appeal of the printed materials. In addition to their SAM tool, the authors recommend
the Fry (1977) readability formula, which uses the number of sentences and syllables to assess a
document’s complexity. The authors also acknowledge that additional factors, such as print size, type
style, color contrast, concept density, and unfamiliar context also impact the readability of a document.
While some of the aspects are incorporated within SAM, many of these aspects are not as easy to assess
using a standard readability formula and should be taken into consideration.
2.5.4

Health Literacy Interventions
To address health literacy barriers, researchers have explored a host of health literacy

interventions, such as alternative approaches to document design, numerical presentation, pictorial
representations, media, and readability (Berkman et al., 2011). Researchers develop these strategies to
“promote improvements in patient knowledge, self-efficacy, behavior, adherence, disease, quality of
life, and health care services use” (p. 144). Berkman et al. acknowledge a limitation in that many studies
on health literacy interventions do not focus on the effects in particular sub-groups of individuals with

44

low health literacy, but rather study the effects in groups of mixed health literacy levels. The following
overview of health literacy interventions in Table 2 is drawn from the systematic review Berkman et al.
conducted in 2011.
Intervention

Approaches

Alternative document
design






Alternative numerical
presentation



Alternative pictorial
presentation






Alternative media

Alternative readability
and document design
Physician notification of
patient literacy status









Highlighting common features of comparative information
Presenting only essential information
Putting key information first
Presenting information on quality with higher number (rather than
lower number) indicating better quality
Modifying denominators
Presenting predictive values (conditional probabilities or natural
frequencies) in alternate numerical formats
Adding symbols to hospital quality information to indicate concepts
of “more” or “less”
Varying symbol types
Adding icon arrays (i.e., pictographs) to numerical information
about treatment benefits
Adding a mind map (pictorial representation linking key concepts
and ideas)
Adding illustrations to auxiliary prescription labels
Adding or substituting media (e.g., video, computer, or slide show
presentations) for printed materials
Adding video to verbal narratives
Comparing print-only to print plus video
Combining simplification of readability with document redesign
(e.g., using a chart, larger font sizes, plenty of white space, etc.)
Notifying physicians of patient literacy status
Increasing physicians’ use of communication-enhancing strategies
Table 2: Comparison of Health Literacy Interventions

Strength of
Evidence as
Assessed by
Berkman et al.
Insufficient

Low

Insufficient

Insufficient

Insufficient

Low

As Table 2 demonstrates, the strength of evidence supporting research health literacy
interventions is low. The limited strength of evidence is attributable to differences in broadly grouped
interventions, as well as the neglect of researchers to separate out participants by health literacy prior
to administering the intervention and/or stratifying analyses by literacy level. Clearly additional studies
are needed to explore health literacy interventions in broader populations.
This literature review section has traced the history of the term health literacy as well as the
notable research studies in this area. In addition, this review has evaluated the most common health

45

literacy assessment tools and explored health literacy interventions. As researchers, health care
providers, and health policy analysts search for best practices, “health literacy is increasingly described
as the currency for improving the quality of health and health care in America” (Paasche-Orlow et al.,
2005).
2.6

Health Insurance Literacy

2.6.1

Setting the Stage for Understanding Health Insurance Literacy
While health literacy and its ramifications on understanding general health information have

been studied extensively (see the previous section of this document), only a limited amount of research
has been focused on health insurance literacy. In fact, though it may seem apparent that many
individuals lack clear understanding of their health insurance, it is a “widely perceived but poorly
documented problem” (Loewenstein et al, 2013, p. 851). One of the first formally proposed definitions
of health insurance literacy describes it as “the extent to which consumers can make informed purchase
and use decisions” (Kim, Braun, & Williams, 2013, p. 3).
Employees have been making health insurance decisions for many years, and now the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) has brought the issues of health insurance literacy to the spotlight. Through
the ACA, millions of previously uninsured persons are making health insurance choices for the first time
and Americans with employer-sponsored insurance will see a change in coverage benefits (Patient
Protection & Affordable Care Act, 2010).
For the 77 million adults with basic or below basic health literacy (Kutner, Greenburg, Jin, &
Paulsen, 2006), their ability to procure appropriate levels of health insurance coverage and interact with
the health care system successfully may be limited. Initial research in this area has shown that health
insurance information materials are not written with low-literacy users in mind (Pati et al., 2012;
Vardell, 2013). To date researchers have assessed health insurance literacy in selected populations (Cho,

46

Lee, Arozullah, & Crittenden, 2008; Hibbard, Jewett, Engelmann, & Tusler, 1998; McCormack, Bann,
Uhrig, Berkman, & Rudd, 2009; Politi, 2014; Wong et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2009), as well as explored the
effects of demographics (Hira & Loibl, 2005; Norton, Hamel, & Brodie, 2014; Sentell, 2012) and human
resources departments in health insurance education (Moses & Hogg, 2009). To further the area of
research in health insurance literacy levels, researchers at the American Institutes for Research (AIR)
have recently released a validated measure of health insurance literacy (Paez et al., 2014).
This section will discuss literacy concerns across the health insurance process, beginning with
awareness of health insurance. Next, a model of health insurance literacy will be presented, followed by
a discussion of large-scale assessments of health insurance literacy. A discussion of the role of choice in
health insurance decision-making; resistance to health insurance; and literacy demands in the health
insurance process, with a focus on the readability of health insurance informational materials and forms,
will follow. Finally, research on the role of human resources departments in addressing health insurance
literacy will be explored.
2.6.2

Awareness of Health Insurance Literacy
The first step in effective use of the health care system is awareness of the available resources.

Federman et al. (2009) conducted a study of inner-city seniors to determine awareness of
pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs, such as Medicaid supplemental programs. The researchers
interviewed inner-city seniors about their awareness of programs, participation in health insurance
presentations, and other demographic factors. Male gender, black race, inadequate health literacy
(measured using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults), and receiving care in a clinic
setting (as opposed to private or group practice) were associated with low awareness of cost-assistance
programs. Study participants who had heard a live presentation about health insurance were more likely
to be aware of such programs. The authors suggest that their findings support the “use of live
presentations, in addition to health literacy materials and messages, [as] … important strategies in

47

promoting knowledge of and enrollment in state and federal pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs
for low-income seniors” (p. 127-129).
2.7

Models of Health Insurance Literacy

2.7.1

McCormack et al.’s Conceptual Framework for Health Insurance Literacy
Using data collected from 1,202 Medicare beneficiaries, McCormack et al. (2009) developed a

conceptual framework for health insurance literacy to "integrate a range of health- and insurancerelated variables" (p. 227). Their model (see Figure 13) includes factors such as health status, age,
education, race, culture, financial literacy, numeracy, health literacy, and health care decision-making.
Since these conclusions were drawn from a population of older adults, only 12.7% of whom were under
age 65, further studies should be conducted to extend the implications to a wider group.

Figure 13: Conceptual Framework for Health Insurance Literacy (McCormack et al., 2009, p. 228)

The framework developed by McCormack et al. is novel in that it was the first to model health
insurance literacy. In addition, it combines multiple facets, such as financial literacy and health literacy,
building on strong areas of research ripe for further exploration in a new context.

48

2.7.2

Paez et al.’s Health Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model
In developing their Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (discussed further in the following

section), Paez et al. (2014) created a Health Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model (see Figure 14). Their
model identifies knowledge, information seeking, document literacy, and cognitive skills as the four
domains that impact individuals’ health insurance literacy, with self-efficacy as an underlying domain.
These domains were identified through a combination of a literature review, key informant interviews,
and a stakeholder group. They are operationalized in Paez et al.’s Health Insurance Literacy
Measurement (see next section, “Measurements of Health Literacy and Health Insurance Literacy”).

Figure 14: Health Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model (Paez et al., 2014, p. 229)

In comparing the two models/frameworks for health insurance literacy, the model presented by
Paez et al. includes more domain-specific tasks, such as completing health insurance forms, calculating
cost-sharing, and other insurance-related skills to model the concept. McCormack et al. focus more on
the underlying causes of differences in health insurance literacy, such as demographics and health
status. Barnes, Hanoch, and Rice (2015) stress the multi-dimensionality of this topic, stating that health

49

insurance literacy is “likely influenced by cognitive abilities consumers possess (e.g., numeracy) and the
amount of information available in the decision environment” (p. 60). It may be necessary to combine
multiple models to create a fuller picture of health insurance literacy, understanding both the individual
characteristics as well as individual abilities that form an individual’s health insurance literacy.
2.7.3

Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy
The Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy (see Figure 15) was created in an

attempt to combine existing models, including Klinkman’s The Consumer’s Choice of Health Care Plan
Framework, Sainfort and Booske’s Conceptual Framework of Consumer Selection of Health Plans,
McCormack et al.’s Conceptual Framework for Health Insurance Literacy, and Paez et al.’s Health
Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model.

Figure 15: Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy

This framework was created through identifying common characteristics in the models (e.g.,
demographic variables, health-related variables), as well as common relationships (e.g., relationship

50

between background characteristics and literacy levels). The framework demonstrates the relationship
between an individual’s traits (i.e., demographic and health-related variables) and their ability to use a
health insurance literacy skill set.
The framework also depicts the impact that available health plan characteristics and information
plays on an individual’s ability to use their skills effectively. For example, if an individual does not have
access to helpful information sources, they may not be able to identify definitions and make the
necessary summaries and comparisons to select an appropriate insurance choice. In addition, the
presence of multiple plan types (i.e., multiple plan characteristics) may also impact an individual’s ability
to use their health insurance literacy skill set; that is, it may be easier to compare between two PPOs
and less feasible to compare between a PPO and a CDHP. The framework was used to create the
research questions for this study and analyze individuals’ reported health insurance decision-making
strategies and health insurance literacy skills.
2.8

Measurements of Health Literacy and Health Insurance Literacy
More than one quarter of the population with employer-based insurance demonstrated little to

no “simple and concrete literacy skills” (Kutner et al., 2006, p. 5) in the 2003 National Assessment of
Adult Literacy (NAAL). The U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics
administered the NAAL to more than 19,000 adults, making the NAAL the largest-scale measurement of
health literacy in the United States to date. A total of 24% of the adult participants with employer-based
insurance had basic or below basic health literacy skills (17% had basic health literacy and 7% had below
basic health literacy).
While the greatest percentage of adults with employer, military, or private insurance had
intermediate or proficient health literacy, individuals with Medicare, Medicaid, or no insurance had the
greatest percentage of below basic health literacy (more than half of that population had basic or below
basic health literacy skills; 25% had basic health literacy and 28% had below basic literacy). This statistic

51

is particularly significant given that individuals with no insurance comprise the majority of those seeking
insurance within the Health Insurance Marketplace. In addition, individuals who struggle the most with
understanding health care information were more likely to be 65 years or older, male, Black or Hispanic,
and/or have spoken another language besides English prior to formal education. These findings are a
strong reminder that health literacy skills cannot be generalized to particular populations. While there
are demonstrable trends, low health literacy levels can be observed in portions of most populations.
McCormack et al. (2009) used principles of financial literacy, coupled with previous research on
health literacy, to examine health insurance literacy. Their group created a two-part instrument to
assess health insurance literacy, including questions designed to gauge prior knowledge and familiarity
with health insurance terminology and questions aimed at assessing proficiency using the Medicare
insurance system (as their focus was on older adults). The study sample was comprised of 1,202
Medicare beneficiaries participating in the longitudinal Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. For the
terminology section, the terms that were the most misunderstood included “provider network” (41%),
“formulary” (44%), and “Medigap” (56%). This indicates a lack of prior knowledge of insurance concepts
and supports the need for dictionaries or glossaries in Medicare informational materials, such as the
handbook Medicare & You (http://www.medicare.gov/medicare-and-you/).
In the proficiency exercises designed by McCormack et al., the questions requiring
interpretation of the Medicare Explanation of Benefits form proved to be the most difficult. The authors
demonstrated that “certain vulnerable subgroups also had significantly lower levels of health insurance
literacy relative to their counterparts” (p. 236), including adults over the age of 85, women, ethnic
minorities, adults from a lower socio-economic level, and those who reported a lower health status. A
2005 systematic review of health literacy research corroborates these findings as it demonstrated that
lower levels of health literacy are associated with level of education, ethnicity, and age; however, the
systematic review also demonstrated that lower health literacy is not associated with gender or

52

measurement instrument (Paasche-Orlow, Parker, Gazmararian, Nielsen-Bohlman, & Rudd, 2005). The
relationship between gender and health insurance literacy may require additional research due to
conflicting findings, some of which show males with lower health insurance literacy (Federman et al,
2009; Kutner et al., 2006; Politi et al., 2014), while others show women with lower levels (McCormack et
al., 2009).
In 2014, Norton, Hamel, and Brodie at the Kaiser Family Foundation conducted a large-scale
assessment of Americans’ familiarity with health insurance terms and concepts by surveying 1,292 U.S.
adults. Overall, 52% of the public were able to answer 7 out of 10 questions correctly. However, 28%
answered four or fewer questions correctly, 8% gave no correct answers, and only 4% answered all 10
questions correctly. The majority of respondents (79%) correctly answered that health insurance
premiums must be paid monthly rather than only when health care services are used. Many were able
to identify the correct definitions for premium (76%), provider network (76%), annual deductible (72%),
and annual out-of-pocket limit (67%). The concepts of a formulary and in-network providers were the
least understood by participants. The questions that drew upon individuals’ numeracy skills to calculate
out-of-pocket expenses proved to be the most difficult. Demographically, individuals with lower levels of
education, younger Americans, and the uninsured scored lower on the health insurance literacy quiz.
Politi et al. (2014) examined 51 uninsured adults’ (mostly low-income and African-American)
health insurance literacy and preferences using semi-structured interviews. The participants
demonstrated minimal understanding of common health insurance terminology (coinsurance,
deductible, out-of-pocket maximum, prior authorization, and formulary were the most difficult).
Participants with no previous history of health insurance demonstrated lower health insurance literacy
than those who had previously been insured. In addition, their study demonstrated that those with
lower general health literacy also had poorer understanding of insurance-specific topics.

53

In an examination of the strategies that participants used to understand health insurance terms,
Politi et al. observed that about half of participants connected concepts from non-health contexts to
understand the terminology. For example, participants recognized the term “deductible” from car
insurance and “referral” from searching for jobs. These results suggest that providing context around
terminology may aid in understanding these complex concepts.
Wong et al. (2015) used semi-structured interview techniques to assess young adults’
understanding of health insurance terms and to identify participants’ perceived advantages and
disadvantages of obtaining health insurance coverage. In their participant group of 33 young adults
(between the ages of 19 and 30), participants demonstrated poor health insurance literacy skills, with
48% incorrectly defining deductible and 78% incorrectly defining coinsurance. When the researchers
asked participants to self-rate their ability to understand health insurance terminology, confidence was
poorly correlated with true understanding of the concepts. Cost-sharing concepts, such as deductibles,
coinsurance, and out-of-pocket maximums were particularly confusing for their group of participants.
The Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (HILM) Project at the American Institutes for
Research released a measurement of health insurance literacy in October 2014 (Paez et al., 2014). The
HILM is comprised of four scales. The first two are designed to understand how individuals select a
health plan by asking individuals to report their confidence in choosing a health plan and their behavior
regarding comparing health insurance plans. The second two scales assess how consumers navigate and
use health plans by asking individuals to report their confidence and past behavior with using health
insurance. The HILM questions are designed to gauge an individual’s self-efficacy, and, therefore, match
self-efficacy as the underlying domain in Paez et al.’s Health Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model. The
HILM is available to those who register for an account at http://healthinsliteracy.airprojects.org/. The
only published studies to date that have used the HILM employed it to measure the effectiveness of a
health insurance literacy training program (Bartholomae et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2016).

54

2.9

Health Insurance Literacy Research
Each year the 150 million Americans with employer-sponsored health insurance (Kaiser Family

Foundation, 2015) must select their preferred insurance coverage option from a handful of choices.
These decisions are often made with only Summary of Benefits and Coverage (SBC) forms as guides. SBC
forms are designed to provide standardized information about different options to enable employees to
select their optimal option. Assessments of health insurance informational materials have demonstrated
high literacy demands (Pati et al., 2012; Vardell, 2013), indicating that individuals with lower health
literacy levels may not have the skills necessary to interpret SBC forms.
There is a growing trend in health care to encourage healthy individuals to enroll in consumerdirected health plans. Consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs), or low copay, high deductible plans,
require enrollees to compare costs between providers and treatment options. Those who do not have
high levels of health insurance literacy may not have the skills to participate effectively in a consumerdirected health plan. The disconnect between insurance plan literacy demands and the literacy levels of
enrollees may increase health disparities and health care costs among a large portion of the population
(Miller, 2007).
2.9.1

Literacy Demands in the Health Insurance Process
Lawson, Carreón, Veselovskiy, and Escarce (2011) explored the role of culturally and

linguistically appropriate services (CLAS) in health insurance literacy. They surveyed 123 health plans
about their language data collection and determined that 74.0% of health plans collected language data
(commercial 60.0%, Medicaid 89.1%, Medicare 91.7%). Nearly all of the health plans reported offering
language services, including interpretation services via phone, multilingual informational handouts, and
access to bilingual providers. The authors suggested that the “availability of a full range of culturally and
linguistically appropriate health care services is essential for overcoming barriers and accessing timely
care” (p. e479).

55

2.9.2

Readability of Health Insurance Materials
Yin et al. (2009) extracted data from the 2003 NAAL to explore the ability to fill out health

insurance forms by the parents of young children. In this population of 6,100 parents, 68.4% were
unable to complete a health insurance form properly, and 65.9% were unable to calculate the annual
cost of a health insurance policy on the basis of family size. Perhaps it follows logically that the parents
with below-basic health literacy were more likely to have a child without health insurance in their
household. The authors conclude that given the large proportion of U.S. parents with low health literacy,
“decreasing literacy demands on parents, including simplification of health insurance and other medical
forms … is needed to decrease healthcare access barriers for children and … ameliorate existing child
health disparities” (p. S289).
The reading levels of Medicaid and other health care plan applications continue to be a popular
research area. Pati et al. (2012) examined compliance of Medicaid-renewal applications to the
established state reading level guidelines. The reading levels were assessed using three readability tests:
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level Index, New Fog Count, and FORCAST. As of 2008, 45 states had reading level
guidelines for the Medicaid-related materials, yet 24 (52.2%) of the states failed to meet their own
guidelines on all three readability tests. As the authors emphasize, “Complying with established reading
level guidelines for Medicaid-related materials is one simplification strategy that should be implemented
to improve access” (p. 297).
Wallace, DeVoe, and Hansen (2011) conducted a more holistic assessment of Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) applications by assessing reading demands, layout characteristics, and
document complexity. They assessed these characteristics of online English-language (n = 50) and
Spanish-language (n = 39) Medicaid/CHIP enrollment applications through Lexile Analyzer (to assess
reading demands), the User-Friendliness Tool (to assess layout), and the PMOSE/IKIRSCH scale (to assess
document complexity). While the low-literacy guidelines state that applications should be written at a

56

6th grade or lower reading level and using a font of 12 points or larger, the results showed that the
application ‘‘Signature’’ pages were written at a high school reading level and only five enrollment
applications (5.6%) consistently used a 12-point or larger font size throughout. Wallace et al.
determined that document complexity was above recommended levels, with the majority of the
applications ranking at level 4 (high). In addition, the authors noted that to increase access for all
populations, every state should provide an online Spanish-language version of the Medicaid/CHIP
enrollment application, whereas at the time of their study only 39 of the states provided a Spanishlanguage version.
To address these demonstrated gaps, Gazmararian, Beditz, Pisano, and Carreón (2010),
comprising a team of researchers from Emory University and America’s Health Insurance Plans, sought
to develop a health literacy assessment tool for health plans. Gazmararian et al. designed the tool to
serve as a benchmark to address the “magnitude and consequences of low health literacy… [and] the
role health plans are playing and the activities they undertake to address this problem” (p. 93). The
areas of focus were identified through discussion with health plan representatives and a brief survey of
health plans. Through this work they proposed six main areas of evaluation: information for
members/navigation, member services/communication, web navigation, forms, nurse call line, and
nurse case/disease management. They conducted a pilot study of their assessment tool on eight health
plans. After incorporating reactions from this pilot study, the researchers launched the full assessment
tool in 2009, available at https://ahip.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/01/HealthPlanOrganizationalAssessmentofHealthLiteracyActivities.pdf.
The Maine Area Health Education Center (AHEC) Health Literacy Center created a national skills
training workshop called Writing for the Medicaid Market to address the issue of a lack of easy-to-read
Medicaid materials (Root & Stableford, 1999). The Maine AHEC Health Literacy Center designed the
training for public and private organizations providing Medicaid managed care services, gearing the

57

training towards alleviating the mismatch between the low literacy skills of the target population and
the high reading level of most health and managed care materials. While post-training survey data
demonstrated that the workshop was successful, the authors state that “faulty and/or nonexistent
communication planning limits the success” (p. 1). That is, lack of attention to relaying the changes in
Medicaid to consumers effectively has resulted in widespread confusion. Workshops and assessment
tools that promote the skills necessary to develop easy-to-read application materials provide a starting
off point for greater discussion of building effective health insurance systems.
2.9.3

Health Insurance Information Sources
Once patients are aware of their health care plan options, they are confronted with a barrage of

insurance choices. Hibbard et al. (1998) conducted a study of 1,673 Medicare beneficiaries to assess
ability to make informed choices about fee-for-service (FFS) and managed care options. Their crosssectional telephone survey results indicated that participants use a variety of information sources to
learn about health plans, with an average of 2.8 sources each. For both HMO and traditional Medicare
enrollees, HMO advertisements were the most common information source for learning about health
plans. In addition, “30 percent of beneficiaries know almost nothing about HMOs; only 11 percent have
adequate knowledge to make an informed choice; and HMO enrollees have significantly lower
knowledge levels of the differences between the two delivery systems” (p. 181).
These findings have implications for educating beneficiaries about their expanded choices and
highlight the importance of addressing information needs in this population, as well as their
susceptibility to “aggressive marketing.” Hibbard et al. encourage moving from mere information
dissemination to active education. Targeted educational efforts aimed at intermediaries such as patient
advocates, consumer health librarians, family members, and health professionals, will be needed to
enhance their ability to assist seniors in making informed health care choices. For a further discussion of

58

choice in health insurance decision-making, please see the Health Insurance Choice section following
this review of health insurance literacy.
Brown et al. (2016) developed the Smart Choice Health Insurance© education program to
enhance individuals’ health insurance literacy. An interdisciplinary team of financial and health
educators developed a curriculum with the “goal of reducing confusion and increasing confidence in the
consumer’s ability to make a smart health insurance decision” (p. 209). The research team used the
Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (HILM) to assess the effectiveness of the program. Their results
indicated that the workshop increased individuals’ confidence in health insurance decision-making. A
related study by the same research teams identified greater gains in health insurance literacy among
Smart Choice Health Insurance© participants who were female, had higher income, and resided in
states that showed supportiveness of the ACA (Bartholomae et al., 2016).
2.9.4

Resistance to Health Insurance
Villaire and Mayer (2009) contend that if patients are empowered to use health care services

more effectively by funding preventive and education measures, “we end up with a true health care
system, rather than a sick care system” (p. 56). In addition, there is a better chance of achieving positive
health outcomes and a reduction of necessary use of the health care system, with a final outcome of a
“system that costs a lot less” (p. 56). However, many Americans elect not to obtain health insurance. In
an effort to determine reasons for resistance to health insurance, researchers used theories of
behavioral economics and polling data to study those who elected not to obtain health insurance. Their
findings may also have implications for resistance to the ACA and other barriers to enrollment.
Baicker, Congdon, and Mullainathan (2012) used the theories of behavioral economics, a
combination of psychology and economic analysis, to explore why uninsured Americans do not take
advantage of the insurance options available to them. Baicker et al. point out “while prices and
information are undeniably key factors for understanding and achieving socially optimal health

59

insurance coverage, … there is mounting evidence that a third factor, the psychology of individual
decision making, plays a central role in driving coverage outcomes” (p. 108-109).
Baicker et al. demonstrated that transaction costs such as long Medicaid applications and social
stigma can impede enrollment. Assistance with enrollment has been proven to improve participation,
presenting a strong argument for the need for librarians and other information professionals to offer
support in this area. An additional reason for non-enrollment may be the perception of limited benefits,
as the true benefit only arises once one is sick and requires medical attention.
Although the ACA’s individual mandate now requires all Americans to obtain health insurance,
there are still individuals who select not to enroll in health insurance and, consequently, pay an
individual shared responsibility payment (frequently called a tax penalty). This fee is calculated as paid
when an individual files his/her federal tax return and is calculated based on a percentage of the
individual’s income or per person (whichever is higher). The individual shared responsibility payment is
increasing each successive year following the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (i.e., the per
person fee was $95 per adult in 2014, $325 in 2015, and $695 in 2016).
Collins, Gunja, Doty, and Beutel (2015) surveyed a random, nationally representative survey of
4,881 adults to determine reasons individuals elected not to procure health insurance following the
ACA. Their survey determined that affordability was the most significant factor in adults' choice of plans
and enrollment decision. In addition, obtaining personal assistance (e.g., telephone hotlines, navigators,
and insurance brokers) makes a critical difference in whether individuals elect to enroll.
2.9.5

Impact of Health Insurance Literacy
Individuals can actually make better informed choices through their employers, particularly

when employers provide a short list of options for employees choose from, as well as provide
administrators to offer guidance. Barnes, Hanoch, and Rice (2015) drive home the importance of
providing assistance with health insurance literacy concerns: “whether the policy goals for the

60

Affordable Care Act are achieved will be shaped in no small part by the extent of Americans becoming
engaged consumers of health insurance. To do so … they will need a great deal of help understanding
and comparing coverage options when making these important decisions” (p. 76).
Health insurance literacy concerns also extend beyond selecting a health insurance coverage
option. Once individuals are insured, their health insurance literacy levels may dictate how effectively
they are able to navigate the health care domain. For example, if an individual unwittingly uses an outof-network physician or hospital, it could cost the person thousands of dollars more than selecting
health care providers within their insurer’s network. As Levitt (2015) underscores “the lack of health
insurance literacy (and numeracy) has important implications for how effectively people use health care
services and their insurance” (p. 556).
2.10

Health Insurance Choice
This section presents an overview of the research that has been conducted to study individuals’

health insurance choice. Many of these studies focus on individuals’ abilities to select from Medicare
Part D prescription drug coverage options (Barnes et al., 2013; Barnes, Hanoch, Wood, Liu, & Rice, 2012;
Hanoch, Wood, Barnes, Liu, & Rice, 2011; Heiss, Leive, McFadden, & Winter, 2013; Kan, Barnes, Hanoch,
& Federman, 2015; Szrek & Bundorf, 2014; Wood et al., 2011; Zhou & Zhang, 2012); however, there
have also been studies focused on the increasingly popular consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs;
Greene, Peters, Mertz, & Hibbard, 2008; McDevitt et al., 2014), mock-ups of the Health Insurance
Marketplace (Barnes, Hanoch, & Rice, 2015; Johnson, Hassin, Baker, Bajger, & Treuer, 2013; Ubel,
Comerford, & Johnson, 2015), as well as other formats of health insurance coverage. These studies
demonstrate the multiple factors that can be studied when assessing individuals’ abilities to choose a
health insurance plan. Most of the studies have employed survey methods to explore this area,
suggesting there may be a need to employ other methods (e.g., interviews) to create a broader picture
of this puzzle. The results overwhelmingly indicate that most individuals are not able to make effective

61

health insurance decisions. Some solutions are suggested here, but there is more work to be done in
addressing this gap in ability to make effective health insurance choices.
The success of the Health Insurance Marketplace depends on the ability for consumers to select
the most appropriate policy for their needs and that this effective consumer choice will drive price
competition that will lower prices (Johnson et al., 2013). As Nadash and Day (2014) highlight: “the ACA’s
goal of making health care more affordable through health plan competition can be met only if
consumers are able to make good choices among plans” (p. 210).
Underpinning health insurance choice research is the idea that individuals should select the
health care coverage that matches their anticipated health care utilization. Health insurance companies
should, in a fair market, compete to attract subscribers with a financially competitive offering. However,
as will be outlined in this section, consumers are often unable to select the most financially appropriate
option. Consequently, the competition in the market is minimized and “naïve consumers pay prices
substantially above marginal cost, and effectively subsidize sophisticated consumers who are able to
exploit the mispricing” (Loewenstein, 2013, p. 851). This section of the literature review focuses on
research that looks at consumers’ abilities to make effective health insurance choices.
The ACA has some recognition of the need to support consumers’ health insurance decisionmaking. The law requires that coverage options within the Health Insurance Marketplace provide
information in a standardized format, in the hopes of enabling plan comparisons by consumers. States
who selected to participate in the Health Insurance Marketplace are required to provide information to
residents, including in-person assistance, a hotline, and a website. However, it is yet unclear how many
individuals take advantage of these resources or even how helpful these resources are in practice.
When assessing individuals’ abilities to make health insurance decisions, researchers often
concentrate on the ability of individuals to ascertain the cheapest health insurance coverage option

62

given their health history and health needs (Barnes et al., 2012; Barnes et al., 2013; Barnes et al., 2015;
Hanoch et al., 2011; Heiss et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2013; Szrek & Bundorf, 2014; Wood et al., 2011;
Zhou & Zhang, 2012). Researchers are also interested in the roles that numeracy, health insurance
literacy, demographics, and other individual characteristics might play in people’s ability to select the
most appropriate option. In addition to individual characteristics, researchers have explored how
information presentation might impact individual choice ability. For example, many researchers have
looked at choice set size (or the number of insurance choices available) as a factor in effective insurance
decision-making (Barnes et al., 2012; Barnes et al., 2013; Hanoch et al., 2011; Szrek & Bundorf, 2014;
Wood et al., 2011). These factors and other relevant results will be explored in this literature review.
2.11

Research in Health Insurance Choice
The following chart (Table 3) is a breakdown of research studies on individual’s insurance

choices. This table presents the populations of focus, insurance type, factors studied, method(s)
employed, and the research results to assist with quick comparison among the available studies on this
topic. The articles featured here were found using a PubMed search for choice behavior or decision
making and health insurance (("Choice Behavior"[mh] OR "Decision Making"[mh]) AND ("Insurance,
Health"[mh])). This list was supplemented through citation chaining. Search results and citations were
selected for inclusion if they were research studies and were relevant to the topic of choice and
decision-making in health insurance.

63

Article
Barnes, Hanoch,
& Rice, 2015

Population
Uninsured: a)
276 young,
healthy, techsavvy
individuals; b)
161 low-income,
rural Virginians

Insurance Type
Hypothetical
health insurance
marketplace

Factors Studied
Health insurance
comprehension
(using four-item
questionnaire),
numeracy (using
the Lipkus scale),
choice consistency,
and number of plan
choices

Method(s)
Online
questionnaire

Results
Individuals with higher
numeracy levels
showed higher health
insurance
comprehension, those
with more health
insurance
comprehension made
choices more consistent
with stated
preferences, those who
chose plans more
consistent with
preferences were more
likely to choose a
cheaper health plan,
and those facing more
plan choices showed
lower health insurance
comprehension.

Barnes, Hanoch,
Martynenko,
Wood, Rice,
Federman, 2013

70 medical
students and
internal
medicine
residents (many
patients expect
physician help
with selection)

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Decision processes,
strategy, and ability
to pick the cheapest
drug plan

Within-subject
design using
Mouselab
(which allows
informationacquisition to
be studied)

Choice set size plays
significant role.
Participants were more
likely to identify lowest
cost plan when
presented with 3 rather
than 9 choices.

Barnes, Hanoch,
Wood, Liu, &
Rice, 2012

126
participants,
ages 18-91

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Effects of price
frames, brand
names, and choice
set size on ability to
choose lowest cost
plan

2x2x2
within-subjects
design using
Mouselab to
track drug
plans choice
across 8 trials

Numeric prices
decreased likelihood of
choosing lowest cost
plan when compared
with symbolic prices.
Likelihood of choosing
lowest cost plan
decreased as amount of
information increased.

Danis,
Abernethy,
Zafar, Samsa,
Wolf, Howie, &
Taylor, 2014

246 patients
with cancer
history and 194
of their family
members

Medicare

Sociodemographics,
health status,
Choosing Health
plans All Together
(CHAT) exercise
assessments, and
group benefit
selections

70 CHAT
exercises, an
interactive
decision tool
designed to
facilitate group
deliberation

Participants concluded
that the CHAT exercise
led to fair decisions
about coverage
priorities.

64

Article
Green & Peters,
2009

Population
Florida Medicaid
consumers

Insurance Type
Medicaid

Factors Studied
Medicaid
information
comprehension,
numeracy, literacy
skills

Method(s)
Six focus
groups (n = 59)
and a survey to
test simplification of
Medicaid
comparison
chart

Results
While participants were
enthusiastic about
having choices in their
health care coverage,
this did not mean that
participants in fact
spent more time
comparing health plan
options.

Greene, Peters,
Mertz, &
Hibbard, 2008

303
participants,
ages 18-64, with
a focus on lowincome adults

Consumerdirected health
plans (CDHPs) and
preferred provider
organizations
(PPOs)

Literacy demands of
consumer-directed
health plans,
presentation of
information,
numeracy, literacy,
socio- demographic
factors

Six different
formats for
displaying
CDHP/PPO
information
(side-by-side,
common/
unique, and/or
long, short, or
no format)

Side-by-side
comparisons were more
effective at conveying
CDHP information. The
framework reduced
comprehension for the
less numerate and
increased
comprehension for the
highly numerate.
Numeracy level was the
greatest indicator of
comprehension.

Hanoch, Wood,
Barnes, Liu, &
Rice, 2011

129 individuals,
ages 18 and
above

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Age, strategy
selection, choice set
size

Mouselab
study (a
process-tracing
program),
participants
randomly
assigned to 3
or 9 drug plans

Participants identified
lowest cost plan only
46% of the time.
Increase in choice set
size and increase in age
also increased the odds
of selecting a lessdesirable plan. Older
adults more likely to
use attribute-based
rather than alternativebased search approach.

Heiss, Leive,
McFadden, &
Winter, 2013

Administrative
data from
Medicare Part D
claims records
(a 20%
representative
sample from
2006-2008)

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Ability of consumers
to optimize plan
choice

Analysis of
administrative
data, including
simulation of
costs
consumers
might face
under the
different plans

Fewer than 25% of
individuals enroll in
plans that are as good
as the least cost plan
offered by Medicare's
Plan Finder tool.
Consumers value other
plan features over cost.

65

Article
Hibbard, Jewett,
Englemann, &
Tusler, 1998

Population
1,673 Medicare
beneficiaries,
ages 65 to 80;
half enrolled in
traditional
Medicare, half
enrolled in a
Medicare risk
HMO

Insurance Type
Medicare

Factors Studied
Ability to make
informed choices
about fee-forservice (FFS) and
managed care
options

Method(s)
Telephone
survey
designed to
gauge
knowledge
needed to
make informed
choices

Results
Participants use a
variety of information
sources to learn about
health plans, with an
average of 2.8 sources
for HMO enrollees and
3.3 sources for
traditional Medicare
enrollees. For both
groups, HMO ads were
the most common
information source for
learning about health
plans. 30% of
beneficiaries know
nothing about HMOs.

Johnson, Hassin,
Baker, Bajger, &
Treuer, 2013

992 individuals
selected to
reflect the
average
population
seeking
insurance
through the
Health
Insurance
Marketplace
plus 76 MBA
students
selected to
represent highly
trained,
financially
literate
individuals

Hypothetical
health insurance
marketplace
choices

Ability to select
most cost-effective
plan

In Experiment
1 participants
selected an
insurance
option for a
family of three,
once from a
set of 4 plans
and one from a
set of 8. In
Experiment 2
participants
were
financially
incentivized to
select the most
cost-effective
policy. A costcalculator and
tutorial interventions were
tested.

Respondents perform
at near chance level,
show a significant bias
towards out-of-pocket
costs and deductibles,
financial incentives do
not improve
performance,
individuals do not
recognize their poor
performance.
Educational tutorials,
calculation aids, and
smart defaults
improved respondents’
performance.

66

Article
Kan, Barnes,
Hanoch, &
Federman, 2015

Population
250 English- and
Spanishspeaking adults
65-years and
older without
Medicaid

Insurance Type
Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Factors Studied
Self-efficacy
regarding insurance
plan selection (i.e.,
preferences for
delegating
insurance decision
to others)

Method(s)
Self-efficacy
measured with
7-item
assessment of
perceived
understanding
of Medicare,
preferences for
support, and
decisionmaking
anxiety;
Medicare
knowledge
assessed with
9 true-or-false
questions

Results
Despite 53% reporting
difficulty understanding
insurance information,
most subjects (89%)
prefer to make
decisions themselves.
Many also report a
preference for receiving
advice. Preference for
delegating (i.e., lower
insurance decision selfefficacy) was associated
with lower Medicare
knowledge, females,
having a spouse, and
having worse health.

McDevitt,
Haviland, Lore,
Laudenberger,
Eisenberg, &
Sood, 2014

200,000 families
at 16 large
employers
offering both
CDHP and
traditional plans

Consumerdirected health
plans (CDHPs) and
traditional plans

CDHP choice, using
risk scores, family,
choice setting, and
plan characteristics
as predictors

Risk scores,
family characteristics, and
enrollment
decisions
derived from
medical claims
and enrollment
files;
interviews with
HR

Single person families,
younger people, highly
educated people, and
those who received
greater communication
from HR were more
likely to enroll in
CDHPs. Predicted
medical spending (i.e.,
risk scores) was lower
for CDHP enrollees.
Those without default
plan options were more
likely to choose a CDHP.
CDPHs with higher
employer contributions
and lower deductibles
were more popular.

Szrek & Bundorf,
2014

229 Internetenabled
individuals over
the age of 65

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Choice set size,
numeracy

Simulation of
enrollment,
randomly
assigned to
two sets of 2,
5, 10, or 16
drug plans;
Numeracy
assessed with
Lipkus, Samsa,
and Rimer
items

Numerate adults made
better decisions (i.e.,
more likely to enroll in
plans more beneficial to
them) when choice set
size was small. When
choice set size was
large, numeracy had no
effect, all decisions
were poorer.

67

Article
Ubel,
Comerford, &
Johnson, 2015

Population
Convenience
sample of
participants
from public
buses (number
of participants
not stated in the
article)

Insurance Type
Hypothetical
health insurance
marketplace

Factors Studied
Influence of labels
on perception of
health insurance
plans

Method(s)
Plans were
described as
bronze, silver,
and gold, with
the bronze and
gold categories
being labeled
correctly with
one set of
participants
and switched
with the other
set. Math
ability was
measured (test
not described
in the study).
In a second
survey, plans
were shown
with weekly
premium
information
listed for half
of participants
and monthly
premiums for
the other half.

Results
The majority of
participants with lower
mathematical ability
said they preferred gold
plans over bronze plans
regardless of which plan
was labeled gold (i.e.,
high cost/low
deductible vs. low
cost/high deductible).
Participants were less
likely to select the
higher-premium, lowerdeductible plans when
presented with monthly
premiums than with
weekly premiums.

Wood, Hanoch,
Barnes, Liu,
Cummings,
Bhattacharya, &
Rice, 2011

121 adults, ages
18-91

Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Choice set size,
numeracy, age

Questionnaire
resembling
Medicare site
developed to
test comprehension;
numeracy
assessed with
Lipkus, Samsa,
and Rimer;
tests of mental
state, processing speed,
crystallized
knowledge,
executive
functioning,
working
memory, and
personality.

Participants performed
better with fewer
choices and older adults
performed worse.
Results demonstrate
that numeracy plays a
significant role
regardless of age.

68

Article
Zhou & Zhang,
2012

Population
Medicare Part D
enrollees (5%
random sample;
n = 412,712)

Insurance Type
Medicare Part D
plans (prescription
drug program)

Factors Studied
Overspending
(difference in total
beneficiary
spending between
patient’s choice and
cheapest
alternative option);
demographics (age
and ethnicity)

Method(s)
Pulled from
national 2009
Part D data
linked with
public
formulary files

Results
Beneficiaries do not
select the most cost
effective plan given
their medication needs.
As beneficiaries aged,
they overspent more.
Blacks, Hispanics, and
Native Americans chose
cheaper plans.
Overspending increased
with larger sets of
choices.

Table 3: Health Insurance Choice Articles by Population, Insurance Type, Factors Studied, Method(s), and Results

2.11.1 Highlights from a Comparison of Results
Many of the studies presented here focused on individuals enrolling in the Medicare Part D, a
federal program that subsidizes the cost of prescription drugs for Medicare beneficiaries (i.e., generally
adults over the age of 65). Medicare Part D, implemented in 2006, may be a particularly popular health
plan to study when assessing choice abilities, as individuals must select from somewhere between 40
and 60 competing private insurers in their area (Szrek & Bundorf, 2014, p. 340). Barnes et al. (2012)
summarize the imperative of this research focus thusly “many seniors choose Medicare Part D plans
offering poorer coverage at greater cost” (p. 460). Results from studies focusing on this publicly
subsidized prescription drug insurance program may be precursors of the results that will come from
studying the Health Insurance Marketplace, as it is also a collection of publicly subsidized health plan
options from private insurers.
Several studies focused on overspending of individuals by comparing what would be the
cheapest plan given an individual’s health with what the individual would or actually did choose. Zhou
and Zhang (2012) and Heiss et al. (2013) used existing Medicare Part D data to illustrate that
beneficiaries do not select the most cost effective plan, while Johnson et al. (2013) used a simulated
health insurance selection environment, demonstrating that individuals perform at near chance levels

69

and are not able to select the most cost effective option. These studies demonstrate the financial
implications of individuals’ abilities or inabilities to select the appropriate health insurance plan for their
needs.
Several studies presented in this literature review isolated numeracy as an important factor in
determining individuals’ abilities to select appropriate health insurance coverage (Green et al., 2008).
Wood et al. (2011) demonstrated that numeracy plays a significant role regardless of the age of the
individual. Szrek and Bundorf (2014) concluded that while higher numeracy skills were beneficial with a
small choice set size, when studied with a large choice set size, numeracy showed no effect.
In fact, several studies have shown that the choice set size (i.e., the number of choices available
to individuals) plays a significant role in individual’s ability to select the most economical insurance
option (Barnes et al., 2013, 2015; Hanoch et al., 2011; Szrek & Bundorf, 2014; Wood et al., 2011; Zhou &
Zhang, 2012). When more choices are presented, individuals have a more difficult time selecting the
best option. This research demonstrates the importance of employing tools or other kinds of assistance
to narrow down the options to a smaller set of appropriate choices.
Barnes et al. (2015) underscore the significance of both choice set size and numeracy in stating
that health insurance literacy is “likely influenced by cognitive abilities consumers possess (e.g.,
numeracy) and the amount of information available in the decision environment” (p. 60). Information
presentation was studied by a handful of studies covered here. The display of information was shown to
be more effective when symbolic representations were used (Barnes et al., 2012) and with side-by-side
comparisons of plan options (Green et al., 2008). Ubel, Comerford, and Johnson (2015) demonstrated
that naming conventions (e.g., bronze vs. gold) and premium pricing breakdown (i.e., weekly vs.
monthly) has an impact on selection of preferred coverage. Johnson et al. (2013) showed that

70

educational tutorials, calculation aids, and smart defaults (which preselect the most cost effective
option given an individual’s usage) improved individual’s choice performance.
2.12

Developing Health Insurance Choices and Designing Health Plans
A handful of studies that focus on health insurance choice take a more preliminary approach by

assessing what role allowing individuals to shape the available choices might play in the development of
health plan options. Abiiro, Leppert, Mbera, Robyn, and De Allegri (2014) used focus groups and
interviews to develop attributes that could be used in a discrete choice experiment focused on micro
health insurance (an emerging insurance model designed for people in low- and middle-income
countries). Through focus groups with laypeople and interviews with key informant health workers,
Abiiro et al. identified the following attributes as being the most significant when choosing a health
insurance option: unit of enrollment (i.e., how many people within a family structure would be covered),
management (who manages the “common basket”), health service benefit package, copayment (i.e., the
proportion of health services a member is expected to pay out-of-pocket), transportation to health
facilities, and premiums per person per month.
These six attributes were then put to the test in the continuation of this study, published by
Abiiro, Torbica, Kwalamasa, and De Allegri in 2014. They conducted the discrete choice experiment
(using the six attributes identified in the previous study) with 814 households in two rural districts in
Malawi. Their results indicate that all of the attributes except management significantly influenced
respondents’ choice behavior. The relative order of importance identified by their participants is as
follows: transport, health services benefits, enrollment unit, premium, copayment, and management
(only the last of which was not statistically significant). These aspects should be kept at the forefront
when investors are interested in developing micro health insurance options.

71

These two studies by Abiiro and team do not fit within the chart, because they are not focusing
on understanding or choosing within a particular set of insurance choices. Rather these two studies are
more appropriate for exploring the preliminary stages of insurance development and may be
appropriate when deciding which aspects are the most important for consumers, particularly within
low- and middle-income countries. These studies are also unique in their application of a discrete choice
experiment (DCE) within health insurance choice, particularly in their detailed explanation of the use of
qualitative methods to identify appropriate attributes for inclusion.
Similarly, the Choosing All Together (CHAT) exercise has been used with over 4,000 lay
participants to obtain input on health insurance priorities from the general public. Danis et al. (2014)
were the first research team to employ the CHAT exercise to identify coverage priorities within a specific
disease population (cancer patients). They argue that “if use of the CHAT exercise is of value to this
patient population and the Medicare program regarding alignment of priorities, it may prove to be
similarly useful with other patient populations in the United States or other nations interested in
undertaking patient-centered health plan design” (p. 2). Participants in the study conducted by Danis et
al. expressed that the CHAT exercise led to fair coverage decisions, took individual viewpoints into
account, involved realistic discussions and decisions, and led to feasible group decisions.
2.12.1 Potential Solutions
While all of the studies presented here demonstrate a general lack of ability to make effective
health insurance decisions, potential solutions to the issues can be hard to identify within the research.
A small handful of studies shared results with information presentation suggestions in mind. In addition
to suggesting symbolic representations of numerical information (Barnes et al., 2012) and side-by-side
comparisons of plan options (Green et al., 2008), Johnson et al. (2013) featured the most concrete
suggestions, including educational tutorials, calculation aids, and smart defaults.

72

Johnson et al. (2013) designed their experiment to test three potential interventions for
improving consumers’ choices. All three of their interventions improved participants’ abilities to select
the most cost-effective option in a statistically significant way. Their findings demonstrate that just-intime education (through tutorials about computing annual cost), smart defaults, and cost calculators
(when combined with education) can be effective tools for guiding individuals to the most appropriate
options for insurance coverage.
There is a strong imperative in place to encourage future research in this area. Insurance
providers, human resource officers, Health Insurance Marketplace navigators, librarians, and other
insurance professionals and volunteers may need to explore methods for helping individuals understand
different health care plans, compare their options, and make effective choices.
Because “we know little about whether and how health insurance comprehension is related to
insurance choices” (Barnes, 2015, p. 60), it is clear that additional research may need to be conducted in
this area. The use of alternative methods – beyond the surveys commonly employed by the research
presented here – may be able to shed light on the why and how questions of individuals’ abilities to
make effective insurance choices.
2.13

Semi-Structured Interviews in Health Insurance Literacy Research
Most researchers studying health insurance literacy and health insurance choice have employed

surveys or quantitative techniques (see the previous sections of this literature review, including Health
Insurance Literacy and Health Insurance Choice). These methods have been used to demonstrate the
lack of understanding of health insurance terminology as well as the tendency for many individuals to
select suboptimal insurance coverage options. What is less understood is the information process
individuals undergo to assess health insurance information and make health insurance choices. Semi-

73

structured interviews may be an effective research method for understanding the why and how of
health insurance literacy.
Politi et al. (2014) conducted semi-structured interviews with 51 uninsured individuals (ages 18
to 65) in Missouri. The interviews began by asking participants to discuss past experience with health
insurance and whether any insurance-related words were unclear based on these past experiences. The
researchers then provided passages describing key insurance terms. Following the introduction of these
passages, participants were asked whether and where they had heard the term and what they knew
about the term. Research staff used probes, including the tell-me-more probe, to better understand or
clarify a response and to gather more in-depth information. Participants were then asked to identify
aspects of plan details that were most important. Finally, the researchers described eight features of
typical plans often identified as important to individuals’ decision-making and then asked the
participants how important each of the features would be. Through these methods, Politi et al.
demonstrated poor understanding of common health insurance terminology by the participants in their
study.
Wong et al. (2015) used semi-structured interviews to study young adults’ (ages 18-30)
understanding of health insurance terminology, general opinions about health insurance, and the most
salient factors in selecting a health insurance coverage option. To assess health insurance literacy, the
researchers asked participants to self-report their understanding and define a set of 12 health
insurance-related terms. They then asked participants to free list attitudes towards health insurance by
having them identify the advantages and disadvantages of health insurance and the factors participants
considered most important in selecting a health plan. Their results showed that their participants had
low levels of health insurance literacy (e.g., 48% of participants incorrectly defined deductible and 78%

74

incorrectly defined coinsurance). Through the free list technique, participants identified deductible,
premium amounts, and preventive care coverage as the most salient factors.
These recent studies of health insurance literacy using semi-structured interview techniques
suggest that this research method may be an appropriate way to obtain a deeper perception of
individuals’ understanding of health insurance terminology and their individual preferences in choosing
a health insurance plan. In addition, because this study focuses on the decision-making process, semistructured interviews may enable participants to trace and elaborate on the multiple steps involved.

75

CHAPTER 3: METHODS
3.1

Research Questions
This qualitative study explores how people understand and make decisions relating to health

insurance. The overarching research questions were informed by the Integrated Framework for Health
Insurance Literacy (see Figure 15) and include:
1. How do people understand health insurance concepts?
2. How do individuals make their own health insurance decisions?
3. What are the factors that impact health insurance literacy and decision-making?
3.2

Research Design: Sample of Participants
Study participants were recruited through the pool of new employees who participate in

benefits training from the Office of Human Resources at a large university in the southeastern United
States. Participants were recruited at the weekly benefits training sessions, which they attend on their
first day of work. These orientation sessions introduce approximately 20-40 new hires each week to
information about university benefits, such as vacation and sick leave, health insurance, retirement
benefits, tuition remission, etc. At the conclusion of the benefits training session, the benefits officer
conducting the training announced the study and introduced the researcher to the attendees using the
following script (see Appendix 1 for additional, sample recruitment materials):
“Emily is studying how individuals understand health insurance concepts and make health
insurance decisions. She will be interviewing new [university] employees to understand how
they make their health insurance choices. Her study should take less than an hour and
participants will receive a $25 Target gift card for their time. Participation is optional. If you are
interested in participating, please talk with Emily after the training session to set up a time to
meet one-on-one.”

76

Between July and November 2016, the researcher attended nine orientation sessions when
recruitment took place and collected the names and email addresses of interested participants at the
end of the orientation session. The researcher sent an email to each individual who indicated interest in
participating in the study. A sample of the follow-up email can be found in Appendix 1.
All new hires are strongly encouraged to attend the sessions. An online version is offered to
those who cannot make the in-person training. The online version is usually only taken by high-level
administrators and faculty members, who may not have been as well represented in the orientation
sessions used for recruitment.
The university in the study offers a small set of options (three choices, see Table 4 and Appendix
9 for descriptions of the available choices), which (as demonstrated in the Health Insurance Choice
section) has been shown to increase comprehension and may minimize confounding variables in this
study.
Plan Name

Enhanced 80/20 PPO
Plan

Traditional 70/30 PPO
Plan

Consumer-Directed
Health Plan (CDHP)

Plan
Characteristics

participant pays 20% of
eligible, in-network
expenses after $700
deductible ($2,100
deductible for family);
$30 copay for primary
doctor [$15 for primary
care provider (PCP) on ID
card] and $70 for
specialist

higher copays ($39 for
primary/$92 for
specialist), higher
coinsurance (participant
pays 30%), and higher
deductibles ($1,054 for
individual, $3,162 for
family) than 80/20 plan

high deductible ($1,500
for individual, $4,500 for
family), lower
coinsurance (15%), office
visits cost 15% after
deductible

highest premiums

no cost to full-time
employees for employeeonly coverage

includes $600 Health
Reimbursement Account
(HRA)
lowest premiums

Table 4: Health Insurance Coverage Plans at University

The total number of hires in 2015 can be seen in Table 5. This table is broken down by EPA (nonfaculty employees), Faculty, and SPA (staff employees). Not all of these individuals elected to obtain
health insurance through the university, however, as they may have coverage options elsewhere (e.g., a
77

spouse’s plan). The total number of hires who selected to enroll in a university-sponsored health
insurance plan over the previous seven years can be seen in Table 6. These counts were used to help
with sampling.
EPA NonFaculty
January hires
February hires
March hires
April hires
May hires
June hires
July hires
August hires
September hires
October hires
November hires
December hires

Faculty
27
23
12
10
11
29
28
25
21
17
9
10

SPA
22
8
7
6
16
15
113
36
21
11
8
5

51
50
48
42
49
83
81
93
60
68
91
43

Table 5: Total Number of Hires by Employee Type in 2015

2014

1,122

2013

1,137

2012

1,027

2011

938

2010

940

2009

929

2008

1,526

Table 6: Number of Hires Who Selected to Enroll in a University-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan

The researcher used fluency in English, employment at the university, and ages 18 through 64 as
inclusion criteria. This was designed to ensure the participants are homogeneous enough to observe
patterns in the data; for example, as university employees, all participants will be interacting with the
same information and enrollment interface in their health insurance decision-making process. Due to

78

high interest in the study and diversity among recruited participants, it was not necessary to recruit
participants outside of the inclusion criteria.
Because enough participants were recruited through the orientation sessions, no alternative
recruitment strategies were necessary. Participants were recruited to address the multiple aspects of
the health insurance decision-making process. Recruitment was designed to enable the researcher to
identify common concepts that arose with multiple participants. Recruitment ceased at 30 participants
when the concepts of interest reached saturation.
3.3

Semi-Structured Interviews
Semi-structured interviews are a qualitative research method designed to capture a well-

rounded picture of an individual’s experience. For researchers interested in understanding information
behavior, “[interviews] are particularly useful in uncovering the story behind a participant’s
experiences” (Doody & Noonan, 2013, p. 28). Interviews allow researchers to gain insight and context
and provide interviewees with the platform for describing their unique experiences. The back-and-forth
of a natural conversation is mirrored in interviews, allowing researchers to ask more complex questions
and participants to seek clarification and shed light on previously unanticipated areas (Smith, 1995, p.
13). The researcher selected semi-structured interviews as the method for this study to obtain rich
descriptions of the process and explore in-depth the factors that play a role in individuals’ health
insurance choice and literacy barriers.
3.3.1

Creating the Interview Guide
“Developing [an interview] guide requires planning for difficulties that may arise ... includ[ing]:

the phrasing of complex questions, discussions of sensitive topics” (Doody & Noonan, 2013, p. 30). It is
imperative that a researcher consider difficulties that may be encountered in advance, particularly “in
terms of question wording or sensitive areas and to give some thought to how these difficulties might
79

be handled” (Smith, 1995, p. 13). To avoid biasing responses and to maximize the quality of the
information collection, Smith recommends questions that are “neutral, avoid jargon, [and are] openended” (p. 14). This may be particularly important when asking research participants’ questions about
the politically-heated topic of health insurance (or even more so if asking directly about the Affordable
Care Act) and underscores the importance of carefully wording questions to avoid relaying any potential
researcher bias.
The semi-structured interview questions were carefully worded to be non-leading and reduce as
much bias as possible, maintaining the interpretive validity of the interview guide as a research
instrument. In addition, the more sensitive questions (regarding the Affordable Care Act and specific
health care needs) were asked at the end of the interview to allow time for the interviewer to build
rapport with the interviewee. The interview guide also began with questions about recent events (i.e.,
health insurance enrollment within the past seven days) and then ended with asking the interviewee to
reflect on changes over the past five years, as asking questions in reverse chronological order has been
shown to increase the accuracy of collected responses (Doody and Noonan, 2013, p. 31).
One specific example of a semi-structured interview technique that relates to interviewing a
participant about a process over time is Dervin’s (1983) Micro-Moment Time-Line Interview. In the
Micro-Moment Time-Line Interview, a researcher asks a participant to list step-by-step everything that
went into a situation, writing each of the steps down on a card. Then the researcher asks specific
questions about each card, including “what questions he or she had, what things he/she needed to find
out, learn, come to understand, unconfuse, or make sense of” (p. 10). This technique helps a researcher
methodically discuss a process with a participant and obtain rich descriptions of each step involved.

80

3.3.2

Conducting the Semi-Structured Interview
The qualitative, semi-structured interviews took place in person, one-on-one. To make

participation as convenient as possible, the researcher offered to travel to wherever was convenient for
the individual participants. The researcher also offered a quiet space to conduct the interviews. The
interviews were recorded using an audio recording application on the researcher’s cellular phone
(following permission of the interviewees). Each participant was given a participant ID which was used
to track their audio recordings and additional materials as described below. One interview (Participant
11) was conducted via Skype as she worked at a geographically distant institutional site.
After talking through the consent form (see Appendix 2), participants were asked to complete a
short demographic questionnaire (see Appendix 3). This questionnaire included demographic
characteristics featured in health insurance literacy models and research and shown in the Integrated
Framework for Health Insurance Literacy (see Figure 15), including race, age, educational level, family
status, and job title (to determine EPA/SPA status).
The researcher used the interview guide (see Appendix 4) to conduct the interview session. The
one-on-one interviews were recorded. The researcher asked participants to reflect on the process they
went through to select a health insurance plan. The researcher brought official state health plan
handouts to help refresh participants’ memories. To obtain as close an approximation as possible to the
actual experience, individuals who participated in the study were interviewed seven days or less from
when they made their decisions and submitted the online forms. The interview guide began with openended questions to start the interview, including:


How do you make your health insurance choice(s)?



What goes through your mind as you think about the choices?

81

Next, the researcher used Dervin’s (1983) Micro-Moment Time-Line Interview technique to ask
participants to list each step in their decision-making process. The researcher wrote down each step on
a note card and then ask specific questions about each individual note card to obtain a rich depiction of
the process (see Appendix 4 for further details).
The additional questions in the semi-structured interview guide were developed using
sensitizing concepts from the Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy (see Figure 15) and
the concepts represented in Klinkman’s frameworks, Sainfort and Booske’s Conceptual Framework of
Consumer Selection of Health Plans, McCormack et al.’s Conceptual Framework for Health Insurance
Literacy, and Paez et al.’s Health Insurance Literacy Conceptual Model. Some of these concepts included
financial and health literacy, health care decision-making, and use of health care services. For example,
if an individual referred to their health status as being a driving factor in their selection or if they
expressed difficulty understanding what the numbers in the forms mean, the researcher would be able
to suggest in the Discussion section that health status and financial literacy are playing a role in their
decision-making process. The interview guide was piloted with participants recruited at the benefits
orientation sessions and was refined using the pilot data.
After asking broader questions geared at assessing the individual’s health insurance decisionmaking strategies, the researcher asked that the participants reflect on any health insurance materials
they brought with them (whether they used them to make any decisions or not, see Appendix 1 for
follow-up email). This included notes they made in discussions with others and during the new
employee orientation sessions. The researcher photographed the materials that the interviewee
brought to the interview and asked participants to describe the notes contained within the materials.
The printed orientation materials were evaluated using the only readability form designed for charts,
the FORCAST Readability Test (see Appendix 5), which is included in the analysis of research findings.

82

For interviewees that did not bring any printed material, the researcher provided a copy for
reference. The researcher asked which page(s) or section(s) of the materials were most helpful in
making the decision. This line of questioning was conducted to determine the most salient information
for the participants.
After the semi-structured interview, the researcher asked participants to complete the first two
scales of HILM measurement (see Appendix 6). The first two scales were selected as these are the two
that pertain to health insurance enrollment (the last two scales look at the use of health insurance). The
HILM was administered after the interview so that participants would not be sensitized to focus on any
of the concepts in the HILM during the discussions. In addition, because the HILM provides definitions of
some terms (i.e., deductible), not having the participants view it in advance revealed that some
participants did not have a clear, working definition of a deductible in their minds.
The HILM was selected as it is the only measurement of health insurance literacy currently
available in the published literature. Because it relies exclusively on self-reporting self-efficacy, the
results may not accurately reflect an individual’s true health insurance literacy skills (e.g., the ability to
define core terms such as copay, coinsurance, and deductible; the ability to select a health insurance
plan that matches anticipated health care expenditures). However, because there have been published
studies on individuals’ HILM scores, it is possible for the researcher to compare her participants with
previous studies to determine how the participants in this study compare with participants in other
health insurance literacy studies to assess the validity of this study’s findings.
The data collection session concluded with an opportunity for the participants to ask any
questions of the researcher. The researcher only answered questions regarding the study and did not
provide guidance on the health insurance selection process. Each of the 30 participants was
compensated with a $25 Target gift card for their time (see Appendix 7 for receipt form). The researcher
83

provided contact information should the participants have wished to provide additional information or
ask any questions after the interview date.
3.4

Research Methods: Analysis
Each participant was given a participant number and all related data was stored using only the

participant number. The interview recordings were transcribed through the Rev.com transcription
service and were stored in a secure location to minimize security threats. In addition, analysis focused
on aggregated trends to minimize any individual risks. The researcher omitted identifying information
for the quotes from particular individuals. The researcher wrote memos to document the process and
note reflections during the interview and analysis stages.
3.4.1

Analyzing Semi-Structured Interviews
Once the semi-structured interviews have been conducted, it is time for the researcher to turn

to analysis. While it can be tempting to begin with generalizations of the data, Smith (1995) encourages
researchers to “look in detail at one transcript before moving on to the others. This follows an
idiographic approach to analysis, beginning with particulars and only slowly working up to
generalizations” (p. 20). Staying close to the data may increase the accuracy of the results and, once
again, minimize researcher-induced bias. This approach also prevents privileging the first few
transcripts, which can lead to premature closure.
The interview transcripts were coded to determine trends using the qualitative analysis
software Atlas.ti. The researcher used the constant-comparison method of content analysis (Lincoln &
Guba, 1985, pp. 339–344) to analyze the interview transcripts. Transcripts were coded individually by
inductive reasoning, allowing themes to emerge, with specific codes drawn from participants’ words
when possible (Wildemuth, 2016). The researcher began with open coding three interviews to establish
a codebook (see Appendix 8). The researcher then used this codebook to code the remaining interviews,
84

adding additional codes when necessary and going back to recode the original transcripts to ensure
consistent coding across all interviews. The codes were constantly compared to one another to minimize
redundancy and aim for thoroughness. In transcripts where multiple themes were identified in a single
block of text, multiple codes were assigned. After identifying more than 62 individual codes (see
Appendix 8), the researcher began to identify connections between the codes to develop larger themes
(discussed in the Results and Discussion sections).
The researcher used the artifact model from the discipline of contextual inquiry to analyze the
photographs of participants' decision-making aids. An artifact is a physical thing that is created while
working or a physical item that is used to support the work. An artifact "reveals the assumptions,
concepts, strategy, and structure that guide ... people" (Beyer & Holtzblatt, 1998, p. 102-103). For this
study, examples of artifacts included sections of the university-provided documentation that
participants indicated were most helpful or least helpful, as well as handwritten notations that
participants made on the university-provided documentation. The content of these resources was
analyzed using the same codebook that was used to code the interviews. Photographs of the artifacts
are included throughout the Results section to provide examples of key themes.
This data was compared with existing information seeking and use models. In addition, the
Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy was reviewed to determine its relevance in this
setting.

85

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
The findings of the demographic questionnaire, semi-structured interview, and Health Insurance
Literacy Measurement (HILM) will be presented in this results section. The demographics of study
participants demonstrate a cross-section of new hires at the institution. The semi-structured interview
and the accompanying Micro-Moment Time-Line interviews reveal detailed findings on the health
insurance decision-making process. Participants discussed their information tactics and the personal
reflection they undertook to evaluate their needs. They also identified their interpersonal information
sources and priority coverage areas. They discussed what went into evaluating the choices available to
them and reflected on the process they took and the United States health insurance system in general.
Participants also outlined aspects of the use of health insurance and pondered their own health
insurance literacy skills. These discussions were echoed in the results of the HILM.
4.1

Demographic Characteristics of Participants
Participants came from diverse backgrounds and represented a variety of demographics.

Fourteen participants (46.7%) were between 27-35 years old, six (20.0%) were 18-26 years old, six
(20.0%) were 36-45 years old, three (10.0%) were 46-55 years old, and one (3.3%) was 56-64 years old.
The racial and ethnic composition was as follows: 63.3% White, 13.3% Black/African American, 13.3%
Asian or Asian American, 6.7% Hispanic/Latino, and 3.3% American Indian. Thirteen participants (43.3%)
had a Master's degree, eleven (36.7%) had a Bachelor's degree, four (13.3%) had a Doctoral degree, and
two (6.7%) had some college. Twenty-four participants (80.0%) were female and six (20.0%) were male.

86

There were also a variety of family make-ups represented by the participants. Seventeen
participants (56.7%) were single, eleven (36.7%) were married, and two (6.7%) had a domestic partner.
One participant shared that she was widowed but preferred to be characterized as single. Seventy
percent of participants had no dependents, and 30.0% had dependents. Two-thirds (66.7%) selected
80/20 coverage, 26.7% selected the consumer-directed health plan, and 6.7% selected the 70/30 plan.
4.2

Tracing the Timeline
All of the participants in this study had one month following their first day of work to make their

health insurance enrollment decisions. On their first day of work, they all attended one of the weekly
orientation sessions where a Benefits Officer provided an overview of the plans available to them. Then
they were given a month to make their selection. For Participant 8, this one-month period provided the
opportunity for self-reflection and evaluation of the options. “At my previous job, ... when it came time
to make the decisions, I was sitting with an insurance person and they were like talking through it.
Which is fine, but I like to have some time to understand it a little bit.”
During this one-month period, individuals pursued a variety of techniques and approaches to
make their health insurance decisions. These individual timelines were constructed using MicroMoment Time-Line Interviews. Individuals’ timelines included discussing the orientation session they
were all required to attend, reading the printed materials provided for them, reviewing information on
the state health plan website, and identifying the most helpful information for their needs.
4.2.1

Micro-Moment Time-Line Interview Findings
During the course of the Micro-Moment Time-Line Interviews, participants reflected on their

techniques for reviewing the information available to them, narrowing down their choices, searching for
answers to specific questions, and using available tools (e.g., online benefits calculator). Participants also

87

spoke about discussing their health insurance coverage options with others perceived as having more
experience (e.g., a parent), those with similar coverage (e.g., colleagues), and those involved in their
financial decisions (e.g., a spouse). Three timelines are shown below (see Figure 16, Figure 17, and
Figure 18) to provide examples of the decision-making processes undertaken by participants.

Spoke with colleague
before orientation
who recommended
specific plan

After orientation
read through printed
materials

Logged into online
system to enroll with
printed book out to
confirm plans

Reviewed state
health plan website

Printed enrollment
confirmation to double
check coverage for 2016
and 2017

Figure 16: Participant 15 Timeline

Looked at Decision
Guide for Open
Enrollment book

Talked with
boyfriend about his
experience with
state health plan

Reviewed information
about out-of-pocket
costs and coinsurance
(scenarios were
helpful)

Looked at money
spent last year on
physical therapy

Used the state
health plan online
calculator to
estimate costs

Searched for
limitations on the
number of physical
therapy visits per year

Looked for coverage
of contraceptives

Talked with sister
who has a high
deductible health
plan

Figure 17: Participant 19 Timeline

Talked with friend
about what plan she
had

Talked with dad
about insurance
terminology (i.e.,
FSA, deductibles)

Googled terms (i.e.,
FSA, CDHP) and
comparison of plans

Let the information
sink in (“percolate”)
overnight

Figure 18: Participant 24 Timeline

88

Used cost calculator
on the state health
plan website

Used drug calculator
on the state health
plan website

As a result of using the Micro-Moment Time-Line Interview technique, participants were better
able to estimate the amount of time spent on the health insurance decision-making process. They were
also more thorough in identifying the helpful individuals they spoke with during their decision-making
process. While some at first said they did not consult with any other individuals, after seeing the
timeline cards in front of them, several recalled specific individuals with whom they talked. In addition,
seeing each step of their process reminded them of the questions that arose and the resources they
used to address them. The detailed findings of the timeline interviews will be discussed throughout the
Results section.
4.2.2

Orientation Session
Twenty-one participants mentioned the orientation session as playing a role in their insurance

decision-making process, often citing it as the beginning of their choice journey. Eight participants
shared that the orientation session was not helpful (due to the information being too general or being
presented in a format that did not match preferred learning styles), while six participants deemed the
orientation session a helpful step that provided psychological reassurance. Seven participants did not
classify the session as helpful or unhelpful and some mentioned annotating materials during the session
to provide reminders. Three participants looked at insurance information prior to attending the
orientation session and two participants discussed how they felt the benefits officer was promoting one
choice over another during the orientation session presentation.
Eight participants (P6, P12, P16, P23, P25, P27, P28, and P30) shared that the orientation session
was not as helpful and/or that they were not able to pay full attention. One aspect that Participant 28
attributed to his lack of attention was the general nature of information provided at the orientation
session. "I admit that I paid very little attention to that. Those things are generally so broad and they're
covering so much information at once that it's not terribly useful" (P28).
89

Another reason to which participants attributed a lack of attention was the method in which the
information was presented. "I sort of half paid attention to her talking. It's difficult. I'm just not a very
auditory learner" (P12). To address this disconnect with learning styles, Participant 12 suggested that "it
might have been more useful if when she was talking about specific things, she referenced specific page
numbers within the booklet in the packet so when she was talking, at least I knew where to go to follow
along."
Six participants (P1, P4, P5, P13, P14, and P26) shared that the orientation session was helpful
preparation for making their health insurance decision. "I've never been in an orientation where they
led you through your options step-by-step. I thought that was really helpful and set a nice foundation for
my understanding of the plans side-by-side. Also to be in a room with a bunch of other people in the
same thing was kind of psychologically reassuring" (P13).
Seven participants (P3, P9, P15, P19, P20, P21, and P24) cited the orientation session as part of
their decision-making process but did not classify it as either helpful or unhelpful. Some of those
participants discussed making annotations on the materials during the session "I took down notes on
the slides during orientation, things that stood out that I didn't know yet" (P20). Figure 19 shows an
example of the type of annotations Participant 20 made in her materials during the orientation session.

Figure 19: Participant 20's Annotation from the Orientation Session

90

Participants 1, 6, and 25 looked at health insurance information (on the state health plan
website) prior to the orientation. These participants wanted to obtain some information prior to the
session and came away with an initial predisposition towards one of the options. Participant 1 changed
her mind following the orientation: “I knew like at this orientation they would be covering it, so I like
looked online a little bit before. Just to try to figure out what the options were. I had an idea, completely
changed my mind after orientation.”
Participants 5 and 6 spoke about the advice of the benefits officer leading the orientation. "I will
say it definitely felt like the orientation was biased against not choosing the 70/30 plan… The person
who was leading the discussion kind of looked like they were trying to sway people away from that and I
can't say I fully understand why... I definitely took his advice even though he shouldn't be leaning people
anyway in terms of health insurance plans."
In addition to presenting information about the plans verbally, the benefits officers also
distributed printed material for individuals to refer to during their decision-making process. Reviewing
these printed materials was often the next step in the participants’ decision-making timelines.
4.2.3

Review Printed Materials
The majority of participants (n = 24) discussed reviewing the printed insurance materials

distributed at the orientation session as a key step in their decision-making process, often at the
beginning as they were surveying the information landscape and beginning to make comparisons
between plans. “I think that from the presentation I had a pretty good understanding, but then just
wanted to look over it one more time and look at my options” (P14).
Generally reviewing the printed information materials was the step taken to get a wide view of
all the options rather than to answer specific questions. As Participant 3 explained, “sometimes I just

91

read things without any question in my mind.” When participants were interested in obtaining
information about a particular coverage need, they often consulted the website rather than searching
the paper materials to locate an answer. As Participant 25 summarized, “in between the orientation and
actually doing the stuff online, I actually went through a lot of the booklets. And actually had to go to
the website to try to find some of the information that I was looking for.”
Participant 13 spoke about reviewing the printed materials in tandem with her husband. She
shared that she “look[ed] at the materials myself and with him in depth. That is more broad and overarching, and then just taking time once the kid's in bed where we can really delve into the materials.” In
particular, Participant 13 liked having a printed chart for side-by-side comparisons "The first one was for
picking your Consumer Health Directed Plan or your 80/20 or 70[/30] and it explained all the ones. Then
you turned the page and it was very friendly on the eyes because it was all laid out on a page, whereas
to find it on the internet, you only see that little bit and you have to scroll up and down. Having it all laid
out, page to page in the order was so, so helpful. I liked it. I definitely had that open next to me as I was
going through” (see Appendix 9 for the side-by-side comparison chart).
Some participants engaged with the printed materials by annotating them. Participant 15 used
highlighting and sticky note tabs to break up the printed information into helpful sections (see Figure 20
for photographs of Participant 15’s annotated materials). “I highlighted and then tabbed in the book. To
see really what the cost was and see what it actually covered.”

92

Figure 20: Participant 15's Annotated Printed Materials

The printed orientation materials were analyzed using the FORCAST readability formula in the
Oleander Readability Studio Software. The side-by-side comparison chart (see Appendix 9) rated a 12.4
grade level, indicating it is suitable for a reader who has completed most of her/his senior year in high
school. The open enrollment decision guide, designed to elaborate on the options and provide helpful
scenarios of coverage, rated a 10.9 grade level.
4.2.4

Review Information on the State Health Plan Website
In addition to reviewing the printed materials distributed at the orientation session, sixteen

participants used the state health plan website to gather information and make their decision.
Participants used the online information to support the printed materials, researched answers to
specific questions, and some reviewed information in advance of the orientation session.

93

The website was often used in conjunction with the printed materials. "Looking over all of the
material provided, and kind of going in and just checking out the website, and then coming back in and
putting what I thought I needed and saving it..." (P11).
Ten participants searched the state health plan website for the answers to specific questions
about the plans. Participant 19 "wanted to see if there was a limit on physical therapy... I think I found a
PDF of the consumer-directed plan and the 80/20 plan. A PDF of explanation of benefits or whatever
online." Participant 20 discussed her strategy for locating specific information within the general
overviews. "I would find a PDF like this and Ctrl Find for ultrasound or specialist."
Three participants (P1, P13, and P20) reviewed the state health plan website prior to the
orientation session to obtain information about the benefits available to them. "I had gotten a verbal
offer but nothing from HR yet. I went through … the benefits page online... I just wanted to know what
… the different plans looked like, the different options. I've never worked for the state before, so I had
heard that it was really good but didn't really know about it" (P20).
In contrast, Participant 3 (a married, Asian man with a Doctoral degree) elected not to review
the information on the website. "The original plan was to check the website to get more information,
but I think the information from the handout [was] already overwhelming."
4.2.5

Most Helpful Information
Participants reflected on the information most helpful to them. The side-by-side comparison

chart and the scenarios were the most often identified helpful piece of information. Participants also
identified the chart of monthly premiums, the preventive care sections, the insurance plan guide, the
benefits calculator, and the coverage scenarios as helpful. Nine participants (P1, P5, P7, P10, P12, P13,
P16, P25, and P27) pointed to the side-by-side plan comparison chart (see Appendix 9) as the most

94

helpful during their decision-making process. "Charts like this are helpful. Comparison charts... Generally
I look at the benefits before the costs" (P12). The most helpful information for six participants (P6, P9,
P11, P15, P18, and P22) was the chart with the monthly premiums demonstrating which wellness credits
were necessary to reduce the monthly cost. As Participant 18 highlighted, "affordability is like my
number one concern." Other sources of information identified as most helpful were the parts on
preventive care (P4 and P23), the insurance plan guide (P14 and P26), and the benefits calculator (P24).
Participant 24 pointed to the online calculator as most helpful because "it made me feel better about
the decision." These helpful information sources will be discussed further in the Information Tactics
section.
In addition to these areas identified as most helpful, nine people (P2, P12, P19, P20, P21, P22,
P24, P25, and P29) spoke about the coverage scenarios as being particularly helpful for seeing what the
plan looked like in action. The scenarios (see Figure 21) provide information about the health needs of
an individual and show what the coverage options look like for each of the scenarios. “I read through a
couple of the scenarios that they put of people using this plan, … and it kind of helped me think about it
in a more real world application instead of just looking at the chart. Helped me understand it a little bit
more” (P19).

95

Figure 21: One of the Provided Coverage Scenarios

4.3

Information Tactics
Each individual employed his/her own unique combination of information tactics to select the

health insurance plan that best met his/her needs. Participant 11 highlighted that the onus falls on the
individual to take charge. “It's a matter or looking it up and kind of actively finding it for yourself. I mean,
I guess the information is there.”
Tactics discussed by participants included comparing plans side-by-side, evaluating and
calculating costs, ignoring/eliminating information, avoiding overthinking, and managing their personal
information. Some of these tactics were undertaken in conjunction with one another: “The way my
brain works it's usually like several things at one time” (P18).
Participants spoke about the difficulty that came with translating the information to the real
world. “I guess, again, trying to figure out the specifics of what it actually means on a practical level. It
96

gets very number specific, and that sometimes ... It's ten o'clock at night and I've been staring at this for
a couple hours. I'm like, I don't know, whatever. I guess trying to figure out whatever data is presented,
what that means on a practical level” (P12).
Some information tactics are harder to quantify or specifically trace. "I call it percolating. I like
things to percolate especially for bigger decisions" (P24).
4.3.1

Comparing Plans Side-by-Side
Comparing plans side-by-side was a common strategy identified by participants. Participants

spoke of the benefits of numerical information presented in chart form and the ability to focus on
relevant sections. One participant even created his own chart to compare the plans according to his
anticipated health care needs.
All 30 participants spoke about comparing plans during their decision-making process. Even
those who were inclined to go with one plan from the beginning compared their preferred plan with at
least one of the other options to make sure they were satisfied with their choice. "I was pretty sure that
I was going to go with the 80/20 plan... I read through this to see like for the types of things that I
typically use. So like if I had a copay for a prescription or just going to primary care. Usually I just kind of
do like a yearly checkup and get a prescription refilled... So I was looking though to see what that would
look like" (P8).
Participants spoke positively of having the coverage information provided to them in a chart
form. Participant 30 shared that the chart made it “easier to compare things. I think in general when
numbers are involved, it’s easier to see them in a chart instead of embedded in a paragraph of text. I
guess I would say I look at the chart first, probably. Then I would read, possibly as well, to see if my
understanding matches up with what it's saying.”

97

Participant 25 noted that the chart allows users to hone in on the most helpful information. "I
think just because you can pick out the things like, I want to know how much maximum will come out of
my pocket, let me look at these. Okay, this is the maximum that can come out of my pocket. Or I have a
medication I take regularly and I know that it's generic tier two.” This allows users to connect their
anticipated needs with the differing coverage choices. If a user has remaining questions, she/he can
then turn to other information materials to locate information that is more specialized. “The charts were
great because then you could just take a snapshot look, decide, look at the coverage in the books
[which] have more detail, and then make a decision” (P15).
While some participants spoke about focusing on a particular section of the comparison chart,
Participant 6 spoke about the helpfulness of looking thoroughly through the comparisons. "I really like
the comparison so I definitely looked at the monthly costs. All of these apply to me so I looked through
everything. Even if they don't really apply now, there's a chance it could later so I wanted to know."
Participant 27 (a single, White man between the ages of 18-26 with a Bachelor’s degree)
described creating his own chart to help with comparing plans (in this case the dental insurance options)
and their coverage of his specific coverage needs. "I made a chart [to compare the high vs. low dental
options]. I made rows for wisdom teeth, retainer, and cleaning and compared what the low and high
coverage looked like for each. I got the amounts from the packet to do comparison. I got out a calculator
to see price difference” (P27). Online calculators (such as the one available for the medical coverage)
assist users in making comparison charts customized to their health care needs (see the Calculate Costs
section for further discussion).
4.3.2

Cost
Cost was the most commonly mentioned topic by participants. It was discussed by all 30

participants a total of 96 times. While cost was the most significant factor mentioned by all participants,
98

some discussed cost in relation to the monthly premiums while others focused on the costs within the
plans (e.g., deductibles, copays, etc.).
Most participants (n = 19) discussed balancing the monthly premium costs with the coverage
costs. As Participant 12 explains, "it's sort of looking at a trade-off between the premium costs and the
deductibles and contracts, and the nuts and bolts it would actually end up being in the short-term of
what my projected needs are, and in a horrible what-if scenario, if something catastrophic happens."
(P12). For these participants, costs include all aspects from paying for coverage to paying for care. For
three participants (P4, P14, and P23), it was unclear which type of costs were most significant in their
decision-making process.
Four participants (P2, P6, P17, and P26) mentioned costs associated with deductibles, copays,
etc. as a more significant factor in their decision-making process than the monthly premiums. "Cost was
a driver. I was looking at the overall deductibles, out-of-pocket expenses for each visit, co-pays, and ...
coinsurance" (P2). This may be a result of the lower premium costs across the board at the institution
(see Appendix 10), which led these individuals to focus on the costs of care over the monthly premiums.
Three participants (P1, P5, and P22) focused solely on the monthly premium costs when
mentioning cost as a driving factor. For example, "it was the monthly amount that was the big
determinant, not necessarily what the co-pays were or things like that" (P22). In this example, the
participant selected the consumer-directed health plan, which has a $0 copay after wellness credits.
However, the two other participants (P1 and P5) who mentioned monthly premium costs as a driving
factor selected the 80/20 plan, which is the plan with the highest monthly premiums (approximately $15
per month after wellness credits). That is, even though the monthly premiums were the most important
aspect of cost for these participants, they still selected the plan with the highest monthly premium. The
researcher hypothesizes that the low monthly premiums across the board may confound some of the

99

results here. Further research should be conducted to determine the role that monthly premium costs
play in individuals’ decision-making processes.
4.3.3

Calculate Costs
Eighteen participants performed calculations in their effort to determine the most appropriate

coverage type for their needs. Nine participants used mental calculations, six used an actual calculator
and/or wrote out their calculations, and three used the online benefits calculator provided through the
state health plan website.
Nine participants discussed tabulating up the costs of the monthly premiums versus the other
coverage charges but did not formally compute using any formal tools (e.g., a phone calculator or the
online benefits calculator). "So I kind of just played around with it. I didn't do any serious calculations. I
just sort of played around in my head" (P16).
Six participants spoke about using a calculator (often either on their phone or computer) to
compute specific amounts related to their predicted medical costs. "I pulled out my calculator and then I
read through the plans again and just tried to do an estimate of what I thought I would need health
care-wise this year...I knew about what visits I'll do each year so I calculated the copays and
prescriptions and then I balanced that against the monthly charge that you do have with the 80/20"
(P6).
Three participants used the online benefits calculator provided through the state health plan
website, which enables users to input their number of expected doctor visits, medications, and other
health care needs. For example, Participant 19 and her boyfriend used the online calculator together to
estimate the next year's expenses. "I know that he used the online calculator a lot and put in every
scenario that you can think of. I put in a couple of urgent care visits or things that I thought could

100

feasibly happen. A couple of visits to a specialist, things like that. Maybe put in five preventative care or
something, but I didn't use that much this past year, but I was like maybe..." Participant 24 underscored
the benefit of using the online calculator: "It made me feel better about the decision. I had no idea how
much ... It's hard to visualize what the real cost is."
4.3.4

Ignoring and/or Eliminating Information
Sixteen participants spoke about mentally ignoring or eliminating information to help them

focus on the information most relevant to their decision-making process. Individuals eliminated or
ignored information in coverage areas that did not apply to them (e.g., inpatient, prescription drug,
and/or dependent coverage). Individuals also eliminated entire plans (e.g., 70/30 or the CDHP) to
simplify their choice.
Eleven participants eliminated information on irrelevant coverage areas. Participant 3
confessed, "inpatient hospital I didn't read." Some participants who do not take prescription drugs
mentally ignored that section of information. "I don't take any prescription drugs, so none of this really
applied to me" (P5). In addition, family structure was another measure by which individuals ignored
information. Participant 10 explained, "The family doesn't apply, of course, because it's just going to be
me."
Ten participants eliminated plans altogether (see Figure 22 for Participant 1’s annotations
denoting the rejection of the 70/30 plan). "At that point I had pretty much eliminated one of the plans
just based on the research I had done, so then it was comparing two of them" (P12). The 70/30 and the
Consumer-Directed Health Plans were the most frequently mentally rejected plans.

101

Figure 22: Participant 1 Eliminated the 70/30 Option

4.3.5

Avoiding Overthinking
Nine participants (P4, P5, P6, P9, P18, P19, P21, P23, and P28) talked about avoiding

overthinking. For some participants explained that it was due to the fact that they would be able to
choose again during open enrollment. Participant 4 shared, "I thought, 'Okay, I'm not going to stress
over it and just pick the minimum and bare bones and then, when October rolls around, I'll do more
research then'" (P4).
4.3.6

Should Have Done More
Four participants (P3, P15, P19, and P30) admitted that they should have done more during

their decision-making process. Participant 19 confessed, "Well, I've never actually told someone what
I'm doing right now which is really good exercise and shows me that maybe I should have done that. I'm
not totally naïve when it comes to trying to understand it. I guess I'm a little bit confused..." (P19).
4.3.7

Not a Logical Choice
Four participants (P3, P6, P14, and P21) divulged that it was not a logical choice that they made.

“You know, it was between the 80/20 and the consumer-directed, and I guess it was mostly just a kind
of a gut decision on the fact of, I thought the 80/20 was better for me. I guess there wasn't a really
strong, oh, this is the light bulb kind of thing…” (P14).

102

4.3.8

Personal Information Management
In talking about how they manage health insurance information, participants shared some of

their personal information management habits. Techniques included printing out insurance materials,
rectifying receipts, filing statements, and bookmarking information.
Eight participants (P1, P2, P10, P15, P16, P17, P28, and P29) printed out insurance materials
during and/or after making their decision and enrolling online. Participant 10 explained, "Sometimes I
do like printing out stuff to be able to really look over it." In addition to liking to view the information in
a printed format, others printed out the materials to confirm enrollment, "Just as a safeguard in case the
system wasn't saving. I know that we had a small [enrollment] window" (P15).
Participants 3 and 21 talked about rectifying receipts with insurance statements. "I need to
make sure I get all of the documents as far as billing and things like that. Just to follow up and make sure
I'm actually getting what I'm supposed to get" (P21).
Participant 13 discussed filing Explanation of Benefits statements without clearly understanding
them: "they're just going to continue to confuse me and be incomprehensible, but I usually just file them
away." Participant 30 had plans for managing her health information in the upcoming year to help her
during open enrollment season. "I've been telling myself that this year I will pay attention and maybe
make a spreadsheet or something of that stuff. So I would know at the next open enrollment if it would
make sense [to pick a different plan]."
Participant 20 (a single, White woman between the ages of 27-35 with a Bachelor’s degree)
bookmarked the information about her selected health insurance plan in her Internet browser (see
Figure 23). "I have the Main Benefits HR page. I have the summary of the 80/20... Oh, yeah, the smaller
decision guidebook and the examples in here... Then the Flex Guide, which I think was the same as the

103

printed book we got." Additional personal information management techniques included saving receipts
by the door until they could be filed for reimbursement (P17), shredding old insurance cards (P23), and
opening a tab with each of the plans while weighing the options (P25).

Figure 23: Participant 20's Bookmarks

4.4

Personal Reflection
In addition to reviewing provided information and using formal information tactics, participants

also discussed personal reflection as a step in their choice journey (often in response to the interview
guide question “What goes through your mind as you think about the choices?”). Participants looked at
their past behavior and personal health, including experience with health insurance, past use of
coverage, and their health status and age. They also discussed future forecasting including their
anticipated needs for the next year and what would occur in the event of a worst-case scenario.
4.4.1

Past Experience with Health Insurance
Past experience with health insurance impacted the enrollment decisions that individuals made.

Twenty-seven participants specifically spoke about how their experience with health insurance informed
their decisions this time around. Familiarity with particular types of coverage (e.g., high deductible

104

health plan), experience selecting a plan, past use of coverage, and experience with the U.S. health care
system are examples of how previous experience with insurance played a role in the decision-making
process.
Previous experience with a particular type of coverage may explain why some individuals are
more comfortable with some types of coverage than others (in particular why some are willing to enroll
in a high deductible health plan and others are not). Participant 23 explains the CDHP thusly: it "was
very similar to what I had before, so it was easy to just understand that that's how it worked." As a new
hire, Participant 8 sought to ease the transition from one position to another by "remember[ing] what I
had from my previous job [and] just figuring out what was comparable coverage [to] that I had."
Participant 2 selected the 80/20 plan in part due to negative past experience with different
types of insurance coverage. She was disinclined to select the consumer-directed health plan, and
shared, "I suspected that it meant processing more paperwork, which I dreaded this flex spending
account in previous years because of the amount of receipts, the paperwork you had to process. I just
found it dreadful."
Some participants reflected on specific aspects of past use of health insurance as a factor. For
example, Participant 6 shared, "Definitely I think it will go through a deductible, and I know that from
past years." Knowing how the coverage played out in practice was a key aspect for Participant 6’s
calculations to identify the best plan.
Four participants (P6, P15, P20, and P22) connected their past experience with health insurance
with their confidence navigating the system. "Several years ago when I got onto my own insurance plan,
I spent some time learning about the ins and outs a little more. In general, I feel pretty comfortable with
those, but there are certainly some things that [are unclear]" (P6).

105

Eight participants (26.7% of the participants in this study) shared that this was in fact their first
time selecting health insurance coverage. This was the first full-time position for many of these
participants, several of whom mentioned they were transitioning from being full-time students (on
student health coverage) to being full-time employees. Many of the participants who were selecting
health insurance for the first time were also young (four were between 18-26 years old, three between
27-35 years old, and one between 36-45 years old).
These individuals may have different health insurance information needs due to their
unfamiliarity with this process. Participant 21 shared, “It's very complicated, a lot of overlapping
concepts. Things aren't necessarily as clear as they could be for a first-time person selecting insurance. I
guess there should just be more clarification on some things.” The average cumulative HILM score for
those selecting health insurance for the first time was 2.82, below the average HILM score for
participants in this study (3.00).
Participants 3 and 23 had more familiarity with a health care system outside of the United States
(China and India, respectively). Because more of their experience was outside of the U.S. system, they
felt less confident in their ability to navigate the U.S. health insurance system and had lower cumulative
HILM scores (2.08 and 1.92, respectively). These two HILM scores are the lowest of any of the
participants.
4.4.2

Reflecting on Past Year's Use of Coverage
When making this year's health insurance selection, nine participants (P3, P17, P19, P20, P22,

P23, P24, P25, and P26) reflected on their use of health insurance coverage over the past year in
particular. Participant 25 used the following questions to get started on the decision-making process:
"So what happened last year? Has anything changed? Those things affect what I choose."

106

Participant 19 (a White woman between the ages of 27-35 who works as a Project Coordinator)
spoke about reflecting on past coverage of specific health needs: "I looked a little more at the deductible
cost this year just because I've had significant injuries the past two years... When I looked at my out-ofpocket costs for the past year, if I had gone with a different plan then I would have spent less money. It
would be more money up front but overall it would be less money over the whole year."
Participant 22 (a married, White man between the ages of 36-45 who works in technology
support) focused on coverage areas that caused concern in past years. He spent time "looking at some
of the stuff that has been questions for me in the past, with previous insurances, you know, and
knowing my medical and knowing what's come up..."
4.4.3

Reflecting on Health Status
Sixteen participants spoke about reflecting on their health status as a key step in determining

the best coverage for them and, when applicable, for their family. Participant 13 reflected that her high
health status and that of her family meant the consumer-directed health plan was a good fit. "I think
consumer-directed worked for our family and I would say it might work for someone else, too, who is
healthy and wasn't expecting ... I guess if another family needed particular diabetes drugs or something
like that, it might be more helpful to go with an 80/20 plan" (P13). Others acknowledged they might
need more coverage due to their health status’. "I understand that I have more medical needs than your
average person or that I would like to. I need to make sure I can get everything that I need, that my
health is taken care of” (P21).
4.4.4

Age as a Factor
Fourteen participants cited their age as a factor in their decision-making process. Nine

participants (P1, P3, P5, P6, P11, P12, P13, P14, and P17) spoke about how the process was simpler for a

107

younger, healthy person. "At this age I don't expect many things, any bad things, to occur in the next
year" (P3).
Five participants (P2, P18, P22, P26, and P30) spoke about their age as a reason they spent more
time and effort selecting health insurance. "I feel like, and maybe just because I'm getting older and
having to be more responsible and I actually have health issues, that maybe I had to spend more time
thinking about it" (P2).
Participant 18 described her personal growth thusly: “I think previous times… I was really
young… [so] I was just like okay sign, sign, sign, sign, I didn't really think about it. I was like, yeah, I have
health insurance, put the cards in my wallet and didn't do anything with it. It was kind of like
development in a way, like a transition. Then when I got to the age of thinking about having kids, it
meant something different. It depends on what it means at that point in my life. The past couple years I
went back down to the 70/30, like, I'm not having kids anymore, I need to try to save some money. Now
I'm like okay, you got a new job, it's a better job, I make a little bit more money. Maybe I should start
thinking about what could happen and preparing for those things, whatever they might be.”
Participant 12 (a married, White woman between the ages of 27-35 who works as a Research
Specialist) attributed her youth and comfort with technology as making her more comfortable with
selecting the CDHP. "Probably to some extent it's an age thing. I'm pretty comfortable with technology. I
know other people who have used health saving accounts ... to get reimbursed for things."
4.4.5

Forecasting Needs for the Next Year
When asked about what goes into their health insurance decision-making process, twenty-six

participants mentioned forecasting their needs for the next year as a key technique. As Participant 8
describes, “Typically, I think of what I generally need, like, in a year. Thinking about how many times I

108

might go to the doctor, prescription drugs that I need to get and make sure that I have good coverage
for that and then also maybe sort of general emergency, just thinking in that way. I don't really go to the
doctor that often, so I kind of just want to make sure my general bases are covered.”
4.4.6

Forecasting the Worst-Case Scenario/Unknown
During the decision-making process, fifteen participants forecasted their health care needs in

the event of a worst-case scenario (e.g., a major accident) or the unknown (e.g., an unexpected medical
diagnosis). Participant 6 explained, "I was just thinking about what I think my medical costs will be and ...
being covered in case of emergencies, so I thought about which plan had a better emergency coverage."
Participants shared that this tendency to prepare for the unknown was not necessarily born out
of past experience. "If you want to do a worst-case scenario, you get into an accident, well, what does
that actually end up looking like in terms of how that affects your health insurance? If you haven't
experienced it, you really don't know. You just hear horror stories" (P12).
Participant 21 (a single, Black woman between the ages of 18-26 with a Bachelor’s degree) saw
covering the unknown as a personality trait. "I like to plan for just-in-case situations." Participant 26 (a
single, Asian-American woman between the ages of 36-45 who works as a Research Assistant)
demonstrated why some individuals might select an insurance plan with coverage beyond their needs.
"You never know what's going to happen, so better to pick a plan where you have more coverage, which
would be the 80/20." Future studies may consider using the Risk Information Seeking and Processing
(RISP) Model (Griffin et al., 1999) to explore further the connections between personality and health
insurance choice.

109

4.5

Interpersonal Information Sources
A key element of many of the participants’ timelines was discussing their choice(s) with trusted

individuals. Participants spoke with spouses/partners, colleagues, parents, benefits officers, and friends.
Reasons for consulting other individuals included obtaining advice from individuals with more health
insurance experience, those with similar coverage, and those involved in their financial decisions.
4.5.1

Spoke with Spouse/Partner
Participants consulted their spouses/partners during their decision-making process. Many

participants (n = 13) spoke with their spouse/partner to determine whose coverage to use. Even when
the participant's spouse or partner was not going to be covered under the plan, many participants still
chose to discuss their options with their significant other. Additional reasons for consulting with
spouses/partners included the desire to obtain input, domain expertise, familiarity with the available
plans, and previously established roles regarding who takes the lead on financial decisions.
The most common reason for discussing the decision with a spouse or partner was to determine
through whom to obtain coverage. "So it was about whether she wanted to move to mine or whether
we should keep ours individually and what we should change" (P23). Participants compared their
options with the options available through their spouse to determine the most feasible coverage option
for them and, when applicable, for their dependents.
Participant 12 spoke about a desire to have someone from whom to obtain input. "There's
probably a moment where I just threw the packet at him and said, 'Tell me what to do.' At that point I
had been looking at it for an hour and a half, two hours, something like that. It was more trying to
bounce ideas off of somebody and figuring out what would end up being best for our situation."
Individuals who are part of a couple may rely on their partner/spouse as a second/confirmatory opinion.

110

Participant 1 consulted with her partner due to his domain expertise. When asked for the
reasoning behind sharing the decision-making with her spouse, she said, "Since he has to work so much
with health insurance... He can read that language better than I can."
Participant 19 consulted her boyfriend due to his familiarity with the specific options available:
"He's a state employee as well so he changed his health plan last year and so I talked to him about the
way he used his health plan this year." The personal connection with her boyfriend was an additional
reason Participant 19 asked for assistance: "But I feel really comfortable asking my boyfriend about it,
because I don't worry about sounding ignorant or not understanding."
Participant 13 shared that her spouse was usually the one to make financial decisions, so he
took a lead role: "My husband is probably the bigger driving force in our marriage in terms of making
financial decisions, so he has opinions."
Conversely, Participants 10 and 18 decided not to discuss the plan with their spouse/partner
because they knew that they were not going to be covered under their plan. As Participant 18 described
it, "Your health is your business."
4.5.2

Spoke with a Colleague
Twelve participants consulted with colleagues to learn about their experiences with the plans

and to solicit advice. Because their colleagues have the same plans available to them through the
institution, their experience with the plans was a valuable source of information for many of the
participants. Participants sought feedback on plans, compared insurance needs with colleagues, and
obtained recommendations on physicians. Ultimately, the advice of their colleagues had varying levels
of influence.

111

Some participants solicited general advice to gauge negative or positive experiences; for
example, “the one colleague that mentioned the consumer-directed health plan seemed happy with it.
It makes you look at it because it wasn't where somebody said, ‘Ew that's a terrible [plan] ...’” (P16).
Others specifically sought out the advice of people they respect; "I had a couple of people whose advice
I trust tell me this is the plan that you want. So I was already predisposed to a particular plan" (P28).
Four participants compared their experiences with their colleagues’ to ascertain whether their
coverage needs were similar, due to health reasons (P12), age (P29), or family make-up and the need to
cover dependents (P15 and P28). Participant 12 spoke with her boss who "told me what she'd done in
the past, and then we were talking about the health saving accounts things and whether we thought
that was a way that we had to go, or ... if our medical needs were similar enough that it's even worth
comparing, things like that. It was probably a little bit more general and theoretical."
Because some of the wellness credits available to employees require that they select a primary
care physician, two participants (P16 and P30) also sought physician recommendations in conjunction
with insurance advice. “I'm new to the area, and my work supervisor had said that she could
recommend doctors to me so I just checked in with her and wrote down the names of the doctors that
she recommended. Then I went online to see if the primary care doctor was accepting new patients”
(P30).
Two participants (P3 and P4) recognized, upon reflection, that they considered speaking with a
colleague, but in fact did not. Participant 3 shared that, “I didn't do it. I had an idea but I didn't do it.”
Privacy concerns and colleagues’ unawareness of his particular medical needs were the reasons that he
decided not to ask for colleagues’ opinions.
Participant 30 (a single, White woman between the ages of 36-45 with a Master’s degree)
shared that, while she listened to advice from colleagues, it did not influence her ultimate decision. “I
112

guess it's always interesting to know, but I feel like everyone has a different idea of their own needs. I
don't think I would've just signed up for a plan because it was the same one that she had.”
4.5.3

Spoke with Parent(s)
Ten participants spoke with their parents as part of their decision-making process. Their

reasoning behind doing so included more experience with insurance, familiarity with individual health
care needs, domain knowledge, assistance with terminology, and to outsource decision-making.
Consulting with parents during the decision-making process varied by age. Five-sixths (83.3%) of the
participants between the ages of 18 and 26 spoke with their parents during the process, 35.7% of
participants between the ages of 27 and 35 consulted their parents, and none of the participants above
the age of 36 sought parental advice.
Many of the participants who consulted with their parents did so due to their experience with
insurance. "I asked my mother if she would help me decipher between the different plans and help me
choose because she's done that before" (P21). In addition to being more familiar with navigating the
health insurance system, parents may also be a source of lessons learned: "My dad always jokes that he
didn’t do a lot of it right. So he doesn’t want me to make the same mistakes that he did" (P1).
Participants identified parents as individuals most familiar with their health care needs. As
Participant 21 explained, "[my mother has] attended all of my doctor's appointments with me so she
knows my needs." Other participants (P20 and P29) cited their parents' domain knowledge as a
contributing factor: "she's an RN so I always consult [with her] about that stuff" (P20).
Participants 8 and 24 also consulted their parents to help with terminology. "I just Googled a
few things. Some of them, too, I just asked my parents when I was talking about it with them because

113

they have a much more extensive plan than I've had. So, pretty much everything at the end of this book,
I didn't know what it meant. So, it was just like looking them up quickly or talking to my parents" (P8).
Participant 6 (a single, White woman between the ages of 18-26 who works as a Research
Coordinator) consulted with her parents to alleviate some of her mental burden. “If it's something I've
done before, I probably won't [consult my parents]; but anything entering into a new thing, I like to
outsource my decision-making.”
While some participants consulted their parents in person (e.g., "He was sitting there with me,"
P8), others had to call or email their parents due to geographic location (P5, P21, and P24). “I also called
my mom and my dad was home at that time so I was able to speak with them both at the same time. I
mentioned to them that I might take some pictures of the documents that we have and then email them
just so they could review them, but I ended up not doing that because I felt like I was equipped to make
a decision, and I felt confident in that decision based on the information that we got in the orientation
session” (P5).
4.5.4

Spoke with Benefits Officer
Ten participants contacted benefits officers during their health insurance decision-making

process. Participant 7 shared her strategy for answering health insurance questions: "The first thing I'm
probably going to do is I'm going to e-mail the ... benefits guy, and see if he can fill in anything. I think
he's very knowledgeable. It seemed like he didn't mind helping and he gave us his card, so I'm just going
to use it."
Participants 10 and 27 emailed the benefits office with specific coverage questions (i.e.,
identifying a primary care physician and to confirm enrollment deadlines). Participant 2 contacted a

114

benefits officer to ask about insurance terminology. She shared "I remember asking [name of benefits
officer], 'Well, what is coinsurance? Is that the same thing as the co-pay?'"
4.5.5

Spoke with Friends
Eight participants spoke with friends during their health insurance decision-making process.

Participants spoke with friends who worked at the same institution, compared health needs with
friends, and sought out friends with insurance expertise.
Four participants (P5, P10, P11, and P28) sought advice from friends who were employees of the
same institution. Participant 10 obtained advice through social media comments: "I went on Facebook
and posted, because I know some of my friends are on the 80/20 plan."
Two participants (P1 and P24) compared health care needs in obtaining advice. "Just the brief
texting with my friend. That probably helped the most. Just seeing that she did it with as many medical
expenses as pharmacy expenses as they have" (P24). Participants 1 and 8 sought out family friends with
insurance expertise. "I ended up calling a family friend who is in the insurance business as well" (P8).
4.5.6

Spoke with Other Interpersonal Source(s)
Two participants (P2 and P4) spoke with a financial advisor, one participant spoke with her

daughter (P16), and one participant (P27) spoke with the insurance company. Participant 19 spoke with
her sister: "My sister is not a state employee, but she has a high deductible health plan, so I talked to
her about some of the pros and cons of hers.”

115

4.6

Priority Coverage Areas
Participants reflected on their priority coverage areas. These areas included in-network vs. out-

of-network, sufficient coverage, copays/office visits, prescription drug coverage, preventive care,
coverage for dependents, specific coverage needs, and out-of-pocket maximums.
Fourteen participants spoke about the significant role in-network versus out-of-network
coverage played in their decision-making. "I was looking at what doctors were in-network compared to
out-of-network. Could I find a doctor in-network that I wanted to use?" (P25). Participant 18 further
explained, "It mattered a lot to me that my doctor was covered... I've been with him for so long I don't
want to switch. That's important. My preferred provider and my preferred hospital. "
Ten participants (P2, P8, P11, P15, P17, P20, P21, P22, P23, and P28) wanted to make sure they
had “sufficient coverage” (P2). Participant 21 elaborated, " I need to make sure I can get everything that
I need, that my health is taken care of.”
Six participants (P5, P6, P9, P10, P20, and P24) pointed to the costs of office visits and copays as
a priority. Participant 20 said, "I probably go to the office visits first."
4.6.1

Prescription Coverage
Another significant priority coverage area for participants was pharmaceutical coverage.

Participants researched the pricing for specific medications, and two participants wanted examples of
the medication tiers to understand the pricing structure.
Sixteen participants mentioned the prescription coverage as a key factor when they were
comparing the three available plans. “The copays for drugs are lower on the 80/20. Again, that's
probably why I was drawn towards that because I know I have a tendency to get sick a couple times a
year, and I'll be buying more prescription drugs” (P20).
116

Six participants (P2, P11, P18, P19, P24, and P28) looked up the coverage for their specific
medications. “I also have medications that I take, and I wanted to be sure that I wouldn't be paying an
exorbitant amount for those medications; preventative medications that I must take, at least if I want
good health” (P2).
Participants 3 and 5 wanted specific examples of the different drugs that fall under each of the
tiers. “Maybe some examples of what is a tier one versus a tier two versus a tier three drug is. Because I
wouldn't know. Is the birth control pill a tier one? Or, my dad is high blood pressure medications, like
where does that fall? What are the common drugs that many people take, and where do they fall under
these tiers?" (P5).
4.6.2

Preventive Care
Fourteen participants looked at preventive care as a key factor in their decision-making process.

Participant 4 said that she looks at "preventative care, again, because I'm the kind of person that really
does try to take care of herself so that for me was important." For some participants preventive care
was a matter of principle: “I also liked that preventative care is really covered. I just agree with that on
principle” (P6).
Participants 4, 10, and 15 hoped that preventive care would be the only health care services
they required in the next year. Participant 4 explained, "To me was, this is my deductible for the year,
which to be honest with you, didn't factor in to me because he did mention preventative is covered at
100%. I'm like, 'Okay, then that covers everything.' I'm trying to be healthy enough to where I just do the
preventative."

117

Participants 5 and 21 were interested in clear definitions of preventive care. "I think it'd be
helpful to have some examples of like what constitutes an office visit versus what constitutes
preventative care" (P5).
4.6.3

Coverage for Dependents
Twelve participants discussed coverage for dependents as a key factor in their health insurance

decision-making. This was a priority factor for Participant 15, who focused on "making sure my son is
covered. Then myself, but thinking about him is the first thing" (P15). In addition to covering children,
the needs of a spouse also influence the decision. As Participant 23 explained, "Now that I'm married,
my wife's needs and her choices come into play."
Participants discussed that having children made them more likely to require health care
services. "I probably would look at the 80/20, just primarily because I have a small child, and I'm going to
end up paying. She's going to go to the doctor at some point, so it would work out better for the extra
$100 a month" (P17).
4.6.4

Specific Coverage Need
Thirteen participants spoke of a specific coverage need that dictated their health insurance

choice. For example, Participant 19 said, "I use a lot of physical therapy services so that was what I
based my decision on.” This often led to researching specific coverage information that pertained to
their need.
4.6.5

Out-of-Pocket Maximums
Eight participants (P3, P7, P12, P13, P19, P20, P21, and P24) pointed to out-of-pocket costs as a

significant piece of information during their decision-making process. Out of those eight participants,
five selected the consumer-directed health plan, which has the lowest out-of-pocket maximums. This
118

may point to one of the reasons why the high deductible in the CDHP was not a deterrent for these
participants. Participant 3 cited the out-of-pocket maximum as a comfort: "[I] also considered whether
there is an out-of-pocket limit. Unexpected things happen at some point in your life. It's sort of given me
a psychological security that it's not going to break my life."
4.7

Evaluating the Choices
“Mostly I'm just grateful to have the choices. I would say that making the choice between the

different plans … didn't seem like a huge decision to me before. I'm just glad to have insurance” (P30).
During the course of the interviews, participants spoke about the choices available to them and the
importance of the choice itself. These decisions were not undertaken lightly. “Having the choice is nice.
Also, even though it's a small decision, I thought about it more just because I am the one making the
decision” (P6).
Participants reflected on the choices available to them. “I didn't know really what I was going to
have when I came here. I looked at the job and all the other things and the fact that there were health
benefits. But I didn't know whether they would be restricted or broad. So I was pleased with the choices.
I thought they were good” (P16). They shared their reasoning for selecting their preferred plans. “I guess
looking at it, initially, I wish I would've had more choices. But after going through the materials, I kind of
realized that more choices would've made things more confusing so I'm glad that there were only three
for me to choose from. Seeing as how I got something that I'm confident will satisfy my needs, I'm
definitely okay with it now, only having three choices” (P21).
Participants discussed what they wanted out of an insurance plan, considered testing out a new
type of coverage, took comfort in the ability to switch plans, and sought flexibility in coverage. “We have
so many opportunities for benefits to be covered on so many fronts. It's trying to figure out which one is
the best fit for our family” (P15).
119

4.7.1

Reasons for Selecting the 80/20 Plan
Two-thirds (n = 20) of the participants selected the 80/20 coverage. They shared a variety of

reasons for selecting the 80/20 coverage, including costs shown as a fixed amount rather than a
percentage, the low deductible, the low monthly premium, that the plan met their anticipated needs,
past experience with health insurance, and advice they had received.
Ten participants (P1, P2, P7, P8, P10, P16, P20, P21, P25, and P29) specifically mentioned the
structuring of the costs as a reason for selecting the 80/20. The information on the CDHP is presented in
a percentage format (i.e., 15% coinsurance after deductible), whereas the information on the 80/20 plan
is presented in a fixed amount (i.e., $30 copay). This discrepancy between percentage and fixed amount
was a deterrent for selecting the CDHP for many participants. Participant 2 explains, "I didn't know what
the 15% was because ... when you pay for medications and you have insurance, you don't know what
the real cost is and I thought, 'Oh, that could be scary.' This gave me an exact dollar amount" (P2).
Participants expressed a preference for having a fixed dollar amount copay to reduce unexpected costs,
as demonstrated by Participant 8: "I guess I like the idea of having a copay, and I know this is how much
it's going to cost each time."
Seven participants (P2, P5, P7, P8, P16, P26, and P29) cited the lower deductible as a key reason
for selecting the 80/20 plan. Participant 7 simply put it this way: "I picked that because the deductible is
lower.” This may be an example of a heuristic that people employ to make their health insurance
decision. It is possible that individuals focus on the deductible as a key factor and base a
disproportionately large part of their decision on that specific aspect. As Participant 2 argued, “If I'm
going to be going out-of-pocket for the first number of dollars, I wanted to bring that threshold down as
much as possible.”

120

Six participants (P1, P8, P9, P10, P16, and P18) pointed to the low monthly premium as a reason
for enrolling in the 80/20. "This is safe, and this is cheap. It's not zero dollars cheap, but it’s doable...
Why wouldn't I want the best one?" (P9). Interestingly, the 80/20 has the highest monthly premiums of
all three plans and yet the low monthly premium (see Appendix 10) was still cited as a reason for
enrolling in the plan. This is most likely because, even though it is the highest, it is still fairly low.
Participant 1 indicated a desire to get the best coverage available as an investment: "This is the
maximum coverage offered for $14 a month. I’m pretty healthy, and I’d rather just have that investment
in myself.”
Other participants shared that the 80/20 plan seemed best designed for their needs. As an
unmarried individual with no dependents, Participant 5's family make-up played a role in "leaning
towards the 80/20 plan. It seemed like the consumer-directed health plan was much more geared to
families as opposed to individuals so that also steered me away from that plan as well."
In addition to family make-up, anticipated medical costs were another reason for enrolling in
the 80/20. "I understand that I have more medical needs than your average person or that I would like
to. I need to make sure I can get everything that I need, that my health is taken care of. I may have to
pay a little more for it up front, but as long as I can get my money's worth it'll be fine" (P21).
Past experience with health insurance was another factor that led some to enroll in the 80/20
plan. "I went with 80/20, too, because in the past I've had 80/20 with other insurance companies.
Probably a sense of familiarity" (P15). Participant 27 cited advice from his colleagues as a significant
reason: "They both spoke highly of the 80/20 plan."
Lastly, while many participants gave specific reasons for their decision, one participant noted
that it was not a logical choice. "I guess it was mostly just a kind of a gut decision on the fact of I thought
the 80/20 was better for me" (P14).
121

4.7.2

Unfamiliar with How CDHPs Work
Many of the study participants spoke about how they were unfamiliar with how a consumer-

directed health plan (CDHP) works. Participants spoke about relying on the familiar and being skeptical
of the way CDHPs are structured. Some participants enrolled in the CDHP despite unfamiliarity and
sought unbiased information about the plan.
Unfamiliarity with CDHPs often led participants to select a more traditional coverage choice
(e.g., the 80/20 plan). Participants 15 and 18 both spoke about the tendency to go with what was
familiar, particularly given the time constraints of the enrollment period: “I was too lazy to become
familiar. I knew the clock was ticking. I'm like, go with what you know” (P15). Participant 18 connected
familiarity with a desire to avoid risk: “I'm a creature of habit and I just kind of go with what I know and
have been through. I'm not much of a risk taker and figured that if this could get me through pregnancy
and childbirth and postpartum care, then it could carry me through.”
Nine participants (P9, P13, P18, P19, P20, P21, P22, P28, and P30) reflected on their tolerance
for risk, particularly in association with their willingness to try out the CDHP. In some cases participants
reflected that they were willing to take on a risk to save money. “This is part of my husband's and I
discussion, is that the consumer-directed health plan, we would be responsible more initially out-ofpocket. We were okay with that because we have enough in savings. We don't have any debt" (P13).
Participant 22 summarized: "That's primarily what the insurance game is all about ... It's a bet. It's a
gamble."
Even those who considered themselves fairly health insurance savvy shared a skepticism about
CDHPs. “It seemed awfully risky… And I'm not unintelligent. It just didn't make sense to me” (P9). Still
another participant thought that it simply sounded “too good to be true. If I'm not mistaken, that's the
plan where the state provides you with funds. Like they deposit it into an account for you, if I'm not
122

mistaken. For me, I don't know, it sounded too good” (P21). Participant 21 continued her explanation
thusly: “I have my own savings account. I don't need any more accounts to have to worry about.”
A few participants said that the higher deductible was an automatic deterrent from enrolling in
the CDHP. Participant 29 asserted, "I think once I heard higher deductible, I was out.”
While many participants mentioned unfamiliarity with consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs)
as a deterrent, Participant 4 selected the CDHP plan despite unfamiliarity: “I'm not familiar with this one
but I also was like, ‘Okay, let me try it.’” The ability to switch plans during open enrollment helped her
feel comfortable in making this choice: “It's a short enough time period that I can see if I like it or not.”
Participant 19 shared that speaking with trusted loved ones about their experiences with CDHPs
helped alleviate her anxiety about selecting an unfamiliar option: "From my sister using the high
deductible plan and my boyfriend using it, it kind of made me be like, ‘Okay maybe it's not so crazy.’ I
just really needed to understand all the ins and outs of it to start to feel comfortable to come around to
using it."
Participant 12 spoke about trying to locate resources to rectify her unfamiliarity with CDHPs but
shared that it was difficult to locate unbiased information about health insurance, saying that it was
challenging to locate “a central place to find information that didn't have a stake in the game.”
Other participants expressed little interest in familiarizing themselves with CDHPs. As Participant
7 said, “I don't know. I don't want to know... For this one, it has too many questions.” Participant 30
alluded to The Principle of Least Effort to explain her reasoning: “just trying to understand exactly what
it meant seemed like too much effort” (P30).

123

4.7.3

Reasons for Selecting the CDHP
Eight participants (26.7%) selected the consumer-directed health plan (CDHP). Participants cited

the health reimbursement account, the online calculator, contributing to the greater good, health
status, family structure, and familiarity with the type of coverage as significant reasons for selecting the
CDHP.
Participants 12 and 22 cited the funds that are provided in the health reimbursement account as
a compelling reason for selecting the CDHP. Participant 22 presented the benefits thusly: "Having the
reimbursement account, HRA, and automatically having stuff put in there to cover stuff, that was more
than a zero-sum game" (P22).
Participant 12 (a married, White woman between the ages of 27-35 who works as a Research
Specialist) confirmed her preference for the CDHP through the online calculator. As she explained, the
CDHP “ended up being the most economical according to the benefits calculator thing.” The control of
funds offered by the HRA was particularly appealing to Participant 12: "I liked the ability to feel like I
have money there that I can access that isn't tied down by somebody at the other end of an insurance
claim, which I know probably it still is, it just doesn't necessarily feel that way. I just would at least like to
know where that money is coming from and where it's going and that I'm actually paying a cost and not
some cost that's been inflated because of insurance companies that then gets passed on and you
actually don't know the value of the health care you've received. I feel with the health savings account, if
I just get the bill that's fine, I can pay for it... It's probably entirely more perception than how it actually
works, but I feel like in this modern day and age, perception is nine-tenths of the truth."
She also added that contributing to the greater good was a compelling reason for selecting the
CDHP. “I feel like it's a good system. If there are problems with it, I'd like to be part of making it work
better, because I think it's a good idea” (P12).
124

Participant 13 shared that her health status and family structure were the reasons for which she
identified the CDHP as the most appropriate choice: “For us, it was an okay risk as two younger,
healthier people, to take on more of that personal responsibility.”
Participant 23 selected the CDHP due to familiarity with the coverage type: "Somehow this
jumped out at me, consumer-directed health plan, because it seemed exactly like the higher deductible
health plan I had before."
4.7.4

Reasons for Selecting the 70/30 Plan
Two participants (P17 and P30) selected the 70/30 coverage. Reasons for selecting the 70/30

coverage included lower monthly premiums and an external incentive. Participant 30 explained the
calculations she undertook to determine that the 70/30 plan best met her needs: "The 70/30 one,
there's no monthly fee if you do the tobacco attestation, which I did. The 80/20 one seems like it's
probably, the coverage is maybe somewhat better but there is the monthly fee. I think I multiplied $15
dollars or whatever it is. I tried roughly to think if that's close to what I'd spent on copays in the last
year."
Participant 17 selected the 70/30 plan due to an unusual system at her husband's work place
where they pay their employees to stay off the plan by obtaining comparable coverage through a
spouse's employer. "My husband's company pays us to stay off of their plan. They compensate us the
difference between their plan and the plan that we pick, as long as I'm employed full-time. Then they
pay in addition to the difference, they pay all of our copays. Apparently, it's cheaper somehow for them
to do that, so that makes it really easy."

125

4.7.5

Reasons for Eliminating the 70/30 Plan as an Option
Fourteen participants spoke about their reasoning behind deeming the 70/30 a poor choice.

Reasons included insufficient coverage, ACA non-compliance, advice from the orientation session, the
high out-of-pocket maximum, and the higher deductible.
Six participants (P7, P14, P19, P21, P24, and P26) shared that the 70/30 plan offered poor or
insufficient coverage. "It seems like there's hardly any scenarios except for the one lady who had crazy
pharmacy costs where 70/30 was the best" (P19).
Three participants (P1, P2, and P6) eliminated the 70/30 plan as a choice because it was not ACA
compliant. "The 70/30, because it didn't incorporate some of the new Affordable Care Act, what's been
implemented under Affordable Care Act, I just sort of nixed it all together. It just seemed outdated to
me" (P2).
Two people (P5 and P6) spoke about the orientation session and the benefits officers seemed to
sway people against the 70/30. "The guy running it made a strong pitch against the 70/30. That factored
in because I did look at it and when I calculated out, it kind of made sense" (P6). Additional reasons
included the high out-of-pocket maximum (P12 and P21), that it seemed like the 70/30 option would be
not available soon (P4 and P23), and the higher deductible (P9).
4.7.6

Plans Designed for Families
Nine participants characterized plans as being more relevant for dependent coverage. Seven

participants (P5, P6, P7, P13, P16, P19, and P29) spoke about the CDHP as more designed for families. "It
seemed like the consumer-directed health plan was much more geared to families as opposed to
individuals so that also steered me away from that plan as well" (P5).

126

Two participants (P15 and P28) selected the 80/20 because they deemed it most appropriate for
dependent coverage. "Of course, if I did not have a child, I would have gone with 70/30. Because I have
one, I went with 80/20. I just thought that made better sense" (P15).
4.7.7

Test out a Type of Coverage
Three participants (P4, P12, and P14) were looking forward to the opportunity to test out a type

of coverage that was new to them. Though unfamiliar with the CDHP, Participant 4 divulged, "I kind of
want to test it out. I wanted to see if it was something I could do in the long run or if I had too many
restrictions."
Participant 12 specifically discussed testing out the HRA: "I've never used a health
[reimbursement account]. I don't exactly know how it's going to work, but that doesn't make me not
willing to try it." She continued that testing it out had the potential to contribute to improving the
health care system more globally: "I'd like to be part of making it work better.”
4.7.8

Ability to Switch Plans is Comforting
Eight participants (P1, P3, P4, P8, P9, P18, P24, and P29) found comfort in the ability to switch

plans. "I felt like, with the health insurance, it's like you're not locked into it, so if you don't like it one
year, you can change it the next year" (P29).
4.7.9

Flexibility in Coverage
Six participants (P4, P9, P12, P14, P16, and P18) spoke about wanting flexibility in their

coverage, often in supporting their choice to select 80/20. "There is more flexibility for me to get this
one, because I can go to any doctor, know that it's my 20%, and then I feel comfortable with, ‘Okay, if I
don't like you, I can pick a different doctor.’ This one seems a little more constrictive in that this is it, this
is the choices you're getting and you have to make one" (P4).
127

Participant 16 (a married, White woman between the ages of 56-64 with a higher-level position
at the university) spoke about coverage flexibility as a top priority. "Well, I would look at basically the
cost of what's offered. The scope of what's offered. It's important to me to have freedom, flexibility."
4.7.10 Overwhelmed by Multiple Supplemental Insurances
Five participants (P2, P13, P15, P17, and P23) were overwhelmed by the multiple forms of
supplemental insurance. "This was different in that there were a lot more options. I don't think I've ever
selected so many options in one sitting. There was vision and dental and lots of flex plans and accidental
death and dismemberment, which is an absolutely terrifying name for a plan" (P13).
4.7.11 Too Much Paperwork
Four participants (P2, P10, P22, and P29) lamented how much paperwork was involved in the
choice and use of health insurance. Sources of excessive paperwork included the health reimbursement
account (HRA) and the orientation session. Participant 29 shared that the overwhelming amount of
information made it hard to know where to start: "I guess, there was a lot of information, but I ... didn't
know where to start or what I should actually be looking for."
One of the reasons that Participant 2 (a single, Black woman between the ages of 46-55 with a
higher-level position) elected not to enroll in the CDHP with its accompanying HRA was to avoid
excessive paperwork: "I suspected that it meant processing more paperwork, which I dreaded -- this flex
spending account in previous years -- because of the amount of receipts, the paperwork you had to
process. I just found it dreadful."
Participant 10 (a single, White woman between the ages of 27-35 who works in technology
support) found the amount of paperwork distributed at the orientation session to be overwhelming.
"Especially with the stuff from the orientation session, I've got like ... this thing, and that thing, and the
128

other thing. Then I'm like, 'Okay, was this a single sheet, or was it one of those stapled things? Was it in
the presentation?'"
4.7.12 Flexible Spending Account
Ten participants shared their reasoning for either selecting or not selecting to participate in an
optional flexible spending account (FSA). The seven participants who elected to enroll in an FSA (P7, P15,
P20, P22, P24, P25, and P28) discussed forecasting their health needs to estimate the amount they
wanted to contribute, taking notes during the orientation session, and reviewing bulleted lists of what is
reimbursable through the FSA. The three participants who discussed their decision not to enroll in an
FSA (P2, P12, and P27) spoke about the short amount of time before open enrollment, minimal health
needs, and the CDHP health reimbursement account as reasons for not enrolling in the FSA.
Three participants (P7, P20, and P24) used forecasting to determine the level of their FSA
contributions. For example, Participant 7 shared, "I look at the cost first, also taking into consideration
what I might need in that particular moment or what I think I might need for that particular year. When I
signed up this time ... I used the flex spending, because I want to get a new pair of glasses. It's easier for
me to go ahead and just take 300 and have them divide it up for the remaining of the calendar year as
opposed to me just trying to dish out $300."
Participant 28 (a married, White man between the ages of 46-55 who works as a Business
Manager) used a provided FSA worksheet to help him estimate his costs for the next year to select the
best amount to contribute to his FSA (see Figure 24): "So we just said okay, we're assuming that
between the medication, doctor's visits, mileage, we'll just call this $125 [per month]. We didn't want to
overdo it because you lose whatever you don't use, I guess."

129

Figure 24: Participant 28's Estimated Expenses for FSA Contributions

During the orientation session, Participant 20 took notes of which health services and supplies
are reimbursable through the FSA to help forecast the right amount for her (see Figure 25): "I'm pretty
sure I jotted down notes on, yeah I did, on which of the covered FSA products I would use just to help
me come up with how much I wanted to deduct for that."

Figure 25: Participant 20's Notes on What is Reimbursable through the FSA

The bulleted lists of the type of expenses that can be reimbursed with the FSA were particularly
helpful for Participant 15: "This was great... because it actually gave you a breakdown."

130

Participants 2, 12, and 27 shared their reasoning for not enrolling in an FSA. Participant 2
selected not to enroll in the flexible spending account, in part due to the short window before open
enrollment. "In the past year or two I haven't even used my flex spending because it was not worth the
hassle... I did not sign up for it now because of the open enrollment, and there's the small window. I
know I don't have any expenses now." Participant 27 determined that his health needs were not high
enough to warrant the FSA: "Next year I plan to have a general physical, see the dentist maybe one or
two times in the year, and maybe a specialist. It doesn’t make it worth the cost of NC Flex." Participant
12 elected to sign up for the CDHP with its accompanying health reimbursement account rather than
signing up for the FSA. She and her husband discussed "if it was worth doing the one with the health
savings account versus putting our own money into something that was pre-tax dollars and making our
own savings account that way... I ended up going with the consumer-directed health plan, in part
because at the moment I don't feel like I really have any health needs for 2016 and 2017. The rollover is
attractive in terms of having more money immediately available should I need it."
Unfamiliarity with what an FSA actually is may be another reason why individuals select not to
enroll in an FSA. Participant 24 (a White, woman between the ages of 27-35 with a Doctoral degree)
spoke with her parents to find out what an FSA is. She shared that she spoke with her "parents, like I
talked with them about the flexible spending account. I had no idea what that was."
4.8

Reflecting on the Process
Participants reflected on the process of selecting a health plan and enrolling in their choice. The

open enrollment period and being new to the area were discussed as factors in participants’ choices.
Participants considered the advice they would give others undertaking the same choice. They identified
the source of their questions and resources they wish they could have to support the choice journey.
Lastly, they compared the process with other purchase decisions.
131

4.8.1

Time Spent on Decision-Making Process
Participants were asked to estimate the amount of time they spent on making their health

insurance decision. The amount of time spent on the decision-making process did not vary considerably
according to age or racial/ethnic demographics. Three hours was the average amount of time spent
across the board.
When broken down by age, the average for participants between 18-26 years old (n = 6) and
between 27-35 years old (n = 14) was 3 hours. For those between 36-45 years old (n = 6) the average
was 2.28, those between 46-55 (n = 3) was 3.42, and for the one participant between 56-64 years old it
was 2 hours. When broken down by education level, for those with some college (n = 2) the average was
3 hours, for those with a Bachelor's degree (n = 11) it was 3.89 hours, with a Master's degree (n = 13)
2.12, and those with a Doctoral degree (n = 4) 2.42.
On average those who selected the consumer-directed health plan (n = 8) spent slightly more
time making their decision (average of 3.34 hours, see Figure 26). Those who selected the 80/20 plan (n
= 20) spent an average of 2.76 hours, and those that selected the 70/30 plan (n =2) both spent 2 hours.

132

Figure 26: Amount of Time Spent Making Decision by Health Insurance Coverage Choice

4.8.2

Most Amount of Time in Decision-Making Process
Participants were asked to reflect on which step in the health insurance decision-making process

took the longest. Seven participants pointed to rereading the provided information (P9, P20, P21, P22,
P23, P28, and P30); six participants specified comparing plans (P2, P10, P17, P24, P27, and P29); and
four participants spent the most time on the wellness credits (P4, P5, P13, and P25). Three participants
spent the most time conducting research related to their needs (P1, P12, and P18); three participants
estimated their time was evenly spread out (P14, P15, and P16); two participants cited making decisions
about the supplemental insurance (P7 and P11); and Participant 19 said speaking with her boyfriend
took the most amount of time.
4.8.3

Open Enrollment Window as Factor
Nine participants (P2, P4, P6, P7, P9, P14, P15, P20, and P22) spoke about the open enrollment

window as a factor in their decision. As Participant 9 explained, "Part of [this] was that I know I'm only
electing October through December right now, and in two weeks I get to go back in and make different

133

changes for January. So it was kind of like, 'How big of a deal could it be?’ I'm going to choose the
cheapest, quickest thing now, and in two weeks when I have to think harder about this, I will probably
revisit the sheet that has all the deductible information. If I need a deductible in the last three months of
this year, something big happened." Participant 9’s notes on her different choices for enrollment can be
seen in Figure 27.

Figure 27: Participant 9's Open Enrollment Annotations

The open enrollment window also played a role in Participant 15's supplemental health
insurance selection. "There's a couple that I declined, just because financially wise it didn't make sense,
because we weren't going to utilize it between now and January."
4.8.4

Short-term Decision
Similarly, five participants (P1, P3, P4, P6, and P14) spoke about health insurance enrollment as

a short-term decision. In some cases, that presented an opportunity to try something out for a limited
time. "It's such a short term, you can test it out" (P4).
For Participant 6 (a single, White woman between the ages of 18-26 who works as a Research
Coordinator), the short-term nature of her position meant selecting health insurance was also a shortterm decision: "This is a temporary job. I'm planning to be here for not too long."

134

4.8.5

New to the Area
As newly hired employees, many participants were new to the area and reflected on the health

insurance decision process as part of a bigger piece of settling into a new place. Six participants (P4, P5,
P16, P20, P22, and P30) spoke about how relocating to a new place influenced their choice and use of
health insurance. Participant 30 mentioned a list of all the things necessary after moving to a new home
and how that left her with little energy to put a lot of thought into her health insurance choice: "It just
seems right now, I just moved here, and it feels a little too chaotic to really put a lot of effort.”
Participant 16 spoke about how moving into a new home meant it was harder to access health
information that she needed to complete the wellness activities: "And I'm thinking oh my gosh, my
medical records. Luckily, I brought them with me because my furniture is in storage. So, I went digging. I
had to stop, go dig things up, see what information they had, start it up again." The move to a new area
also affected Participant 20's use of health insurance. Prior to being hired, she "wanted to keep my
prescription going so I got the Obamacare, scheduled an appointment for a primary care physician in
Greensboro where I was staying, so I had to go through the thought process in my mind. How does this
work, once I move to Chapel Hill, I have to go get another appointment for a new prescription or can I
just keep refilling from the doctor's office from Greensboro?" As individuals unfamiliar with the area,
four participants (P4, P5, P16, and P30) specifically spoke about seeking recommendations on health
care providers from colleagues. "I'm looking forward to the office recommendations to see if, 'Hey, this
doctor's really good, you should check him out'" (P4).
4.8.6

Advice I Would Give
Participants were asked what advice they would give if someone asked about the available

health insurance plans. The advice they suggested mirrored the strategies used by study participants. A
variety of advice types were mentioned including estimating expenses, forecasting health care needs,

135

selecting the 80/20 plan, researching available options, reflecting on one's health status, and testing out
a plan.
Eleven participants recommended that people estimate their expenses and/or forecast their
health care needs. Participant 3 recommended making "your own decision based on your income, your
expense[s], how you spend money." Participant 10 suggested others forecast their needs and "think
about what they think is likely what they might need."
Five participants (P11, P15, P26, P27, and P28) specifically suggested that individuals select the
80/20 plan. "You never know what's going to happen, so better to pick a plan where you have more
coverage, which would be the 80/20" (P26). In contrast, Participant 5 explained, "I would also emphasize
to, like, make sure you research each of them and see what's going to fit you best because just because
it's going to work for me does not mean it's going to work for you." Four participants (P2, P5, P14, and
P20) in total recommended that others research the options available to them.
Four participants (P8, P13, P19, and P23) suggested that the individual reflect on their health
status. As Participant 23 stated, "I would really tell them, actually, to not look at the options but look at
themselves first."
Participants 4 and 9 suggested testing out a coverage option to see if they liked it. Participant 1
said if asked for advice, she would "definitely mention ACA compliances" as a factor in deciding in which
plan to enroll.
4.8.7

Most Number of Benefits Questions
The researcher asked participants to reflect on all the content covered in the orientation session

and to identify what they had the most number of questions about after leaving the orientation session.
Aspects that contributed to the number of questions included the multi-faceted nature of insurance,
136

unfamiliarity with retirement plans, difficulty forecasting future needs, and the short-term nature of the
insurance decision given annual enrollment.
Eight participants (P7, P15, P16, P18, P22, P25, P26, and P28) had the most number of questions
about health insurance. Participant 15 cited the multi-faceted nature of health insurance as the source
of the questions: "I think I had more questions about health insurance. Not because they didn't cover it,
but because we have so many options." Only one of these participants (P26) was selecting health
insurance for the first time.
Eight participants (P1, P2, P3, P5, P14, P19, P21, and P24) had the most number of questions
about retirement. Participant 21 clarified that "at the moment, not health insurance. I feel like it's
something I have to experience before I can really understand all of the questions that I'll have. I think
I'll definitely have more along the way. The retirement, I feel like I'm absolutely clueless on. I don't know
anything about it, never looked into it.” Four of these participants (P1, P5, P21, and P24) were selecting
health insurance for the first time. It may be reasonably concluded that they were also selecting
retirement plans for the first time (during their first full-time position). The average age of participants
with the most number of questions about retirement was lower than those who had the most number
of questions about health insurance.
Six participants (P8, P10, P12, P13, P20, and P30) estimated they had an equal number of
questions about health insurance and retirement. Participant 12 drew parallels between the difficulties
for selecting health insurance and retirement: “Probably similar to retirement questions, just in terms of
... Again, you're asking people to plan for events that they maybe haven't experienced yet, and that sort
of forecasting is hard, and not necessarily intuitive.”
Five participants (P9, P11, P17, P23, and P29) said they had more questions about other benefits
discussed in the orientation session (e.g., parking, tuition remission, paid time off, etc.). Participant 29
137

attributed the short-term nature of the decision to this: “I felt like with the health insurance, it's like
you're not locked into it, so if you don't like it one year, you can change it the next year, so my questions
about that weren't ... I feel like I had more questions about other parts.”
Three participants (P4, P6, and P27) did not have many questions following the orientation
session. “I think he did a pretty good job with the health insurance. I felt like it was pretty well covered
especially for my needs... I don't remember thinking of too many questions during this” (P6).
4.8.8

Additional Resources
Participants were asked to share resources that they wish they had to support them in their

decision-making process. They shared creative solutions including a dictionary of insurance terminology,
one-on-one assistance, step-by-step enrollment instructions, wellness incentives, ability to customize
the information displayed in a comparison chart, reminders to those moving to keep health information
handy for the enrollment process, and an insurance system that would allow package customization to
fit anticipated needs.
Participant 1 shared that "a dictionary would've been nice for health insurance language." Other
participants requested additional information on specific terminology, such as "the out-of-pocket
maximum" (P7 and P21), primary care provider (P10), FSA (P24), and CDHP (P24). Participant 5 was
interested in specific examples of qualifying preventive care: "I think it'd be helpful to have some
examples of, like, what constitutes an office visit versus what constitutes preventative care."
Participants 3, 12, and 30 were interested in one-on-one assistance. "The ideal situation is that
someone sits down with me or in an orientation session have a representative from the company
explain things that weren't explained when after I left. Also give me some examples” (P3). Participant 12
suggested a chat feature that would enable more personalized assistance: "Some sort of live chat thing

138

for somebody looking at the website, trying to make a decision on a plan, being able to talk to
somebody who understood all of these things in terms of what the best option was." Participant 30
echoed this desire by sharing that "it would've been nice to have a coach sitting next to me while I did
the whole thing.”
Participants 9 and 16 requested more details about how to complete the enrollment page.
Participant 9 suggested a slide or a demonstration during the orientation showing, "Step One: Go to this
page. Step Two: Click on this link."
As an active person, Participant 19 was interested in wellness rewards that would acknowledge
physical activity: "I think that would be neat because I would definitely get credit for it, but I don't know.
It's not high on the priority list because it hasn't really been something I feel like that's been in the
forefront of health plans." Participant 23 echoed this desire and acknowledged the gap by noting, "The
cost calculation never seems to include things that people can do in their own lives to really take control
of their health."
Participant 12 envisioned a system that would allow users to display the most relevant
information and hide irrelevant information. As she explained, "It would have been nice to be able to
then, once you at least eliminated a choice or if you had specific questions about something, being able
to get more information in a more easily comparable way."
Participant 16 noted that, as someone who had recently moved to the area and did not have all
of her files handy, an early warning about having some health information material available in order to
complete the wellness credit would have been helpful: "I wished someone had told me about was the
health assessment. I got to that question, or that part, and it was like, 'What's your blood pressure?
What's your this? What's your that?' And I'm thinking, ‘Oh my gosh, my medical records.’ Luckily I
brought them with me because my furniture is in storage."
139

Participant 9 was interested in a more flexible insurance system that would allow customization:
"I would love for it to be more a la carte. If there was a plan that could be like, 'We'll pay for this many of
this type of visit. You can get six specialist visits for free.' And pick your package, which you can do, but
it's like a cable plan. When really, I just want to pick my channels."
4.8.9

Comparisons with Other Purchase Decisions
Participants were asked to compare the steps they took to select a health insurance choice with

other purchasing decisions, such as a laptop or an automobile. Twenty-three participants estimated that
the process was very similar to other purchasing decisions, whereas four participants spent less time
and three participants spent more time on the decision about their insurance. Four participants
expressed a desire for online reviews of the insurance coverage to assist with their decision-making
process since they find reviews helpful for other purchases.
Twenty-three participants shared that the process they used to select a health insurance plan
was similar to their behavior with other purchase decisions. Participant 28 summarizes it this way:
"They'd actually be fairly similar. It's a cost/benefit analysis, regardless. ... You've got an idea of what
you want. We'll say a car, for instance... You start with an idea you want and then you go, okay, this car
company's got this model. This car company's got this model. Now you're looking [at] which of these fits
all the basic needs? These three fit the basic needs. Okay. Now the stuff that you actually want, as
opposed to need. Then, it becomes a cost/benefit analysis. The health care stuff is easier because you
can sit down and do it all just right there on your desk without having to go talk to anybody necessarily,
but it's the same process."
Four participants (P3, P9, P17, and P30) estimated they spent less time on insurance than other
purchase decisions. Participant 9 attributed that to the time pressure of enrollment, "Because I have
two weeks to make real decisions, it was much quicker. It was a more quick and dirty version."
140

Three participants (P1, P6, and P25) estimated that they spent more time on their health
insurance decision than they generally do with other purchase decisions. In explaining that rationale,
Participant 6 shared, "I spent more time on this probably. Health insurance seems like an important
thing to me so I learned a bit more about it."
When reflecting upon purchase behavior, many participants spoke about the benefits of online
reviews to help guide them. Four participants (P5, P20, P29, and P30) mentioned that it would also be
helpful to have online reviews of health insurance to learn from others' experiences with the available
plans. “One thing I do a lot when I make a bigger purchase … is I read online reviews, which sounds silly
but … this is a good that you are purchasing, and you would love to hear about other people's
experiences with it in a way that you can review restaurants on Yelp” (P5).
4.9

General Reflections on Health Insurance
In addition to discussing the specific coverage options available to them, participants also

shared general reflections on health insurance. They talked about the psychological security they
procure through health insurance coverage. Participant 26 underscored, “It's just, health insurance is
important. Anything could happen anytime, so I didn't want to be in a situation where I let too much
time go and forget about [enrolling].” Participants also indicated whether obtaining employersponsored insurance influenced their decision to take the position.
Participants shared their experiences and opinions about the Affordable Care Act, indicated a
feeling that health care costs have been increasing over the past five years, and reflected on the health
insurance system as a whole. “Since I have a health problem, I want to make sure that I get something
that can cover me the most… This sounds so horrible to say, but it's like [there were] days I was like, if I
didn't have any health insurance at all, I would've done better than I would if I had my health insurance.
If you come in and you don't have any insurance, and there's a financial counselor [who] come[s] in and
141

talk[s] to you about getting indigent care... It's like you realize, I would've done so much better if I just
walked off the street without any insurance… Sometimes, when I look at my medical expenses, I'm like,
I'm killing myself just to go to the doctor. For me, medical insurance is just important because I want to
make sure ... that I have the most coverage available for me. There's a lot of people who get sick. Those
are the ones who have the GoFundMe accounts because they just cannot afford their medical care. It's
insane” (P7).
Participant 24 also discussed the political aspects of the United States health care system: “I get
very confused by it all. Yeah. I think it’s expensive. It's a shame that it has to cost so much, and I guess
with the whole political situation I'm like, why? Why did the government never intervene more and why
is it privatized? Stuff like that. Probably stuff you don't need to know, or yeah, why is it privatized and
why is it not more affordable?”
4.9.1

Psychological Security
Six participants (P3, P6, P8, P9, P13, and P18) spoke about the psychological security they

associate with health insurance. Participants discussed their general security in the knowledge that they
were covered, the out-of-pocket maximum as a source of reassurance, and the orientation session as a
comforting experience.
When asked about what went into her decision-making process, Participant 9 (a married, White
mother between the ages of 27-35 who works as an Associate Director) spoke of the importance of the
psychological security she would obtain through the coverage options. "I make [my health insurance
coverage choices] based on how secure, ultimately, I will feel once I have them." She further explained,
"I like to feel secure that my insurance is such that if something catastrophic happens, I'm gonna be
good." Participant 18 echoed this theme and spoke about how her personal experience with health

142

insurance led to this being a significant aspect for her. "Just knowing that if I need it I have it. That
wasn't always the case growing up, so it's a big deal."
Participant 3 pointed to the out-of-pocket maximum as a source of psychological security. "I
think [I] also considered whether there is an out-of-pocket limit. Unexpected things happen at some
point in your life. It's sort of given me a psychological security that it's not going to break my life."
Participant 13 found the orientation session to be an additional source of psychological comfort:
"Also to be in a room with a bunch of other people in the same thing was kind of psychologically
reassuring."
4.9.2

Affordable Care Act
Eleven participants (P1, P2, P6, P12, P13, P15, P16, P18, P20, P22, and P29) discussed the

Affordable Care Act during the course of the interview. Discussions included experience obtaining
coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace, seeking coverage outside the Marketplace, ACA
compliance of the available plans, better coverage of women's health, and the ACA as a source of stress.
Five participants (P12, P13, P20, P22, and P29) had experience obtaining coverage through the
Health Insurance Marketplace prior to being hired. "The last time I ended up picking my own insurance
plan was through the Marketplace, and that ended up being fairly easy because there was only one that
was a reasonable price what I thought, and I was fine with it, and I really didn't have any health care
needs at that time" (P12). In contrast, Participant 22 found the amount of available choices
overwhelming, particularly in comparison with the three available through her new employer: “It went a
lot more smoothly than I anticipated because I remember looking into the Health Marketplace. I played
around with that a little bit - I want to say a year or two ago - and there are just so many plans to choose
from. It's just very complicated. The fact that there were only three [now], and it was fairly simple, so I

143

really appreciated that.” Participant 29 also drew comparisons between the experience of selecting a
coverage plan through the Marketplace and through the three available employer-sponsored plans: "My
previous time I used the Marketplace, so there were a ton of options there, but now it's smaller, but
then I was looking at different companies, so with this one, I was just given the three to look at."
Three participants (15, 18, and 21) chose to select a coverage plan outside of the Marketplace
when they were seeking coverage outside the employer-sponsored system. "I just went directly with
Blue Cross Blue Shield. I had that long ago. The Marketplace seemed a little cumbersome when the law
was first passed. I just thought, let's go with the company that you know" (P15).
Whether a plan was ACA compliant was a factor for three participants (P1, P2, and P6). "I will
say that the 70/30 wasn't ACA compliant just made me hesitate a little bit" (P6).
Two participants (P5 and P13) reflected on better coverage of women's health following the
passage of the ACA. "As a female I found, before the ACA, it was very hard to get coverage that wasn't
astronomically expensive, because I have a womb and wombs are very expensive to maintain" (P13).
Two participants (P16 and P22) saw the Affordable Care Act as a source of stress. "And now all
you hear on the radio is all the different things about companies opting out because of ... Obamacare,
and it's stressful to people" (P16). Participant 22 shared his personal experience with the ACA penalty
tax: "I was working four part-time jobs to make ends meet, and I made too much money to qualify for
free medical care, but I didn't make enough money to actually be able to afford insurance. I was
essentially being told, 'Well you're going to have to pay $500,' or whatever the penalty is for not having
insurance. Great, here's another tax."

144

4.9.3

Increase in Costs over Past Five Years
When asked to reflect on changes over the past five years, ten participants (P2, P4, P9, P11, P14,

P16, P22, P23, P25, and P27) spoke about the rising costs of health care. Specifically mentioned costs
included copays (P2, P9, P22, and P25); deductibles (P9, P22, P23, and P25); monthly premiums (P14,
P16, and P27); and emergency room visits (P9 and P22). Participant 27 summarized: "Rates have gone
up higher. Coverage and benefits have tapered off. That’s why I didn’t go with insurance when I was
part-time – the deductible was too high." Participant 22 explained that the increase in costs might
actually lead to avoiding seeking care. “There used to be a $100 emergency room visit and a $50 urgent
care, and then it's now $250. It makes you think twice, of course, about going to the emergency room.”
4.9.4

Impact on Decision to Take the Job
The researcher also asked participants whether receiving health insurance influenced their

decision to take the job. Twenty-one participants said that receiving insurance did affect their decision
to take the job; "if it hadn't [come with insurance], I wouldn't have taken the job" (P26). Nine
participants said it did not affect their decision; Participant 20 called it "a bonus."
For those who mentioned insurance as playing a role in the decision to take the job, the fact
that it was a large, public, government institution was mentioned as especially appealing. "Working for
the university, one of the huge things is the fantastic benefits, so that played a big role in me applying
for the job. Not so much in accepting it, because I knew those benefits would be there, but that's why I
applied. One of the reasons I applied” (P13).
4.10

Use of Health Insurance
Beyond discussions of insurance choice, participants also talked about future use of their

coverage. Participants outlined what they were looking forward to, the peace of mind they obtain

145

through coverage, and what they were not looking forward to. "Until you actually use it with a particular
condition, I think you don't know. You don't know what you're up against. But I felt like, if you got the
basic, a reasonable deductible, and you know your copay and you've got coverage for different levels of
prescription drugs, then it's a matter of navigating and hope that you won't need much of it" (P16).
Participants also detailed their most likely course of action if using their coverage did not go as
expected and their desire to remain healthy in an effort to avoid using insurance all together. Some of
the participants would be using health care services for the first time in a while because they were
underinsured prior to obtaining their new positions. "I also need to follow up with the endocrinologist,
which I haven't been able to do in about four years… I'm just hoping that I can monitor it better. I think
with the wellness programs that they offer it could improve. For me, I'm not 100% sure where my health
stands. I feel fine, but that doesn't mean anything. I've felt fine before and things were wrong. I think
once I have that starting point and know where I am then I can go from there” (P21).
Participant 29 shared her concerns about using her new health insurance coverage: “I am kind
of scared because, not scared, but it kind of encourages you to go to your PCP more, so I'm worried that
I won't be able to get in, like I'll call and they'll be like, ‘Oh, we don't have anything for the next two
weeks.’ If I'm really sick, then it would be hard to get in and then, I might end up using urgent care and
paying $100 for that. I guess, the important thing it seems, is to be able to get those preventative
screenings done.”
4.10.1 Looking Forward to Having Coverage
Participants were asked what they were most looking forward to about their health insurance
coverage. Participants indicated they were looking forward to having the coverage itself, not having to
use it, seeking out specific services, taking advantage of the HRA funds, lower medical costs, and more.

146

Eleven participants said they were most looking forward to having coverage itself. "Just knowing
that if I need it I have it. That wasn't always the case growing up so it's a big deal" (P18). Four
participants (P3, P5, P6, and P14) look forward to not having to use their health insurance. "Hopefully, I
won't have to use it" (P14).
Four participants (P1, P11, P22, and P27) were looking forward to seeking out specific services,
such as Participant 11 who was happy to have "my medications to be paid for again. That'd be nice."
Four participants (P12, P19, P23, and P24) were looking forward to taking advantage of their HRA funds
to cut down on out-of-pocket expenses. Participant 12 saw the HRA as an incentive: "I really like the
rollover thing. Health care's not something that's static, so I think it sort of is a little silly to not have
anything to show for paying for a health insurance plan for a whole year where you don't get anything
out of it."
Four participants (P24, P25, P28, and P29) were looking forward to having lower medical costs,
like the "lower cost of medicines" (P24). Two participants each were interested in the following:
preventive care/wellness visits (P6 and P15), being a part of a large health care system (P9 and P17), and
lower premiums (P20 and P21). Two participants (P7 and P16) were not particularly looking forward to
anything, and one participant (P4) was looking forward to trying it out.
4.10.2 Peace of Mind
Eight participants (P6, P7, P8, P9, P13, P15, P16, and P29) spoke about the peace of mind they
procure through their health insurance coverage. Participant 8 explained, "I don't really get sick very
often or really have too many health issues, so just kind of peace of mind, full coverage, and not
spending too much money on it." In addition to the peace of mind through having access to health care,
participants saw insurance as a source of financial peace of mind. "This might be super cliché, but some

147

peace of mind that if I get something abominable in my abdominals, that we'll have coverage, that won't
bankrupt our family” (P13).
4.10.3 Aspects that Participants Were Not Looking Forward To
When asked about what they were not looking forward to, participants discussed health
insurance literacy concerns, having to go to the doctor and/or use their plan, having to find a doctor,
losing money on the coverage, the deductible, the copays, hearing that something is not covered, the
monthly premiums, and the paperwork.
Eleven participants shared there was in fact nothing about which they were apprehensive.
Participant 11 elaborated there was "not necessarily anything I'm upset about because it's a lot better
than what I was kind of being covered for before." However, most participants (n = 17) were able to
point to something they were concerned about. As one of the four participants (P1, P12, P13, and P25)
who expressed apprehension about being confronted with health insurance literacy concerns,
Participant 1 shared she was not looking forward to "probably learning about what ... I didn't know to
ask questions about or what I didn't understand." Three participants (P8, P23, and P26) were not looking
forward to having to go to the doctor and/or use their health insurance coverage. Participant 8, for
example, was not looking forward to having to see a health care provider: "I just hate going to the
dentist so much." Two participants each expressed anxiety about finding a doctor (P4 and P5), the
deductible (P19 and P24), and losing money on insurance (P14 and P17). Participant 14 explained, "If
you're healthy you're not using [it], you're not really getting as much as if you were unhealthy, you were
sick or did have an accident." Participant 27 was not looking forward to hearing something was not
covered, Participant 28 dreaded the monthly premiums, and Participant 30 cited the paperwork as a
source of trepidation.

148

4.10.4 Most Likely Course of Action if Coverage Did Not Go as Expected
Participants were asked to reflect upon their most likely course of action in the event that their
health insurance coverage did not go as expected. The most commonly mentioned strategies included
changing plans during open enrollment (n = 13), calling the insurance company (n = 10), contacting a
benefits officer (n = 5), and attempting to figure out what they misunderstood (n = 3). Some participants
discussed using these type of strategies in conjunction with each other, such as Participant 14 who said,
"I will probably pull the information out to see if I read something incorrectly and then, if it's a big
disparity, I'll go back to the benefits people here."
Thirteen participants said they would consider changing plans during open enrollment in the
event that the plan they selected did not go as expected. "If it didn't [go as expected], I might consider
trying to do more research about the office visits for the consumer-directed plan. If I found that that is
more suitable, then I might switch to that" (P7).
Ten participants guessed they would probably call the insurance company if something
unexpected occurred with the coverage. "What I usually do is call a representative from an insurance
company and [have them] explain things to me" (P3). Five participants (P2, P5, P14, P17, and P20)
supposed they would contact a benefits officer for clarification. Participant 17 would "probably [contact]
HR because I don't know who I'm supposed to talk to figure out what the problem is." Three participants
(P1, P2, and P14) would attribute the misunderstanding to their own faulty interpretation of the plan. As
Participant 14 (a single, White male between the ages of 27-35 with a higher-level position) explained,
"unfortunately, I'd probably just say, oh, well I guess I misunderstood." Two participants (P9 and P11)
admitted they would most likely complain if things went in an unexpected way. Participant 9 shared she
would "moan and groan about it. Complain verbally. I would do it anyways, because that's what you do.
It's insurance." Additional strategies included asking friends/coworkers (P10 and P25), doing nothing
149

(P23 and P29), contacting a consumer protection agency (P13), trying to make the best of it (P15), not
going to the doctor as much (P19), expecting glitches (P21), and using alternative coverage (P22).
4.10.5 Desire to Stay Healthy
Five participants (P4, P7, P18, P22, and P23) spoke about their desire to stay healthy, often in
relation to wanting to avoid using their health insurance. Participant 4 shared, "I still feel very lucky and
that's also part of the reason that I'm like, 'Don't get sick. Don't overdo it.' I don't want to take
medications; I don't like popping the pills."
Participant 18 (a married, American Indian woman between the ages of 27-35 with a Master’s
Degree) reflected on the risk factors affecting her family and the actions she takes to minimize her
personal risk: "I think about my family's health history and what [the] risk factors are for that particular
population, especially being an American Indian person, and you have to think about higher rates of
diabetes and hypertension and those kind of things that have run in my family historically. Also, I think
about my level of fitness and the things that I try to do to stay healthy and not fall into some of the
things that I've seen people in my family fall into. It's probably easier for me to do that because I don't
live in the area where they all are." These comments on the impact of family and geographic proximity
to cultural influences present promising avenues for future research.
4.11

Participants Reflect on Their Health Insurance Literacy
Even outside of the formal Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (HILM), discussions of health

insurance literacy cropped up in the interviews, including questions about terminology, lingering
confusion, and confidence navigating the health insurance system. In talking through the coverage
details, participants revealed both clear understanding and misunderstandings.

150

4.11.1 Questions about Terminology
Fourteen participants spoke about their unfamiliarity with insurance-related terminology.
Participants used a variety of strategies to locate definitions including Google, consulting an individual,
and reviewing the printed materials provided to them. Some participants revealed that they did not
seek out definitions of unfamiliar terms. Other participants used Google to locate opinions about health
insurance rather than specifically to locate definitions.
The confusing terms identified by participants included: coinsurance (P5, P13, P17, and P19);
health reimbursement account (P2, P3, and P12); CDHP (P5 and P24); deductible (P8 and P13); premium
credit (P1); preventive care (P5); inpatient hospital stay (P5); monthly premiums (P13); out-of-pocket
maximum (P19); flexible spending account (P24); and primary care physician (P28).
Five participants (P3, P8, P12, P20, and P24) used Google to locate definitions of unfamiliar
terms. Participant 12 shared that "it took a little bit of finagling search terms to be happy at least with
the quality of the results... Lots of the other ones that were there were posted by insurance
companies... There was information out there, it just took a little bit of filtering to find." Five participants
(P5, P6, P17, P21, and P28) shared that while there were terms that they did not understand, they did
not take any steps to locate a definition. "I remember looking at it in the session and being like I don't
know what coinsurance means but ... I didn't look it up" (P5). Four participants (P1, P2, P8, and P24)
consulted with an individual to obtain clarification on specific definitions. "I talked with my dad on the
phone, and he told me about some of the terminology that I didn't get" (P24). Two participants (P13 and
P19) looked in the provided insurance materials to locate information about unfamiliar terms to limited
success. "I was still kind of confused between the whole out-of-pocket maximum, coinsurance, etc. I was
not able to find those answers in the PDF" (P19). Some participants used a combination of several
strategies to understand health insurance terminology better. "I looked some up and then I just Googled
151

a few things. Some of them too, I just asked my parents when I was talking about it with them because
they have a much more extensive plan then I've had" (P8).
Participants 12, 13, 25, and 30 used Google to obtain opinions on health insurance coverage
rather than solely locate definitions. As Participant 13 explained, "One thing we talked about, too, was
whether or not we wanted the cancer coverage, and then we decided that, is this something we need?
[So we] Googled extra coverage." Participants 25 and 27 also used Google to locate estimated health
care costs.
4.11.2 Complicated Information
Ten participants (P3, P9, P12, P14, P15, P20, P21, P22, P23, and P24) characterized health
insurance information as complicated during the discussions. "It's very complicated, a lot of overlapping
concepts" (P21). Three of those individuals who reflected on health insurance as complicated were also
the three individuals with the lowest HILM scores (P3, P23, and P24). The average HILM score for those
who characterized health insurance as complicated was 2.99, comparing similarly with the average HILM
score of 3.00 for participants in this study.
4.11.3 Confusion Remaining
Eleven participants shared that, even after going through their decision-making process, they
still had lingering confusion. Participant 2 was confused about how parts of the coverage worked: "I
found that a little confusing. I kind of understood here much more, ‘What am I going to paying out-ofpocket?’ As opposed to, ‘What am I going to get through this HRA? How much do I put in?’ It was just
too much for me to spend even more time to try to understand it, so I just decided it's not worth my
time to figure that one out" (P2). Some who sought clarification continued to remain in the dark. "I was
still kind of confused between the whole out-of-pocket maximum, coinsurance, etc. I was not able to

152

find those answers in the PDF. My boyfriend tried to explain it to me unsuccessfully three times. That's a
question for me about insurance in general" (P19).
It may be that individuals are not sure to whom to reach out. "I think sometimes the whole
process is just a little bit intimidating with the whole coinsurance, out-of-pocket maximum, maximum
this, minimum that. Sometimes I feel like I don't even know exactly who to ask about it" (P19).
4.11.4 Confidence Navigating Health Insurance
Confidence navigating the health insurance system came up in the interviews with twelve
participants. Those with high confidence attributed their comfort to a variety of factors, including access
to resources. The confidence levels shared by participants were reflected in their HILM scores.
Ten participants reflected positively on their confidence navigating health insurance. Participant
5 attributed her high confidence in navigating the system to her access to resources: "I feel like I'm
equipped to navigate that system just given that I'm educated, and I have access to the Internet, and I
have access to other sources in terms of like family and friends that I can reach out to. So, I feel
equipped to navigate picking health insurance." This finding was born out in the HILM Scale 1 scores,
which measures confidence. For the nine participants who spoke about their confidence in navigating
the system, their average Scale 1 scores were 3.15, above the 2.85 Scale 1 average of all the participants
in this study.
Two participants (P3 and P13) shared they were not as confident navigating health insurance.
Participant 3 attributed his doubt in his ability to navigate the system to being new to the country: "I'm
always worrying that the system is so new to me that I'm always hav[ing] the pressure of learning new
systems. In this country, I have to say tax, health insurance, and car insurance, any insurance, and the
health one is so complicated.” This low confidence was reflected in the HILM scores for the participants

153

who spoke about their lack of confidence (P3 scored a 2.17 and P13 scored a 2.83). Their average Scale 1
score was 2.5, below the 2.85 average for all participants. Participant 13 shared this caveat for her Scale
1 answers: “It's hard to answer these questions, because if you were to isolate me alone to make these
decisions, I would scale farther down. If I'm making these decisions with my husband, I feel much more
confident, so I think I'm mixing up as I'm going down through this [measurement].”
4.11.5 Experience Working in Health Care
Six participants (P4, P5, P6, P7, P18, and P21) pointed to their experience working in the health
care industry as a reason they are more confident navigating health insurance. The benefits to this
experience included having a network of people to reach out to, observing emergency coverage without
experiencing it, and greater familiarity with health insurance terminology.
Participant 5 (a single, White woman between the ages of 27-35 who works as a Research
Manager) pointed to her experience in the health care industry as providing her with a network of
people to reach out to with questions. "Maybe it gives me a slight advantage in terms of being, like,
maybe I have research that other people don't have. I definitely feel like I can go to people in the office
if I have a question about something."
As a health care provider, Participant 6 has observed the benefits of insurance coverage for
emergencies even without having personally experienced it herself. “I've been lucky enough to never
have any real emergencies in my life so it's easy to think, ‘Oh, I'll just go with the cheap one.’ Working in
the hospital, it's kind of good to see this happen any time and people are really glad to have insurance.”
Participant 7 (a single, Black woman between the ages of 27-35 who works as a Business
Services Coordinator) pointed to her experience working with health care billing as showing her what
the terminology and coverage looks like in action: “One of the jobs I had before dealing with some of

154

that and looking at different stuff and knowing about coinsurance and out-of-pocket expenses and
realizing how long it takes you to get to 100% to cover something.”
4.11.6 Demonstrated Clear Understanding of Coverage
Fourteen participants demonstrated sophisticated understanding of health insurance concepts.
The well-described concepts included the health reimbursement account, copays, deductible, out-ofpocket maximums, coinsurance, prescription coverage, and in-network versus out-of-network coverage.
Examples of the descriptions provided by participants are included below.
Six participants (P3, P7, P17, P19, P22, and P25) provided thorough descriptions of how a health
reimbursement account (HRA) works. "[The] 80/20 doesn't have this HRA where the CDHP does and
from what I understand, I will start basically in a HRA account, ... and I'll have six hundred dollars to use"
(P19). Six participants (P5, P7, P9, P10, P25, and P30) supplied strong definitions for how copays work
with the plans. "So it looks like $30 for my primary doctor, and then $15 for the PCP that you chose in
your health plan so that's something I would definitely take advantage of..." (P5). Five participants (P3,
P7, P19, P20, and P25) demonstrated understanding of how a deductible works. "Our deductible is not
covered by insurance, that I have to pay out of my pocket" (P3). Participant 19 explained the nuances of
the deductible thusly: "the deductible for the 80/20 is $700, but if I go to just to see my primary care
provider, then that's just a copay. It doesn't go into the deductible, but if I were to have an MRI per se,
then that's not a copay, that pays towards the deductible."
Five participants (P7, P10, P20, P25, and P28) provided insightful examples of how out-of-pocket
maximums work in practice. Participant 7 spoke about looking at "out-of-pocket expenses and realizing
how long it takes you to get to 100% to cover something and thinking, 'Okay, so they'll cover at a 100%,
but I'm stuck with the 3,000 like [I] have to pay $3,000 out-of-pocket.'" Four participants (P7, P10, P19,
and P21) offered sound definitions of coinsurance. "Coinsurance then would be the percent of whatever
155

comes after the deductible that I would have to pay, that I would be responsible for" (P10). Two
participants (P10 and P25) clearly explained prescription drug coverage in the available plans. While
most health care costs are lower on the 80/20, the specialty prescription drug copays are, in fact, lower
with the 70/30. Participant 10 described this surprising difference: "Your generics in the first couple of
tiers are lower on the 80/20. Then the specialty drugs seem lower on the 70/30." Participant 12
provided a perceptive definition of in-network versus out-of-network coverage: "In-network and out-ofnetwork refer[s] to which doctors are providers that the insurance companies have had arrangements
with and services are then billed differently. Out-of-network most of the time being more expensive
than in-network."
4.11.7 Demonstrated Misunderstanding of Coverage
Through the course of the interviews, five participants (P3, P4, P8, P16, and P23) demonstrated
some misunderstandings around specific coverage items. Misunderstood coverage areas included ability
to select a preferred physician (P4), coinsurance (P8), pharmacy coverage (P16), and required
appointments (P23). On average participants who demonstrated misunderstanding scored lower on the
cumulative HILM (2.82) than the average (3.00).
Participant 8 (a single, White woman between the ages of 27-35 with a Master’s degree)
demonstrated a misunderstanding when explaining how coinsurance works: "...The employer pays 80%
of it, and I pay 20%." In this case, the insurance company pays the 80% coinsurance rather than the
employer. This misunderstanding was reflected when Participant 8 completed the HILM, where she
indicated she was slightly confident (score of 2) that “you understand health insurance terms.” Her
overall HILM score was 2.92.
Participant 4 (a single, Latina woman between the ages of 46-55 with a Bachelor’s degree)
shared that she had concerns about the ability to select her preferred provider in the CDHP: "There is
156

more flexibility for me to get [the 80/20], because I can go to any doctor, know that it's my 20%, and
then I feel comfortable with, ‘Okay if I don't like you, I can pick a different doctor.’ This one [the CDHP]
seems a little more constrictive in that this is it, this is the choices you're getting and you have to make
one." In fact, the in-network list of providers is identical between all the coverage options at the study
site institution. There would be no difference between the providers available for Participant 4 whether
she selects the 80/20 plan or the CDHP. Perhaps surprisingly, Participant 4 indicated she was moderately
confident (score of 3) that she would “look to see which doctors and hospitals are covered in each plan”
when she completed the HILM. Her overall HILM score was 2.75.
Participant 16 (a married, White woman between the ages of 56-64 with a higher-level position
at the university) revealed some misunderstanding surrounding the pharmacy coverage: "He mentioned
the pharmacy was CVS, that's a pharmacy that I know. And I've had in the past, so I thought that was a
good thing." While the pharmacy coverage is offered through CVS/Caremark, in actuality participants
may have their prescriptions filled at a multitude of pharmacies and not just CVS pharmacy. This
misunderstanding is not reflected in Participant 16’s high cumulative HILM score of 3.67. None of the
HILM questions specifically address this aspect of pharmacy coverage.
Participant 23 (a married, Asian-American man between the ages of 27-35 with a Master’s
degree) exhibited a misunderstanding surrounding selecting a Primary Care Provider (PCP): "Well, I have
an appointment because I had to take a PCP for this... So I had to make one appointment." Employees
are asked to select a PCP as one of their wellness credits; however, it is not necessary to make an
appointment with a provider to complete this wellness activity. Participant 23 scored the lowest HILM
score of any participant, a 1.92.

157

4.12

Health Insurance Literacy Measurement Findings
The Health Insurance Literacy Measurement (HILM) is comprised of four scales, two of which

were used in this study. The two selected scales measure confidence (Scale 1) and behavior (Scale 2) in
selecting health insurance coverage (see Appendix 6). The average scores for the participants in this
study are as follows: 2.85 on Scale 1 (confidence) with a standard deviation of 0.50, 3.14 on Scale 2
(behavior) with a standard deviation of 0.54, and 3.00 for the cumulative scores with a standard
deviation of 0.49. Breaking the scores down by demographic measurements and other variables
illuminate interesting trends among the participants.
The average cumulative HILM scores broken down by ethnicity/race are as follows (see Figure
28): Black or African-American 3.50 with a standard deviation of 0.35, Hispanic or Latino 2.75 with a
standard deviation of 0.12, White or Caucasian 2.67 with a standard deviation of 0.41, and Asian/AsianAmerican 2.08 with a standard deviation of 0.45. The one American Indian participant had a score of
3.17.

Figure 28: Cumulative HILM Score by Race/Ethnicity

158

HILM scores also varied depending on the coverage type that individuals selected. Those who
selected the 80/20 coverage option scored highest using the HILM (average cumulative score of 3.16
with a standard deviation of 0.39). Those who selected the CDHP as well as those who selected the
70/30 plan scored an average of 2.67 (the standard deviation for those who selected the CDHP was 0.58
and both participants who selected the 70/30 plan had a score of 2.67). Because a CDHP often requires
more health insurance literacy skills and active management of coverage, these findings are slightly
surprising. As shown in the box-and-whisker plot in Figure 29, there is a wider range of scores for those
who selected the CDHP, ranging from a cumulative HILM score of 1.92 to 3.75.

Figure 29: Cumulative HILM Score by Coverage Selection

The cumulative HILM scores for participants were inversely related to their amount of education
(i.e., HILM scores decreased as education level increased). The average cumulative HILM score for those
with some college was 3.75 (SD = 0.24), with a Bachelor's degree was 3.08 (SD = 0.38), with a Master's
degree was 2.9 (SD = 0.46), and with a Doctoral degree was 2.71 (SD = 0.63). This difference was most
pronounced for Scale 2 (the scale focused on behavior, see Figure 30), where those with some college
scored a 3.92 (SD = 0.12), those with a Bachelor's scored a 3.28 (SD = 0.39), those with a Master's a 3.05
(SD = 0.55), and those with a Doctoral degree a 2.67 (SD = 0.53). As with all of the results collected from

159

this study, because of the smaller sample size (30 participants), no definitive trends can be claimed.
However, these results present promising avenues for future research.

Figure 30: HILM Behavior Scale by Education Level

The average HILM score for the participants in this study (3.00) is slightly higher than that of
other studies that employed the HILM. Participants in Bartholomae et al. (2016) and Brown et al. (2016)
had a mean pre-test HILM score of 2.64 prior to a workshop designed to develop health insurance
literacy skills (the mean post-test score was 3.24). One potential explanation for this difference is that
20.7% of participants in the Bartholomae and Brown studies had a high school diploma or less; however,
further research is needed given that HILM scores decreased as participants’ education levels increased
in this study.

160

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION
In reviewing the Integrated Framework for Health Insurance Literacy (see Figure 15) with this
study's findings, it is clear many of the variables identified in health insurance literacy literature were
also present in participants' decision-making processes. Age and family size (i.e., coverage for
dependents) were discussed as factors in individuals' choices. Education and race were shown to impact
individuals' health insurance literacy skills in the HILM. Gender and income were the two variables not
shown to have an impact, potentially because the participants were 80% female and the monthly
premiums were low across the board (minimizing the role of income).
The plan characteristics and the plan information sources played a key role in individuals' health
insurance decision-making processes, as demonstrated through the Micro-Moment Time-Line
Interviews. Participants' health insurance literacy skills were explored through the HILM and through
discussions focused on comparing the available plans.
The study’s findings were used to develop a model of the health insurance decision-making
process. In addition, this study identified information tactics used by individuals evaluating health
insurance materials. The findings also shed light on the personal reflection individuals undertake when
making their health insurance choices. The participants in this study characterized their health insurance
choice as a shared decision, consulting others during their decision-making. The HILM, coupled with
discussions during the semi-structured interviews, identified demographic implications of individuals’
health insurance literacy skills.

161

5.1

Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process
The Micro-Moment Time-Line Interviews were used to trace participants’ decision-making

processes. These findings were used to construct a model of the decision-making process (see Figure
31). Each of the steps was discussed in detail in the Results section and will be elaborated throughout
the next paragraphs. The process is an iterative rather than a linear one and the steps can be repeated
or conducted in a variety of sequences. The end result is that participants evaluate the choices available
to them and select a preferred option. This model is closest to Klinkman’s The Consumer’s Choice of
Health Care Plan Framework (see Figure 8), as they both include prior experience with health insurance,
health status, expected utilization, and reviewing choices as variables.

Figure 31: Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process

As shown in the Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process, participants’ first steps
were aimed at obtaining general, overview information of their choices. They reflected on the

162

orientation session and suggested addressing multiple learning styles, recognizing the bias that benefits
officers may have when conveying information, acknowledging the personal reassurance they obtained
from going through the orientation with others, and distributing the discussion time according to areas
with the most questions. Participants also discussed reviewing the formal information materials,
including the printed materials often used for overview information and the online materials often used
for specific information.
The next steps outlined in the Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process fall under
the category of utilizing strategies for reviewing options. This includes using information tactics to focus
on the most salient information, including selecting preferred information channels, performing cost
comparisons, and ignoring irrelevant information. Participants also engaged in personal reflection about
past and future use of health insurance; this included forecasting needs for the next year and in the
event of a worst-case scenario. Participants also included consulting interpersonal information sources
as a key step in their health insurance decision-making process. This is a novel contribution of both the
Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process, as well as this study in general, as health
insurance has not traditionally been considered a shared decision-making process. All of these steps
culminate in selecting the preferred option and will be discussed further throughout this Discussion
section.
5.1.1

Obtain Overview: Orientation Session
The majority of participants (n = 21) pointed to the orientation session as a key step in their

decision-making process, characterizing it both negatively and positively. Those who described it as
unhelpful did so due to its general nature and the format style. While it may not be possible to
customize the presentation beyond general information nor meet all participant information needs, it

163

could be possible to present the information in a variety of formats to accommodate multiple learning
styles.
A few participants also shared the impression that the benefits officer was presenting the
information in a leading way designed to sway new hires to enroll in some plans (e.g., 80/20 or CDHP)
over others (i.e., 70/30). Benefits officers should be aware of the bias they may be imparting on
enrollees who may be searching for advice on what to do.
The orientation sessions that participants attended were held face-to-face and in person. At
least one participant described the session as psychologically reassuring given that the new hires were
all going through the same process together. This may be a compelling reason to continue to hold inperson orientation sessions in large institutions where this is possible.
Participants reflected on the source(s) of the majority of their questions. Most participants
either had the most number of questions about health insurance (n = 8), retirement (n = 8), or both
health insurance and retirement (n = 6). This supports distributing the majority of orientation time
discussing health insurance and retirement over other benefits information, including annual leave,
tuition remission, and other resources.
5.1.2

Obtain Overview: Printed Materials and Website
Most participants (n = 24) used the printed insurance materials distributed at the orientation

session towards the beginning of their health insurance decision-making process as they were surveying
the information landscape and beginning to make comparisons between plans. Participants identified
the printed materials as a helpful way to obtain a general overview of the choices, supporting the
continued distribution of printed information rather than referring new hires to solely online materials.

164

Several participants (n = 16) used the state health plan website to continue this general
overview and to research answers to specific questions. However, given that 88% of American adults
use the Internet and "Internet usage is near ubiquitous" (Pew Internet, 2017), it may come as somewhat
of a surprise that in this study only 16 participants (53.3%) reviewed the website as part of their
decision-making process. The explanation from Participant 3 that the printed information was already
overwhelming may help explain this phenomenon. The uses and gratification theory (Katz, Blumler, &
Gurevitch, 1974) may also explain this by suggesting that individuals prefer particular types of media (in
this case printed media) to satisfy their health insurance information needs.
Because all of the participants in this study had completed at least all of high school, the fact
that the side-by-side comparison chart rated a 12.4 grade level with the FORCAST readability formula
may not be a huge concern for the studied population. However, because institutions such as the study
site employ individuals with a variety of educational backgrounds, institutions and insurance companies
should consider reviewing their materials for comprehension by individuals of a variety of educational
backgrounds. The open enrollment guide, which rated a 10.9 grade level, appears to be a step in the
right direction, with more narrative explanations and scenarios designed to elucidate the options.
5.1.3

Utilize Strategies: Information Tactics
Comparing plans side-by-side was a common decision-making strategy among participants.

Participants especially liked side-by-side comparison charts for obtaining summary information and
comparing costs. The fact that users identify charts as an especially helpful way to compare plans
supports the continued offering of online calculators that allow users to input their particular health
coverage needs and determine how the plans compare.
When selecting between the available plans, all 30 participants mentioned cost as a significant
factor. However, participants varied on which costs were the most meaningful to them. Some
165

considered the monthly premium costs to be most important while others focused on the coverage
costs within the plans (e.g., deductibles, copays, etc.). Research has demonstrated that individuals often
do not select the coverage plan most appropriate for their needs (see the Research in Health Insurance
Choice section). However, it may be necessary to conduct research regarding individuals’ preferred cost
structures. Perhaps individuals have a personal preference for the costs they are more willing to take on,
either the monthly premiums up front or the copays at the time of treatment. In other words, it is
possible that individuals understand that they have lower health care needs and that the 70/30 plan
could cover them sufficiently at lower monthly premium costs to them but that they are more
comfortable paying more money up front to minimize the risk of having to pay more money for
coverage when needed.
Interestingly, the 80/20 plan has the highest monthly premiums of all three plans and yet the
low cost of the monthly premium was still cited as a reason for enrolling in the plan. This is most likely
because, even though it requires the highest monthly premium, it is still fairly low (approximately $15
for individual coverage when participants complete all available wellness credits). Further exploration of
this phenomenon in populations where the monthly premiums of their choices vary more would be of
use.
Participants in this study demonstrated a strong preference for costs to be structured as fixed
amounts (e.g., $20, $150) over percentages (e.g., 15% coinsurance). The fact that individuals did not
know the specific costs of care and, therefore, could not calculate the percentages they would be
responsible for was a deterrent. Insurance providers should consider how costs are structured when
developing plans. It may be helpful to enrollees to provide sample costs to demonstrate what the
percentages might equal when seeking care.

166

The trend for individuals to eliminate or ignore information lines up with the research on health
insurance choice set size stating that the fewer options available to individuals, the better they are at
making a decision (see the Research in Health Insurance Choice for further discussion). This desire to
eliminate irrelevant information also presents a compelling argument for creating and providing access
to interactive health insurance materials where users could hide irrelevant information (e.g., dependent
coverage) or an entire coverage option (e.g., 70/30 insurance plan).
5.1.4

Utilize Strategies: Personal Reflection
Participants pointed to self-reflection as a key step in their decision-making process, including

past and future use of health insurance and health care services. Participants identified experience with
particular types of coverage, past use of coverage, and experience with the U.S. health care system as
affecting their decision-making style. They also forecasted their anticipated and unanticipated (e.g., a
major accident or unexpected medical diagnosis) health care needs. Forecasting regarding health is a
recently developing research field and an area for further exploration.
5.1.5

Utilize Strategies: Interpersonal Information Sources
Participants consulted spouses, partners, colleagues, parents, benefits officers, and friends

during their decision-making process. Participants selected individuals with which to confer due to their
domain expertise, familiarity with the available plans, and awareness of health care needs. The
discussions happened through a variety of media, including in person, by phone, through text, and via
social media. This preference for interpersonal information channels echoes Johnson and Case’s (2012)
statement that “interpersonal communication is the preferred mode of communication for [health]
information seeking” (p. 163).
Health insurance decision-making research has traditionally considered the process as an
individual one, studying individuals’ health insurance literacy levels and habits in isolation. This study
167

offers a significant contribution in acknowledging that health insurance decision-making is often a
shared process where others are consulted and included in the decision.
5.1.6

Select Preferred Option
Building on the overview information they were given, participants used a combination of

strategies to review their options, including information tactics, personal reflection, and consulting
interpersonal information sources. After reviewing the options available to them, participants selected
their preferred option. Participants talked about testing out different types of coverage and the comfort
they found in the ability to switch plans, suggesting that individuals do not see health insurance
selection as a one-time event, but rather a process that may evolve over time due to experience and
changing health care needs.
As new hires, many of the participants in this study had recently moved to the area. Being in a
new place presents an extra challenge to the health insurance decision-making process. Individuals are
investing significant amounts of time settling into a new area, which may limit their energy for
thoroughly evaluating their health care needs and their available coverage options. In addition, for
individuals needing to transfer or fill prescriptions shortly after moving, there may be unanswered
questions about where they can be filled and under which insurance plan.
5.2

Feelings about Risk
The health insurance decision-making process includes aspects outside the domain of

information science. The fact that so many participants reflected on the psychological security they
obtain when they have insurance coverage points to larger factors at work when individuals consider
their health insurance choices. The risk-as-feelings hypothesis (Lowenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch,
2001) offers one potential way of exploring the role that emotions and affect play in health insurance

168

decision-making, given participants’ reflections on psychological security and illogical choices during
their decision-making processes.
5.3

Health Insurance Use
One thing that was clear from participants’ reflections is that those who had no coverage or

were underinsured were actually less likely to seek out health care, underscoring the relationship
between insurance coverage and health disparities. A few participants talked about their relief in finally
being able to be seen by a doctor and obtain guidance on health care concerns they had to ignore
before obtaining health insurance coverage through their new employer.
Even those who had always had health insurance coverage noted that rising health costs were a
factor in health care coverage. Participant 22 explained that the increase in costs might actually lead to
avoiding seeking care: “There used to be a $100 emergency room visit and a $50 urgent care, and then
it's now $250. It makes you think twice, of course, about going to the emergency room.” Even if
individuals have health insurance coverage, high costs may ultimately lead to negative health outcomes
if individuals go untreated for significant health care needs.
5.4

Participants’ Health Insurance Literacy
Through the course of the interviews, participants reflected on their own health insurance

literacy, speaking about unfamiliarity with insurance-related terminology, lingering confusion about the
process of enrolling, and experience working in the health care industry as a reason for increased health
insurance confidence. Some of the health insurance literacy findings are related to individuals’
demographic groups.

169

5.4.1

Demographic Implications
Perhaps surprisingly, the cumulative HILM scores for participants were inversely related to their

amount of education (i.e., HILM scores decreased as education level increased). This may be
counterintuitive and does not match the majority of health insurance literacy research that
demonstrates education is a factor in individuals’ health insurance literacy levels (see the Health
Insurance Literacy section of the Literature Review for further discussion). As with all of the results
collected from this study, because of the smaller sample size (30 participants), no definitive trends can
be claimed. However, these results present promising avenues for future research. It is possible that
those with higher levels of education are more aware of their limited understanding of health insurance
and, therefore, self-reported lower confidence in the HILM, which measures self-efficacy rather than
knowledge. It is also possible that other factors (e.g., experience working in the health care industry) led
participants with lower education levels to feel more confident navigating health insurance. In addition,
those who have lower levels of education may have more invested in the decision and potentially more
experience choosing insurance, leading to higher confidence in navigating the health insurance system.
This could be a limitation of the HILM, which appears to work differently than other measurements of
health literacy.
Familiarity with the United States health care system culture played an important role in
individuals’ perceived health insurance literacy abilities. The two participants most familiar with nonU.S. health care systems had the lowest HILM scores of any of the participants. It can reasonably be
concluded that a lack of familiarity with the health care and health insurance system in the United States
leads to a lower HILM score. Individuals who are new to the United States will most likely require
additional assistance navigating the U.S. health care system including insurance.

170

The average cumulative HILM score for those selecting health insurance for the first time was
2.82, also below the average HILM score for participants in this study (3.00). This data suggests that
unfamiliarity with selecting health insurance may be reflected through lower health insurance decisionmaking self-efficacy, as demonstrated through HILM. There may be different types of information needs
for those selecting health insurance for the first time or those more familiar with non-US health care
systems.
5.5

Possible Solutions
Participants had creative ideas for resources that would support their health insurance choice.

One of the popular suggestions was for a dictionary of insurance terminology, including definitions for
coinsurance, health reimbursement account, CDHP, deductible, premium credit, preventive care,
inpatient hospital stay, monthly premiums, out-of-pocket maximum, flexible spending account, and
primary care physician. Information providers may consider linking to helpful dictionaries where the
information is needed most, for example, within a health plan website and information materials.
Another suggestion made by a few participants was step-by-step enrollment instructions. Many
participants reflected on the helpfulness of (and often desire for more) slides that specifically show the
steps of how to enroll. In this case, participants would go back and review the printed PowerPoint slides
from the orientation to see where to go to enroll in the online system. Figure 32 shows the notes that
Participant 26 took to supplement the official, provided materials, which did not go into sufficient detail
for her needs. Participants shared that more slides of specific steps and annotations denoting exactly
where to click would be most helpful.

171

Figure 32: Participant 26's Annotations of the Enrollment Instructions

Participants also expressed the desire to customize the information displayed in a comparison
chart. Participants talked about mentally eliminating options as a heuristic employed to help them
simplify the information for their decision-making process. One potential design suggestion might be an
interactive chart comparing available options which would allow participants to remove information
from the chart that is not as relevant to them, for example a coverage option (e.g., 80/20, 70/30, CDHP)
or coverage area (e.g., prescription information). This would help them only have to review the
information most pertinent to their particular needs.
Participants spoke about a desire for flexibility and choice in their coverage. This may reflect a
perceived lack of control over health insurance. Participants are given a limited number of fixed options
and do not have an opportunity to customize coverage. This appeared to feel constraining for some
participants (P9 and P18). One potential solution might be to have participants select one type of highercost coverage, such as either emergency or cancer coverage. Both might be expensive things to cover
but participants could reflect on their likelihood to experience one or the other and select the coverage
that best fits their need. Supplemental coverage seems designed to provide some tailoring, but it
appears that a few participants wanted this kind of customization in the basic health insurance coverage
as well.

172

Whereas it might be more convenient for people to choose which items they would want to
cover, the health insurance system is structured so that individuals who are healthier subsidize the
coverage of those who are less healthy. If individuals only select to cover a small number of things (and
pay lower rates for this minimized coverage), this would remove individuals from the system who offset
the costs of those who require additional coverage.
5.6

Limitations
This study only captured the decision-making process of individuals who elected to enroll in the

university’s health insurance plans. It did not capture those individuals who elect not to enroll and
pursue health insurance through outside options (e.g., spouse’s coverage, Health Insurance
Marketplace, etc.) or who elect not to enroll in any health insurance. This study also focuses specifically
on the health insurance plan decision-making process. This study does not capture the health insurance
literacy aspects that govern the use of health insurance.
The researcher hypothesizes that the low monthly premiums across the board (i.e., $15 per
month for the most expensive plan and $0 for the other two when all wellness credits are completed)
may confound some of the results regarding cost comparisons. Further research should be conducted to
determine the role that monthly premium costs play in individuals’ decision-making process.
Because this study was conducted between August and October, it occurred at a time when
participants had to consider their choices for the remainder of the year as well as their open enrollment
selections for the next year. Several of the participants interviewed in August talked about how they
would have to make the decision again in October for open enrollment and how that played a role in
their decision-making process. It is possible that the participants interviewed early in the study were not
investing as much in the decision-making process because they were going to be selecting again shortly.

173

Another potential limitation is the variance in the amount of time between when participants
selected their health insurance plan and when the interview was conducted. It is possible, for example,
that those who were interviewed immediately following the process may have had a richer and more
accurate picture of their decision-making process than those who were asked to reflect back on the
process seven days later.
Given that so many people make their health insurance choices in conjunction with other
individuals, asking an individual to fill out the HILM may come with its limitations. Participant 13 shared
this caveat for her Scale 1 answers: “It's hard to answer these questions, because if you were to isolate
me alone to make these decisions, I would scale farther down. If I'm making these decisions with my
husband, I feel much more confident, so I think I'm mixing up as I'm going down through this.”
Researchers should acknowledge health insurance choice as a shared decision-making process when
assessing individuals’ health insurance literacy levels.
The majority of participants in this study were female (80%), which may limit its applicability to
strategies adopted by all genders. Participant 14 (a male) offered a potential explanation for why not as
many men volunteered for the study: “I think probably ... I'm going to say theoretically, that guys
probably don't want to say that they don't understand something. Health insurance and retirement, I
mean, it's complicated.” For future studies of health insurance choice, it may be necessary to employ a
screening questionnaire to obtain equal distribution of genders.
Participants were recruited at new hire sessions, and therefore, most of them were seeing the
health insurance information for the first time. However, some people in attendance at the sessions
were being rehired in the system or returning to the university system. So while the goal in recruiting
new hires at the employee orientation was to recruit participants who were reviewing the specific
health insurance choices for the first time, this was not the first time some of the participants were
174

encountering information about these specific plans. This may influence some of their decision-making
behavior as this was not completely new information to them, and they may have had past experience
with these specific plans. This may be a limitation of the study as not all participants were completely
unfamiliar with the options available to them. For future studies of this nature, it would be
recommended to add a screening question about whether or not the participants were completely new
to the university system.
Additionally, not all of the codes identified during qualitative analysis are discussed in this
dissertation, as they were outside of the scope of the study. Those codes include proof of coverage
needed; supplemental insurance coverage (e.g., critical illness, cancer insurance, accidental death and
dismemberment coverage, etc.); technical difficulties with the online system; and wellness credits.
These may present areas for potential future research.
5.7

Future Research
As discussed in the Limitations section, because this study focuses on individuals enrolling in the

university’s health insurance plans, it will not capture those who decide not to enroll through their
employer. A future study may pursue the decision-making process that leads to seeking coverage
outside of an employer (e.g., those that procure coverage through a spouse or seek private health
insurance through other available options). In addition, because this study is limited to a setting with
three specific health insurance plan options, the results may not be as relevant in settings with different
plan types and a different number of choices.
Many people spoke about using the time between when they enrolled in university coverage
and annual open enrollment to test out their coverage and find out answers to their lingering questions.
Because the researcher did not conduct follow up interviews with the participants, this study did not
collect information about whether or not participants were fully able to test out their coverage or obtain
175

answers to their remaining questions. It might be interesting to conduct a follow up study with
participants six months after their coverage begins to learn if it went the way they expected and to see if
they did indeed look into changing coverage during open enrollment, and if they ended up searching for
answers to those remaining questions.
During the course of discussing health insurance enrollment, several participants reflected on
the challenges faced when selecting a new physician. New enrollees are asked to identify a primary care
provider as a wellness activity during enrollment to save money on their monthly premium. In addition,
many new hires have recently moved to the area and do not have a pre-established relationship with a
health care provider in the area (i.e., an in-network provider). A future research study could consider the
strategies that individuals use to select a physician when they are new to an area or need to select a
provider for health insurance purposes. Obtaining physician recommendations came up several times
during the interviews and is another area of potential exploration either in conjunction with health
insurance enrollment or as a separate research question.
Participants were asked to reflect on their priorities at the beginning of the semi-structured
interview and many began ranking their priorities without being asked. A follow-up study could look at
ranking health insurance priorities as a part of the decision-making process. A researcher could use
notecards to write down everything that goes into a person's decision-making for health insurance (e.g.,
cost, predicted use, health of children, copays, etc.). Then participants could be asked to sort the
priorities in order of importance. This may shed some light on how individuals structure their priorities
while making their decisions.
Additional research looking at the detailed knowledge needed to understand health insurance
fully is warranted. For example, one participant incorrectly identified physicians as paying the remaining
amount after coinsurance, when, in fact, the insurance company pays the remaining amount. Asking
176

specific questions designed to gauge deeper understanding would provide a more thorough picture of
individuals’ health insurance literacy skills.
A quote from Participant 18 inspired another potential research area: “Ten years ago, I was
really young ... I was just like okay sign, sign, sign, sign, I didn't really think about it… It was kind of like
development in a way, like a transition, then once I got [to] the age of thinking about having kids, it
meant something different… The past couple years I went back down to the 70/30, like I'm not having
kids anymore... Now I'm like okay, you got a new job… I make a little bit more money. Maybe I should
start thinking about what could happen and preparing for those things." This longitudinal look at how
insurance choice may develop over time presents promising areas for future research on how health
insurance behaviors evolve, building on life trajectory and illness trajectory research.
Because intangible aspects came up during the interview (e.g., psychological security, risk),
future research could be focused on the affective (rather than cognitive aspects) of the process, such as
personality and health insurance choice. Research could look at how individual personalities might make
some people more open to the unknown and trying new things or might make them more likely to cover
themselves for unknown disasters.
Some of the participants in this study reflected on how they manage their health insurance
information. A future study could use methods common in personal information management studies to
observe how people manage their health insurance information. Critical incident interviews and
participant observation are two research methods that may be appropriate for studying personal health
insurance information management.
In addition, a future research avenue ripe for exploration is the area of use of health insurance.
Many studies have focused on health insurance choice, fewer have focused on individuals’ use of health
insurance coverage. Future research could focus on the literacy issues individuals face when using their
177

health insurance coverage. Additional areas of potential research include educational campaigns that
could assist with health insurance enrollment, the role of forecasting during health-related decisionmaking, and how the use of information tactics may vary based on HILM scores.

178

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION
The findings of this study offer several contributions to the field of health insurance literacy
research, including the Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process (see Figure 31) and the
acknowledgement of health insurance decision-making as a shared decision-making process. This
research study found that choosing health insurance often parallels the process individuals go through
in making other purchasing decisions. A majority of participants (n = 23) estimated the process was
similar to their usual purchase behavior, supporting the application of these findings to other choice
scenarios, such as making a large purchase (e.g., a car, laptop, or home) or selecting a retirement plan.
Because people review insurance materials and make their decisions in tandem with other
individuals, convenient ways to share the materials would be a helpful tool. Some participants talked
about reading the printed materials side-by-side with another person while others talked about reading
them aloud over the phone. Insurance companies and human resources departments should look for
ways to facilitate sharing information about the health plans with others involved in the decision-making
process (e.g., spouse or parent).
Participants also expressed a need for unbiased information resources they could use to obtain
clarity on topics with which they are unfamiliar (e.g., CDHP). This sentiment offers a promising
opportunity for librarians to provide information resources, as they may be best equipped to locate
sources outside of those with a vested interest (i.e., insurance companies). Also, participants relished
the opportunity to share advice when asked. There might be a good amount of interest in user-driven or
crowdsourced websites where users could review insurance plans and share guidance on how to select a
plan.

179

This study’s results also offer several concrete examples for ways in which individuals can be
better supported during the health insurance decision-making process, including improving health
insurance informational materials and supporting one-one-one assistance from information
professionals or Human Resources officers. This study’s findings encourage improvement of health
insurance materials and provide a guide for those seeking to create materials to support this decisionmaking process. For example, insurance companies and Human Resources officers should consider
presenting information in a variety of formats to assist individuals with a variety of learning styles (e.g.,
auditory, visual, hands-on, etc.). One example to bridge the gap between the auditory orientation
session and visual learners would be if a benefits officer could link the orally presented materials to the
specific, relevant page numbers in the printed materials to help visual learners connect with the
material.
Because participants identified printed materials as a preferred method for obtaining overview
information about their choices, Human Resources departments should consider continuing to
distribute printed information (rather than referring to online-only materials). However, participants in
this study also had creative suggestions for ways in which the materials could be improved. For example,
participants spoke about forecasting expected use of health insurance in the upcoming year; inviting
enrollees to formalize these reflections through worksheets or other means may help support the
decision-making process.
Several of the information design suggestions offered by participants work best in an online
environment. Participants’ desire to eliminate irrelevant information indicates that creating and
providing access to interactive health insurance materials where users could hide irrelevant information
(e.g., dependent coverage) or an entire coverage option (e.g., 70/30 insurance plan) would be helpful.
Benefits officers could consider better promotion of already available online calculators since only three

180

participants in this study mentioned using the online benefits calculator as a part of their choice but
many individuals reflected on the benefits of calculating expenses as part of the decision-making
process.
The demonstrated difficulties with insurance terminology suggest that information providers
should consider linking to helpful dictionaries or glossaries, particularly when most helpful, such as
within a health plan website. One possibility might be the inclusion of a pop-up window so that a
definition is provided when a user hovers over a word. Information providers should particularly
consider what resources could be designed for populations who may be less familiar and have less
experience with the U.S. health care system, such as first-time enrollees and those more familiar with
non-U.S. health care systems.
To obtain information on their health care needs, participants used creative means to locate
specific answers, such as using Ctrl+F within a PDF document. Insurance information providers should
consider facilitating multiple methods for locating specific information within online content, as
currently much of it is presented in PDF format. Developing finer grained searching capabilities would be
appropriate to allow users to locate the most helpful information for their anticipated needs.
The findings presented in this study may be of particular use to librarians and other information
professionals who seek to support this process and provide access to quality health insurance materials.
In particular, the results of this study could be of assistance to health insurance information mediators
such as ACA Navigators and Human Resources officers. The results of this study suggest that individuals
would like more guided assistance with the health insurance decision-making process, indicating that
the study has policy implications for greater focus on and funding of quality information assistance, as
well as more concentrated attention on the readability of health insurance materials.

181

It is also important for information mediators providing health insurance enrollment assistance
to be aware of the bias they may be conveying to those asking for guidance. Participants in this study
spoke about benefits officers cautioning against particular plans. Information professionals should be
cognizant of the strong role their advice might play for enrollees searching for answers on what to do.
Employers may also be interested in the results of this study. Large employers may currently be
subsidizing insurance coverage which individuals are not getting the maximum value out of (e.g.,
individuals who select greater coverage than their health care utilization warrants) and, therefore, may
be losing money on unnecessary health care coverage for employees. Larger employers, in particular,
save large amounts of money when their employers are savvier insurance purchasers. Through better
understanding of health insurance choices, employers may be able to provide more effective assistance
and guidance with the health insurance decision-making process.
In summary, this qualitative study offers unique contributions to the field of health insurance
literacy research by presenting an in-depth look at individuals’ health insurance decision-making
process, as presented in the Model of the Health Insurance Decision-Making Process. This study
described the steps that go into an individuals’ decision-making process, the health insurance literacy
barriers they face, the information tactics they use to compare available plans, the personal reflection
they undergo to forecast which plan will best suit their needs, the interpersonal information sources
they consult for personalized advice, and their strategies for selecting their preferred choice. In a time
when more people are enrolling in health insurance than ever before, understanding the literacy
challenges presented during health insurance enrollment can help information professionals create
more effective information materials and provide evidence-based one-on-one assistance.
