Using Game Mechanics to Increase Graduate Student
Engagement with Library Resources

A Dissertation
Presented to
The Faculty of the School of Education
Texas Wesleyan University

in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Education in Educational Leadership
by
Sharon K. Manson

December 2017

Approved:

Twyla Miranda, Ph.D.
Dissertation Chair

Jearl K. Helvey, Ed.D.
Committee Member

Kay Colley, Ph.D.
Committee Member

Celia Scott, Ph.D.
Director, Doctoral Program

Carlos Martinez, Ph.D.
Dean, School of Education



ABSTRACT
Sharon K. Manson
The purpose of the current study was to determine whether adding gamification to
a doctoral level class would improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement, and 2) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. Twenty-one students agreed to participate and completed the pretest
survey. Eleven students completed the online gamified learning experience and
responded to a posttest survey. Five of the student who did not complete the gamified
quest answered an additional survey to understand their reasons for not completing the
game. In addition to surveys, qualitative data was collected and analyzed.
The students who participated in the online quest found improvement in almost all
areas surveyed. Additionally, qualitative data and in-game remarks from the participants
supported those findings. The results of this study demonstrated that adding a gamified
learning experience could improve motivation, increase engagement with library
resources, and reduce library anxiety.

Chapter I
Introduction to the Study
The purpose of the current study was to determine whether adding gamification to
a doctoral level class will improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement; and 2) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. Gamification is using game thinking and game mechanics to solve
problems, engage users, and change people’s behaviors (Zichermann & Linder, 2013).
Burke (2014) explains “gamification breaks larger goals into smaller practical challenges,
encouraging players as they progress through levels, and engages them emotionally to
achieve their very best” (p. 24).
Game mechanics are the rules (points, levels, challenges), and rewards (trophies,
badges, leaderboards) that make up gameplay—the aspects that make it challenging, fun,
satisfying, or whatever other emotion the game’s designers hope to evoke (status, reward,
achievement, self-expression, altruism, competition). These emotions, in turn, are the
result of desires and motivations called game dynamics (Bunchball, Inc., 2010).
Background
Gamification has been steadily making headway into educational settings. As
millennials enter the workforce, they are followed by even more technically savvy
younger students in schools. Never having known a world that was not wired, much has
been written, researched, and discussed about GenY, digital natives, or Millennials as the
first generation of unconsciously competent users of digital technology, growing and

Manson 2
evolving together (Manafy & Gautschi, 2011), but their younger brothers and sisters who
follow them are even more plugged in (Seemiller & Grace, 2016).
As first digitals, Millennials and their younger siblings, accept new technologies
as a constant reality and actively consider how they can apply these technologies to
innovate and solve problems (Burstein, 2013). These students grew up playing games in
the classroom. From the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s, computers in most elementary
schools were bundled with the games Oregon Trail and Lemonade Stand–both of which
provided opportunities for students to learn and adapt, fail, build problem-solving skills,
and understand the context of their choices in a gamified environment (Renaud &
Wagoner, 2011).
When students are playing games, they are also reading and researching, looking
beyond the task in front of them, and motivated to achieve the task ahead (Thomas &
Brown, 2011). This motivation to do more is crucial to the success of a gamification
program. Libraries have long used gamification in summer reading programs to
encourage children to read, but additional benefits include increased awareness of library
services, improved efficacy of library instruction, and justification of funding and
budgets (Kim, 2015).
Statement of the Problem
Hinkle, Iarussi, Schermer, and Yensel (2014) found doctoral students are highly
motivated by both intrinsic and extrinsic rewards to pursue an advanced degree. Given
the costs in time, effort, and money, it is not a decision entered into lightly. Whether
those deciding factors were a passion for life-long learning or career advancement, most

Manson 3
successful doctoral students were found to be driven by the scholarly challenge, high
standards, and individualized learning (Ivankova & Stick, 2006).
However driven doctoral students may be, numerous studies on doctoral
education have shown that as many as 60% of doctoral students fail to complete their
degree (Hinkle et al., 2014; Ivankova & Stick, 2006; Walker, Golde, Jones, Bueschel, &
Hutchings, 2009). Monsour and Corman (1991) noted the dissertation as a significant
stumbling block for doctoral students who could not finish their studies. In the field of
education, research by Ivankova and Stick (2006) found 50% of doctoral students failed
to complete their program and 20% remain ABD (all but dissertation).
As Bair and Haworth (2004) point out,
this high dropout rate seems incongruous, especially given the tremendous
importance of doctoral study to research, education, leadership, policy and
professional practice. Recipients of doctoral degrees have traditionally occupied
prestigious positions in research and education, where they have been called upon
and funded to produce new knowledge. (p. 481)
It is easy to see that the failure to complete the doctoral degree or to remain ABD has
consequences beyond just the student and the institution.
Why then would students undertake such an important yet arduous journey, yet
quit before completion? De Valero (2001) cites a number of factors negatively affecting
completion rates, among them conducting research. “One of the major problems
identified by graduate students for delaying their completion of the doctoral degree was
the lack of training on how to conduct independent research” (p. 345).

Manson 4
While the concept of research seems simple enough, Creswell (2011) summarizes
the process as “asking a question, collecting data, and analyzing data to determine the
answer to the question” (p. 26), the process for scholarly doctoral research involves much
more in-depth research and understanding. Boote and Beile (2005) lament the failure of
some doctoral programs to provide adequate skills or knowledge to present thorough,
sophisticated reviews of literature and suggest that much more is needed to prepare
doctoral students for researching and writing, especially when writing is a key component
of the dissertation. Brower (2011) suggests a collaboration between librarians and
faculty to assist doctoral students with research and literature reviews.
In a report for the American Library Association, Kim (2015) outlines ways
libraries can use gamification to engage and motivate students. With the goal of
gamification to engage users and solve problems, a gamified library experience is an
ideal opportunity to help library users ask questions, summarize data, and solve problems
(Kim, 2015). If gamification can make learning fun (Zichermann & Linder, 2013), then
an opportunity exists to help doctoral students who must learn to use the library
effectively to complete independent research and complete their degree. Walker et al.
(2009) remind us “the importance of doctoral education to this country’s current and
future prospects can hardly be overestimated” (p. 2).
Theoretical Framework
Three major theories of motivation serve as the theoretical foundation for this
study: Atkinson’s expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002), Bandura’s
(1977b) social learning theory, and Deci and Ryan’s (2008) self-determination theory.
These theories of motivation can be helpful in understanding the needs of the adult

Manson 5
learner and the driver behind gamification. Just as there is not a one-size-fits-all theory
of human motivation, there is not a one-theory that applies specifically to gamified
learning. Motivation is both intrinsic and extrinsic (Pink, 2009) and the theories behind
the motivational drives of adult learners and gamification share many similarities.
Expectancy-value theory describes motivation as the combination of two factors:
the value of the task to the student and the expectation of success in completing the task
(Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). Wigfield and Cambria (2010) explain this concept as asking
the question, “Do I want to do this, and why?” with the answer being critical to a
student’s engagement (p. 2). If they see little value or reason, then they may not do the
activity, even if they were confident they would be successful. This search for meaning
and value is seen in both the game mechanics that make games worth playing and in adult
learning theory where adult learners look for the connections beyond the subject matter to
make the material interesting and relevant.
Social learning theory suggests individuals learn from one another and their social
interactions, observations, or experiences. Learners observe others’ behaviors and decide
what to adopt and which to ignore, or in some situations, they figure out what is working
and what is not working and change their behaviors to achieve a goal (Kapp, 2014;
Reiners & Wood, 2015). In a gamified environment, students learn from observing the
successes and failures of other students and small failures allow students to step back,
observe what did not work, try another technique, or start over (Gee, 2003). Adult
learners thrive on collaboration, working with others in groups, and observing how they
can contribute (McGrath, 2009).

Manson 6
Self-determination theory explains human motivation in terms of intrinsic needs
over extrinsic needs (Kapp, 2012). Ryan and Deci (2000) identify three factors or needs
that assist or weaken motivation: autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Kapp (2012)
also cites research showing that the “psychological pull” of games is due to the ability of
games to produce feelings of autonomy, competence, and relatedness, and those feeling
motivate the player to play longer and feel better playing. Knowles (1984) also pointed
out adult learners are self-directed, autonomous, goal-oriented, relevancy-oriented, and
thrive when these needs are met.
Purpose
The purpose of the current study was to determine whether adding gamification to
a doctoral level class would improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement, and 2) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. Doctoral students rely on library resources when continuing their
studies or completing their doctoral research. Studies have shown that independent
research, especially when completing the dissertation, is a challenge for some doctoral
students, and nationwide 50-60% of those students fail to graduate (Bair & Haworth,
2004; de Valero, 2001; Hinkle et al., 2014). Given the high expectations of students,
families, and faculty and the rising costs of graduate school, it is essential that colleges
and universities provide students the tools they can use to help them succeed.
This experimental study examined if adding gamification to a doctoral level
course would improve self-reported levels of satisfaction, engagement, and confidence in
library usage. Students were asked to assess their perceptions of their knowledge of and
competency with library resources, their desire to complete tasks, and their level of skill

Manson 7
regarding research and writing. They were provided a gamified learning experience and
upon completion, asked a series of questions that helped the researcher understand these
self-reported feelings of motivation, competency, engagement, and knowledge of the
library resources available to complete research.
Research Questions
Based on the literature reviewed regarding gamification and the characteristics of
adult learners, the research questions were:
1. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ perceptions of their
level of engagement with their doctoral education?
2. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ motivation to
complete additional training on library research skills and resources?
3. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ knowledge and selfreported perceptions of their competency in using library resources for
educational research?
Rationale/Significance of the Study
Gamification has been shown to improve motivation in various areas of business,
such as customer service, sales, and customer engagement (Burke, 2014; Kapp, 2012;
Paharia, 2013b; Zichermann, 2013; Zichermann & Linder, 2013). Because digital badges
seem to have a meaningful impact on motivation for learning, status within a community,
and can transparently display achievement level, validation process and directly link to
rich media evidence, the research implications are quite broad and varied (Gibson,
Ostashewski, Flintoff, Grant, & Knight, 2015).

Manson 8
Zuk (2012) has found “research, although sparse, provides some positive evidence
indicating that gamification within educational settings can lead to increased motivation
and positive learning” (p. 7). Additionally, this study could be replicated at other
campuses whose leaders are looking for additional ways to engage adult learners and
doctoral students. Having long been used to entice customers, the concept of loyalty or
rewards programs are only recently being applied to training and education (Paharia,
2013a).
Assumptions
In this study, the researcher assumed that those involved were currently enrolled
doctoral students and freely participated in the process; however, each volunteer
participant was given the freedom to withdraw from the study at any time with no
consequences. The researcher assumed all students given the instructions for
participation understood the out of classroom assignments and actively sought to move
forward and achieve status among their peers by completing quests and achieving badges.
As survey instruments, for pretest and posttest data, are distributed, it was assumed
students would answer survey questions honestly and their confidentiality was preserved.
Limitations/Delimitations
The limitations listed were recognized as beyond the researcher’s control and
ability to influence the outcome of the survey:
1. Sample size–working on one campus limited the number of students involved in
the study.
2. Skepticism– some students may not have been open to trying a new method,
especially if it was seen as extra work.

Manson 9
3. Time constraints– the survey time (pretest and posttest) covered one summer
course over 5-weeks; therefore, survey results might have been seen as an
adjustment to adding a new process.
4. Fear–students might have perceived answers of the instrument would affect their
final grade in the class.
5. Honesty–students may have answer questions how they feel they should be
answered, rather than how they actually believe.
Definitions
Adult learners−Individuals over the age of 25 with different learning styles and
motivations than traditional-age college students are considered adult learners (Taylor et
al., 2000).
Andragogy−The study of adult learning theory (Knowles, 1973).
Digital badges−Digital badges are an assessment and credentialing mechanism
that is housed and managed online. Badges are designed to make visible and
validate learning in both formal and informal settings and hold the potential to
help transform where and how learning is valued. (MacArthur Foundation, 2017,
para. 1)
Digital Natives−Students who have grown up with technology since birth and are
considered native speakers of the language of new technology (Prensky, 2001).
Doctoral student−A currently enrolled, degree-seeking post master’s degree
student.
Games−Activities, usually rule-based, with a focus on entertainment and
winning/losing (Marczewski, 2013).

Manson 10
Game mechanics−The essential elements that make up a game, including
achievements, points, leaderboards, badges, quests, and rewards (Zichermann, 2013).
Gamification−The use of game mechanics in a non-game context to influence
behavior, improve motivation, achieve goals, and enhance engagement (Burke, 2014;
Marczewski, 2013).
Gamified learning games−Educational software used to teach concepts For
example, in the 1990s Oregon Trail taught elementary and middle school students about
19th century pioneer life; current middle school students are using Minecraft learn coding
and computer science (Cohen, 2011).
Millennials (or Gen Y)−Generation born between 1982 and 2000 (Howe &
Strauss, 2000).
Motivation: intrinsic−Motivation that is driven by internal or personal reasons
(Marczewski, 2015).
Motivation: extrinsic−Motivation that is driven by external, tangible rewards
(Marczewski, 2015).
Serious games−Games created with a purpose, outcome, learning objective, or
message, not created solely for entertainment (Marczewski, 2013).
Summary of the Chapter
As adult learners, doctoral students face numerous challenges on their road to
finishing their degree. Critical among those challenges are honing their research skills
and learning to use library resources effectively to both research and write numerous
papers and ultimately, the dissertation. For many years, libraries have used a form of
gamification in their summer reading programs to encourage young readers to keep their

Manson 11
minds active. Leaderboards tracked the number of books read, and prizes were award at
different milestones and for some young students, a negative emotion (from being forced
to read instead of play) was motivated by a positive emotion (competing with peers or
earning rewards). If gamification helped some reluctant summer readers, there is a
reason to believe it could be used to help motivate potential reluctant researchers.
Gamification has been shown to affect adult behaviors in non-educational
settings, such as health, finance, travel, training, and sales. One only has to look at
reward systems where points, levels, and badges are included to see gamification in
action (i.e., credit cards). This researcher investigated whether adding similar game
mechanics assisted doctoral students in their knowledge and understanding of the library
and library resources and by doing so, gave those students the tools and skills needed to
use library resources effectively to accomplish research. Research has indicated
gamification can have an impact by affecting student behavior, commitment, and
motivation, which can lead to improvement of knowledge and skills (Huang & Soman,
2013).
In Chapter II, the researcher provides a review of the literature regarding
gamification, motivational theories used in gamification, and theories proposed on the
characteristics of adult learning styles. In addition, recent research on adult learners and
gamification are reviewed. Chapter III is the methodology used to conduct the study, the
population studied, the research design and instrument, data collection, data analysis, and
a summary of the study. In Chapter IV, the researcher further elaborates on the data
collection, participants studied, and the results of the statistical tests conducted including
the findings of significance or no significance. In Chapter V, the researcher interprets the

Manson 12
results of the data analysis, summarizes the findings, provides implications for practice,
and offers recommendations for future research.

Manson 13

Chapter II
Review of the Literature
What causes people to act and why? For years scientists, psychologists, theorists,
managers, teachers, and students alike have all searched for the answers to the questions
about what motivates human behavior. In 1943 Maslow published “A Theory of Human
Motivation”, and proposed a pyramid-shaped hierarchy of needs model to explain these
motivational drives. For years it was seen as one of the key theories of motivation, and is
used to this day in a number of fields including management, human resources, and
education to explain internal motivation (Cullen, White, Pierce, & Usher, 2000).
Maslow (1943) offered that at the lowest level humans need safety through
security and money. Once one achieves safety, motivation is refocused on finding a
sense of belonging and esteem which is achieved through community dynamics and
social cohesion. Once these are satisfied, then the goal of an individual would be to seek
the highest level, self-actualization, or fulfillment of one’s potential (Maslow, Stephens,
Heil, & Bennis, 1998).
Over 60 years later, understanding human motivation is still being debated
(Cullen et al., 2000). Many employers, managers, supervisors, and teachers still struggle
with understanding the motivational needs of the staff and students under their purview.
Motivation has been defined as the process that initiates, guides, and sustains goaldirected activities (Cook & Artino, 2016).

Manson 14
For human beings, what is it that creates the motivation to learn, alone or with
peers, in school environments, in business communities, or in the prolific and various
multiple learning situations that exist in society? More narrowly, how does the process
of game design and participation in games contribute to the learning abilities of students,
and even more particularly, with adults? The purpose of the current study was to
determine whether adding game mechanics or gamification to a doctoral level class will
improve a) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation, competency, and engagement
and b) knowledge of the library resources available to complete research.
Understanding Gamification
Gamification is the use of game design and game elements in a non-game context
(Walz & Deterding, 2015). The root of the idea is to understand what makes game
playing so motivating and apply it to a non-game situation (like a classroom, training, or
work). Gamification is not about creating a virtually immersive experience, instead it is
about using specific game elements and game mechanics to help to achieve student or
employee engagement, participation, and other organizational objectives (Zichermann &
Linder, 2013). The premise that gamification and the use of game mechanics, or those
key elements that are common to most games: points, badges, leaderboards, etc. improves
learning, increases motivation, and improves engagement with an otherwise dull subject
is a growing trend in business, education, and industry (Attali & Arieli-Attali, 2015;
Burke, 2014)
One of the most critical components of gamification is how it promotes game
thinking, or the conversion of an everyday activity into an opportunity for learning and
growth. Gamification does not trivialize learning; on the contrary, it is an intensely

Manson 15
motivational method for conveying training and educational ideas (Kapp, 2012). It is the
core ability of gamification to provide intrinsic rewards to players for accomplishing
desired tasks and by providing leader boards as a way of encouraging competition, to
drive participation that lies at the heart of gamification (Kinley & Ben-Hur, 2015).
Gamification has proven itself in business and industry by increasing sales,
consumer engagement, or accelerating onboarding. When metrics like increased
engagement and participation are clearly defined, gamification in education, both in the
classroom and in training and development, has repeatedly been proven effective (Kapp,
2012). Research has also found increased test scores and improvement in problemsolving skills (Şahin & Arslan Namli, 2016). Probably the greatest asset of gamification
in the classroom is the ability to provide immediate, meaningful feedback (beyond tests,
midterms, quizzes, and finals) and to use that feedback to motivate or refine the
interactions of the student (Menezes & De Bortolli, 2016).
According to Burke (2014), with gamification students are encouraged to do more
of what you want them to do and at the same time, get better at it. Games associate
learning with fun and allow for mistakes, failure, and with minimal risk, trial and error;
while at the same time, gamification encourages exploration, collaboration, and the
exchange of ideas while removing unwanted pressures that can interfere with students’
abilities (Cohen, 2011). Lee and Hammer (2011) stated that for schools attempting to
engage students, gamification can show students “the ways that education can be a joyful
experience, and the blurring of boundaries between informal and formal learning can
inspire students to learn in life-wide, lifelong, and life-deep ways” (p. 4).

Manson 16
Gamification in schools can be seen in geography, social studies, language arts,
digital media, computer coding, history, mathematics, and just about any subject that
requires engagement and thought (Bruder, 2015). In a recent study of graduate medical
education in residency training, researchers found the gamification-based intervention
was positively received and retention of knowledge increased 11.9% (Nevin et al., 2014).
In the proceedings from the Summit on Educational Games, the Federation of
American Scientists (2006) reported students recall just 10% of what they read and 20%
of what they hear; if there are visuals accompanying an oral presentation, the number
rises to 30%, and if they observe someone carrying out an action while explaining it,
50%. In contrast, students remember 90% “if they do the job themselves, even if only as
a simulation” (Federation of American Scientists, 2006, p. 15). Perry and Klopfer (2014)
found correlations between the time students spent playing on a gamified biology course,
the level a student achieved, and the scores a student obtained on a subtest. Leaning
(2015) also found increased motivation when gamifying a module taught to an
undergraduate media studies class. Results from a study by Watson, Mong, and Harris
(2011) showed students’ increased activity and engagement when gamification was used
in teaching World War II history and “resulted in a shift from a traditional teachercentered learning environment to a student-centered environment” (p. 466).
Gamification has been shown to increase student engagement and participation in
both in-class and online settings (Faiella & Ricciardi, 2015). Kapp (2014) says “a person
needs to be engaged in order to learn” (p. 17). At its core, gamification is about engaging
people on an emotional level and motivating them to achieve their goals by presenting
them with practical challenges, encouraging them as they progress through levels, and

Manson 17
getting them emotionally engaged to achieve their very best (Burke, 2014). In a gamified
environment, the low risk of failure allows a student to explore and learn from mistakes;
there is little to no penalty for trying again. Their gaming experience means they are
happy to work on a level as they know that even if they fail, they will learn something
that they can use to progress further next time (Gee, 2003).
Research provides some positive evidence indicating that gamification within
educational settings can lead to increased motivation and positive learning (DuVernet &
Popp, 2014). Cohen (2011) reminds us,
the key to successful learning is seen in rule-based learning systems, in which
players actively participate, and use strategic thinking to make choices, solve
complex problems, seek content knowledge, receive constant feedback, and
consider the point of view of others. (p. 17)
Educators must focus on an understanding of what a game or gamified strategy is
targeting, how that situates into a larger learning sequence, and how they know what
students have learned from the game (Klopfer, Osterweil, & Salen, 2009).
Gamification is more than just playing games. When information is provided
through the duplication of popular game shows (like Jeopardy or Wheel of Fortune), the
content must be relevant to the task rather than an add-on experience for it to become a
valuable learning experience and the information retained (Ružić & Dumančić, 2015).
Schools and organizations must be intentional about aligning game elements with
educational goals and especially if they are adding gamification as a long-term strategy
rather than a short-term intervention (Burke, 2014). Just as players evolve, good
gamification must evolve and adapt to the player; otherwise, it may stop being effective

Manson 18
(Maliszewski, 2015). Games are motivating because of their impact on the cognitive,
emotional, and social areas of a players motivation; so, therefore, gamification in
education must focus on those three areas as well (Lee & Hammer, 2011).
Theories of Motivation
Games are an integral part of human development, as old as civilization and found
in all cultures throughout the ancient and modern world (McGonigal, 2011). Chou
(2015) reminds us that
throughout history, humans have tried to make existing tasks more intriguing,
motivating and even “fun.” When a small group of people casually decide to
compete against each other in hunting and gathering or simply start keeping score
of their activities and comparing it to their past records, they are adopting
principals that are prevalent in modern games to make tasks more engaging. (p.
6)
In fact, often thought of as the beginning of social gaming, early board games were found
buried in the tombs of ancient Egypt and depicted in hieroglyphics dating back to 3100
BC (Radoff, 2011).
As social-beings, games and play have been a part how humans learn for years.
Livescu (2003) points out that education, pedagogy, play/games, and children all share
the same Greek etymology and that Plato insisted that “the very existence of play is
essential as an educational tool” (p. 20).
Both Piaget and Vygotsky believed play was a crucial component of cognitive
development (Tudge & Rogoff, 1999). Play that has a goal, rules, and a quantifiable
outcome is considered a form of ludic activity, or more simply games are formalized

Manson 19
versions of play (Fu, 2011; Salen & Zimmerman, 2004). Kapp (2012) explains “games
give experiences meaning, they provide a set of boundaries within a ‘safe’ environment
to explore, think and ‘try things out.’ Games provide a motivation to succeed and reduce
the sting of failure” (p. xxi).
This ability to learn from failures and overcome obstacles can be seen in the
research by Dweck (2008) on mindsets. Dweck found those with a fixed mindset
accepted failure as inevitable; whereas those with a growth mindset, saw setbacks as
challenges, but when people are taught a growth mindset they value challenging
themselves and putting in extra effort, and become more resilient when faced with
setbacks (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007). As Pink (2009) explained
“setbacks were inevitable on the road to mastery and they could even be used as
guideposts for the journey” (p. 123). Mastery is a key component in the intrinsic
motivation found in gamification (Paharia, 2013b)
In teaching a growth mindset, rewarding effort and process rather than just ability
and practicing small wins repeated over time builds confidence and resilience (Dweck,
2008). The resilience to repeat a level or slowly advance to the next step by using the
lessons learned keeps students engaged (Gee, 2003). Amabile and Kramer (2011) show
that managers can motivate teams by applying lessons learned from small wins and
“honest failures.” Their research determined that consistent, small wins kept employees
engaged and motivated, despite setbacks.
Dweck’s (2008) growth mindset and Amabile and Karamer’s (2011) progress
theory help explain the engagement and motivation of students who are participating in a
gamified learning environment and are able to achieve success (or mastery) by learning

Manson 20
from failures, and adapting to and overcoming obstacles (Pink, 2009). Additionally,
educators might look to Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development to understand how
scaffolding, or building on increasingly complex tasks, appears in gamification as skill
levels or even actual game levels (Kapp, 2012). For Vygotsky, the zone of proximal
development was the gap between what a student was able to do through independent
problem solving and what the student could achieve through problem-solving with
guidance or collaboration (Lloyd & Fernyhough, 1999).
There are a number of theories that can be used to help understand the reasons
why we find playing games so rewarding or enjoyable. In The Gamification of Learning
and Instruction, Kapp (2012) provides a table listing 12 learning theories and their impact
on gamification. This study will use the following three theories for the foundation for
understanding the motivational factors of gamification:


Expectancy-value theory of achievement motivation found when students
valued an activity, they became deeply engaged (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000).



Bandura's (1977b) social learning theory which states “new patterns of
behavior can be acquired through direct experience or by observing the
behavior of others” (p. 3).



Self-determination theory focuses on human motivation regarding of
competency, autonomy, and relatedness (Deci & Ryan, 2012).

Expectancy-value theory. Simply put, expectancy-value theory attempts to
explain the relationship between the amount of effort required to be successful and the
perceived value of the reward for that success (Cook & Artino, 2016). Motivation is
determined by an individual’s expectation of success or failure on a task and the

Manson 21
desirability of either succeeding or failing (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). If an individual
deems a task worth the effort and believes they will achieve the desired outcome, a
greater effort should yield a greater reward.
According to Wigfield (1994), the expectancy-value model states “expectancies
for success can be defined as beliefs about how well one will do on an upcoming task” (p.
52) and defines four components of subjective values (how the task meets the needs of
the individual) as
attainment value or the importance of doing well on a task, intrinsic value or the
enjoyment one gets from doing a task, utility/usefulness value or how the task fits
into the individual’s future plans, and cost value or what an individual will give
up to complete a task. (p. 52)
For example, if a student, who enjoys solving mathematical equations and excels in math
is looking at a career which uses complex mathematical calculations, that student may
find value in spending time learning calculus, statistics, and other complex scientific
studies. On the other hand, the student, who does not do well in math or does not see a
use for additional mathematical models in the future, would be less inclined to give up
time or effort, despite having an immediate goal of passing a math class. If a student sees
little purpose or value in the activity, they may find more value in not doing the activity
(Wigfield & Cambria, 2010).
Initially used in education to understand student achievement in math, Wigfield
and Eccles (2000) also believed expectancies and values also “influence performance,
effort, and persistence” (p. 69). When one believes they are capable or confident in their
abilities, they will put forth the effort to be successful because they believe the outcome

Manson 22
will be positive (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). Just as in a gamified learning intervention,
when a student believes they can do something, they are more likely to be engaged in
doing that activity (Buckley & Doyle, 2016) and as Schunk and Meece (1992)
determined, more likely to choose a more challenging task.
If an individual is not initially successful, yet they still believe in their capabilities
and can find value in the success, they will put forth the additional effort required to be
successful (Wigfield, 1994). As Cook and Artino (2016) point out, there must be more
than conviction or belief; there must also be a perceived gain or reward. In a study on
low-achieving students in a math class, students who were taught intelligence was
malleable (not fixed) and their abilities in math could improve (they were capable of
improving), showed improved self-confidence, and that students put in the extra effort to
improve their grades (Blackwell et al., 2007). Dweck (2008) later expounded that
students who could see these setbacks as learning opportunities, rather than a fatal flaw or
a lack of ability, expected to succeed, were able to achieve more, sought additional
challenging work, and placed greater value in the reward.
McMenemy and Lee (2007) applied this concept of expectancy-value motivation
to public library use and proposed
if the customers confidently perceive that they can access library products through
a virtual or physical visit of the library, if the products (book, e-book, online
journal article, chat reference services, etc.) that they have found are the products
that they were looking for, and if they think the library products have valence to
satisfy their information needs, they will be motivated to use the library products
frequently. (p. 791)

Manson 23
Social learning theory. Bandura (1977b) theorized that behavior is learned
through reciprocal interactions; children learn by observing and then by imitating other’s
behaviors. Cook and Artino (2016) further elaborated that those shared interactions are
made up of three factors: “personal factors like beliefs, expectations, attitudes and
biology, behavioral factors, and environmental factors including both the social and
physical environment” (p. 1005). It may be common to think individuals are a product of
their environment but it is also fair to believe they are likewise a producer of that same
environment (Pajares, 2008).
Observational learning, imitation, and modeling are a continuous interaction of
the environment, behaviors observed, and personal attitudes or beliefs, and the influence
of those factors depends on their strength at that moment (Bandura, 1977b). Unlike
behaviorists who believed learning was explained through reinforcement and reward,
Bandura showed the presence of others played a role in behavioral change (McLeod,
2011).
In social learning, the behavior is modeled so the learner can observe, process,
and learn from others, or as Bandura (1977b) wrote:
Learning would be exceedingly laborious, not to mention hazardous if people had
to rely solely on the effects of their own actions to inform them of what to do.
Fortunately, most human behavior is learned observationally though modeling:
from observing others one forms an idea of how new behaviors are performed,
and on later occasions, this coded information serves as a guide to action. (p. 22)

Manson 24
As Kapp (2011) explains, learners observe others, decide what behaviors to adopt or
discard based on what works or what does not work, and then behave in a similar fashion
based on those observations and decisions. When observational learning involves
modeling behaviors of a role model (teachers, coaches, parents, siblings, peers, etc.), selfefficacy is also increased (Starks, 2014). Bandura (1977a) explained students needed
clear goals to achieve and a means to evaluate their progress, because the more a student
believes in their ability to gain a goal, the more likely one is to attain it.
Cook and Artino (2016) pointed out that unlike self-concept, self-efficacy is task
oriented and “the beliefs help determine the outcomes one expects” (p. 1006). For
example, a student playing a learning game may have a greater self-efficacy in a
cooperative team-based game than a competitive individual one, or have greater selfefficacy in a mathematics module than they have in a reading module. Self-efficacy is
the belief in what a person is capable of doing (Pajares, 2007). The more an individual
believes they are capable of accomplishing a task, the more engaged and intrinsically
motivated a person is in doing the task (Kapp, 2012).
Self-determination theory. Seeking to find an understanding of an individual’s
intrinsic motivation, Deci and Ryan (2012) found “human beings have fundamental
psychological needs to be competent, autonomous, and related to others” (p. 85), and
across ages, cultures, and socio-economic levels those who experience greater
satisfaction of those three psychological needs, had greater psychological health. Deci
and Ryan’s self-determination theory has shown that when those intrinsic needs are met,
individuals are productive and motivated (Pink, 2009).

Manson 25
To be motivated means to produce or be moved to do something (Deci & Ryan,
2000). An intrinsically motivated person will undertake a task for the enjoyment of the
activity and reap the reward from carrying out the activity rather than as a result of the
completing the task; while an extrinsically motivated person would take on a task to
avoid punishment/pain or obtain a reward (Kraiger, 2002). Activities pursued that are
intrinsically motivated may deliver a more creative output or lead to a greater depth of
understanding (Pink, 2009).
As one of the first needs for intrinsic motivation, autonomy has been described as
an opportunity to choose or feel as though one can decide their own consequences. Kapp
(2012) says “the feeling of having control over one’s actions is an integral part of SDT
[self-determination theory]” (p. 62). Autonomy does not mean being left alone but rather
having the freedom to manage decisions, or as Paharia (2013b) point out, “when people
lack autonomy in one area, they will often seek autonomous experiences in another so
that they can experience that sense of control, of freedom, and of determining their own
destiny” (p. 28). This is seen in the popularity of games, both video games, online social
games, or massive multi-player online role-playing games (MMORPG) like World of
Warcraft.
Another need, competence, is found in self-efficacy and supported by challenge,
failure, small wins, and feedback (Cook & Artino, 2016). Csikszentmihalyi (2014)
describes the process of getting better by overcoming challenges as flow and illustrates
flow as an optimal experience where “the best moments usually occur when a person’s
body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something
difficult and worthwhile” (p. 6). While developing competency, if an individual’s skills

Manson 26
are greater than the challenge, the result is boredom, but if the challenges are greater than
the skills, anxiety sets in; flow is experienced when challenges and skills are in balance
with an individual’s perception (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014).
To become competent one has to master a task or challenge and is driven by the
innate desire to get better and improve (Deci & Ryan, 2012). Improvement is not always
easy, and an individual with a strong self-efficacy towards achieving the task and growthmindset that sees failures as learning opportunities will persist knowing they may never
be perfect, but they can get better (Paharia, 2013b). The research by Dweck (2008)
supports a growth mindset that believes with hard work and dedication abilities can be
improved, and as Pink (2009) says, “mastery is a mindset” (p. 121).
The third need relatedness is about the connections one makes or the sense of
belonging one feels with a group they are like or would like to be like (Ryan & Deci,
2000). Paharia (2013b) points out, “the desire for validation and recognition from others
is a huge driver for our behavior” (p. 36). Pink (2009) calls this drive purpose and states
that humans have a natural tendency to be a part of a cause greater than themselves and
seek a reason or motive to do or contribute more to the greater good.
Deci and Ryan (2002) identified three factors needed for internal motivation:
autonomy, competency, and relatedness. Knowles (1973) developed a theory of
andragogy that stated adult learners need self-direction or autonomy, connection with life
experiences and relevance to goals, and collaboration. Houde (2006) draws this
correlation between the two theories by stating “self-determination theory opens up the
internal motivators that Knowles refers to in the principles of andragogy” (p. 95) and
suggests there is much for further examination.

Manson 27
Adult Learners and Motivation
As adult learners, doctoral students bring a wide variety of expectations and
experiences to the classroom. In looking at doctoral degrees in education, a report from
the National Science Foundation (2016) showed that of the 5,117 doctorates received in
2015, the average time from the first bachelor’s degree to completion of the doctorate
was 14.8 years. While there may be some students who follow a path directly from high
school graduation to the bachelor’s to the master’s to the doctorate, there are still many
more who might have taken slight detours along that path. According to a 2012 National
Student Clearinghouse survey, over one-third, or 38%, of college students were
considered non-traditional or 25 years of age or older (Newbaker, 2012). This large
number of older students can also be seen in the statistics from the same NSF report
showing the median age of doctoral recipients in education fields at 38.6 years of age
(National Science Foundation, 2016).
Regardless of whether a student followed a path directly toward a doctorate or
added life experiences (work, family, avocation, etc.) prior to enrolling, doctoral students
fall into a different learning model than those typically used with younger students.
Conner (1997) points out the difference between pedagogy and andragogy: pedagogy is
“the art and science of educating children” (p. 1) and andragogy is “the art and science of
helping adults learn” (p. 2); moving from teacher-centered learning to learner-focused
education. As Itin (1999) explains, “Learning is best considered as the process of change
that occurs for the individual. Learning is an individual experience. Education, on the
other hand, is best considered as a transactive process between an educator and a student”
(p. 91).

Manson 28
These concepts are not new; this transactive process can be seen in Paulo Freire’s
(1968/2000) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Published in 1968, Freire expressed his
opposition to the banking concept of education. Freire found the typical classroom
teaching similar to that of a bank–where a teacher deposits knowledge or information into
a student and thus, both the teacher and student are seen as objects and dehumanized
(Hanson, 2003). In the early 1900s, John Dewey focused on experiential education and
showing that students learn best when they were involved, engaged, and interacted with
their environment, rather than as passive participants (Dewey, 2004; Hanson, 2003; Itin,
1999).
As a friend, colleague, and counterpart to Dewey, Eduard Lindeman proposed
similar ideas for adult education (Stewart, 1987). He held that knowledge comes from
student experience, not bound by the classroom and learning is lifelong (Stewart, 1987).
In 1926 Lindeman published The Meaning of Adult Education which laid the foundation
for further analysis and development of adult education theories and methods (Fisher &
Podeschi, 1989). Malcolm Knowles, who many attribute to the development of adult
learning theory, acknowledged the inspiration that Lindeman had on the development of
his work (Fisher & Podeschi, 1989; Henry, 2009; Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 2005).
As McKenzie (1979) has been quoted, “Dewey begot Lindeman and Lindeman begot
Knowles” (p. 258).
According to Knowles, Lindeman, and Dewey, the lecturer is more of a
facilitator, guiding students to ask questions, giving feedback, promoting dialog, asking
more questions, and connecting real-life experiences to learning (McGrath, 2009). While
many public K-12 schools and colleges still eschew this type of blended transformational

Manson 29
learning, preferring instead to stick with the classic lecture-listener-note taker or sage on
the stage model, research has shown that engaging students increases student
achievement (King, 1993). This is especially true with adult learners.
Taylor, Marienau, and Fiddler (2000) identified adult learners as individuals over
the age of 25 whose learning styles and motivations differ from those of much younger
students. Freedman (1985) uses the example of a worker who, after a full day’s work,
returns for further education or certification. For Knowles (1970, 1973, 1984, 1988) in
developing a theory or andragogy, the definition of an adult learner included an
independent, self-directed person whose value of learning was integrated into the
demands of their everyday life. Unlike traditional-age college students that see
themselves as students first, adult learners usually see themselves as their career/work
first and college student second (Kazis et al., 2007).
Knowles model of andragogy. Knowles theory of andragogy is in stark contrast
to his beliefs on the assumptions of pedagogy; in classical pedagogy, students only learn
what they need to know on an exam, students rely on teachers to learn information, and
no experience is needed to learn a new skill (McGrath, 2009). Pedagogy has made
learners dependent on teachers; andragogy moves from dependence to independence and
engages adults in self-directed learning (Brockett & Hiemstra, 1991; Hiemstra, 1994;
Knowles, 1970). Mezirow (1991) shows that independent learning style when he states,
“the cardinal goal of adult education is to help learners learn what they want to learn” (p.
198).
Adult learners find value in making connections between what is studied, why it
is studied, and how it can be applied to real-world situations (McGrath, 2009). As

Manson 30
McGrath points out, “adult learners need to know why they are learning new knowledge
before they are willing to participate” (p. 99), and once they understand that, there is a
readiness to learn and participate further. This need for understanding and creating
meaning from what is taught is one of the characteristics (Kearsley, 2017) that make
andragogy different from pedagogy (Knowles, 1988). Rather than gaining knowledge
because it is required (because of age, grade level, or testing requirements), the
acquisition of knowledge is for a meaningful, relatable purpose. Whether a job, skill,
promotion or lifelong passion, the adult learner is invested in the information and how it
will apply to either their next step or what they are doing right now (Houde, 2006;
Merriam, 2001).
In helping educators understand the differing instructional and educational needs
of children and adults, Knowles (1984) outlined the following five key assumptions about
adult learners:
1. As a person grows and matures he/she becomes a more self-directed learner;
accordingly, importance is placed on being seen as a self-directed adult so,
therefore, being treated like a child (in pedagogy) interferes with the learning.
2. As a person matures, he/she brings a “growing reservoir of experience” both
to understanding the materials and to the application of the materials taught.
3. As a person matures his/her readiness to learn is geared toward evolving
social roles; i.e., the learner is focused on what he/she needs to know (at
home, work, social or other roles) rather than what he/she ought to know
(based on their age or year in school).

Manson 31
4. Adult learners bring a shift in learning from subject-oriented to problemcentered, and want to apply what is taught immediately to current problems,
issues or other applications.
5. As a person matures the motivation to learn moves from external influences to
internal dynamics. (p. 12)
McGrath (2009) points out that “Knowles’ theory of andragogy is very much
based on the fact that students want to participate in the classroom and in order to
participate they must be motivated” (p. 106). Instruction for adults needs to include them
in the planning and evaluation, focus less on content memorization and more on the task
or process, explain the meaning or why things are being taught and how it is relevant to
the person’s goals, and allow learners to uncover ideas on their own (Kearsley, 2017).
For learning to take place, there must be mutual respect and trust (Groleau, 2005;
Knowles et al., 2005).
Recent studies in motivation and the adult learner. The motivations of an
adult learner to complete a doctoral program are as varied as the students that enroll. In
an auto ethnographic study, Templeton (2016) looked at four doctoral students at four
different universities in Australia who had enrolled in a doctoral program, dropped out,
and then re-enrolled. Templeton recruited the participants through professional
organizations and interviewed them over a two-month period. As with qualitative
research, the participants were given pseudonyms (Glesne, 2011) as the interviews were
recorded and transcribed, and the data was analyzed using sorting to find themes and
patterns (Templeton, 2016).

Manson 32
Templeton (2016) found common themes among his research participants; they
were intrinsically motivated to learn, they were aware of extrinsic motivations and
benefits of their increased education and those motivations tended to direct what they
were planning to learn, and they had an autonomous motivation to learn. As in adult
learning theory, the participants understood the connection of higher education ambitions
to their immediate goals or family/work situations, and for some that was the reason they
dropped out of their program. The reasons for returning to complete their doctorate were
typically intrinsic motivations or an autonomous motivation to learn. Those in
Templeton’s (2016) study who had not completed their doctorate, still held aspirations to
complete their Ph.D. in the future and for at least one, that motivation was a personal
commitment. As in Knowles theory of andragogy, there was immediacy for the
application of the knowledge and a need to apply the knowledge and experience to a
tangible goal.
Quinney, Smith, and Galbraith (2010) looked at adult learners at Brigham Young
University’s Harold B. Lee Library who believed there to be a gap in the technology use
between millennial students and library faculty and staff. In looking to bridge this gap
the library administration created a “Technology Challenge” or self-directed learning and
training program (Quinney et al., 2010, p. 206). Over a period of eight months, 96
employees participated in a gamified self-directed learning experience, where faculty and
staff achievements were tracked (in an online board game called “Techopoly”) and
rewarded (Quinney et al., 2010, p. 207).
Participants were given a pretest survey, which provided direction for
supplemental training and additional mini-challenges, and after completing the challenge,

Manson 33
participants responded to an exit survey (Quinney et al., 2010). Of the 96 participants in
the challenge, 66 met or exceed the goal of earning 1,000 points (one point per minute
learning technology) and eight participants earned over 2,000 points. In completing the
exit survey, the results showed (through both quantifiable and open-ended questions) that
“the program aligns with Knowles five principles of andragogy to successful help
employees develop both technology skills and learning habits” (Quinney, 2010, p. 207).
Employees in the technology challenge were self-directed and able to recognize the need
for new information or skills they were learning, and immediately applied the new
skills/knowledge to their job. Because they used their experience to connect with home
or personal interests, they were highly intrinsically motivated. In this gamified learning
environment, they were engaged and interested in learning more or repeating the
challenge.
In gamifying a learning environment with undergraduate students, Buckley and
Doyle (2016) found increased understanding of and engagement with a complex concept.
Students at the University of Limerick participated in an online gamified learning
intervention built around a prediction market. Prediction markets provided students the
opportunity to work collaboratively and receive immediate feedback and/or rewards. If
they forecast future events correctly, the value of their prediction increased. They
competed with other teams to improve the value of their portfolio and participated in the
predictive market gamification intervention for three weeks.
Buckley and Doyle (2016) then tested their hypothesis by using a pre- and postintervention survey for general knowledge and the Academic Motivation scale for
motivation. The research showed a statistically significant difference in the improvement

Manson 34
of general knowledge and positive correlations between various types of motivation and
participation. A Spearman’s rho test was utilized to correct for a violation of assumption
of non-normally distributed data, and while positive correlations were found they were
not supported at the 95% confidence level.
Despite heavily researched reliability and validation and the widespread use of the
Academic Motivation scale (AMS) in elementary school, high school, and college
(Buckley & Doyle, 2016; Vallerand et al., 1992), little research has been done with
graduate students and the AMS. The AMS was created to examine the self-determination
theory of motivation and to measure intrinsic, extrinsic, or amotivation (Deci & Ryan,
2008). Results of these studies with school children have shown that intrinsic motivation
decreases with age.
In research on 240 graduate students enrolled at one large urban private
university, Hegarty (2010) sought to understand graduate student motivation using the
AMS. Through non-random sampling, Hegarty distributed surveys to 107 graduate
students in the school of business and 133 graduate students in the school of education.
Due to the extensive research and validity, the researcher used the Academic Motivation
scale and sought the answers to research questions about graduate student motivation.
Hegarty (2010) found that unlike many of the other studies on adult learners, his
participants were extrinsically motivated. The researcher found a significant difference
in motivation based on gender, work level (lower, middle, or upper management), and
family expectation. According to Hegarty,
graduate degree students are performance rather than mastery oriented in their
approach to learning and that graduate students are not intrinsically motivated.

Manson 35
Graduate education students are more motivated overall than graduate business
students and display significantly higher levels of intrinsic motivation than their
business peers. (p. 53)
Limitations discussed by Hegarty (2010) included:


the limited use of the AMS to measure graduate student motivation,



possible bias toward performance-oriented students (due to the competitive
nature of graduate admissions and the assignment of a grade),



possible loss of intrinsically motivated students who may have taken summer
months off,



limited availability of summer faculty (and their motivational influence), and



the focus on business and education graduate students only.

Additionally, the limited location of the study also confines the inference to
universities in similar size locations (large metropolitan cities).
Summary
Gamification has been shown to increase engagement in a number of areas
including education, health, human resources, sales, business, and other industries
(Conaway & Garay, 2014; Constantin & Stoenescu, 2015; Cugelman, 2013; De-Marcos,
Garcia-Lopez, & Garcia-Cabot, 2016; Deterding, 2012; DuVernet & Popp, 2014; Fu,
2011; Kapp, 2014; Van den Berg, 2014). As McGonigal (2011) pointed out human
beings are wired to play, to make fun out of challenging tasks, and motivated to seek
accomplishments that satisfy them. Since the 1930s when S&H introduced Green
Stamps as a loyalty program that rewarded customers with products purchased by virtual
currency, gamification has been changing the way people think about things

Manson 36
(Zichermann, 2013). Mobile apps, frequent flyer programs, and fitness trackers reward
users with badges, levels, and social recognition for staying engaged; either with an app,
a product, or one’s health, gamification has been steadily moving into the way we interact
with the world around us (Marczewski, 2015).
In Chapter II, the researcher provided an overview of some of the literature
regarding gamification and three theories of motivation that can be seen as motivational
factors in a gamified learning environment. Knowles (1970) theory of andragogy, or
adult learning theory, was also reviewed and many of the motivational factors for adult
learners (autonomy, self-direction, problem-centered tasks, and application of
information) can also be found in game mechanics, or as one of the reasons why so many
people find games enjoyable. Research on adult learners has shown there is a gap in the
research especially in the areas of intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation and the method to
quantify and measure that motivation.
Chapter III is the methodology used to understand whether adding gamification to
a doctoral level class will improve a) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement and b) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. In Chapter III, the researcher discusses the population studied, the
research design and instrument, data collection, data analysis, and a summary of the
study.

Manson 37

Chapter III
Methodology
The purpose of the current study was to determine whether adding gamification to
a doctoral level class will improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement and 2) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. Gamification is using game thinking and game mechanics to solve
problems, engage users and change people’s behaviors (Zichermann & Linder, 2013).
Bigdeli, Haidari, HajiYakhchali, and BasirianJahromi (2016) believe gamification could
have a profound impact on the behavior of students using library services. Students who
are unsure of their ability to use the library effectively have been said to have library
anxiety, and Jiao, Onwuegbuzie, and Waytowich (2008) found library anxiety as a factor
in the research problems facing doctoral students.
As adult learners, doctoral students are highly self-motivated to continue their
education in pursuit of an advanced degree or additional credentials (Hinkle et al., 2014).
Despite this strong internal motivation for success, numerous studies have shown 50-60%
of doctoral students fail to complete their educational programs (Bair & Haworth, 2004;
Ivankova & Stick, 2006; Walker et al., 2009). Among the reasons cited for noncompletion was the perceived difficulty in overcoming the seemingly insurmountable
challenge of researching and writing the dissertation (Monsour & Corman, 1991).
For students to engage in scholarly research and writing, a greater depth of
understanding is required of both the materials and the resources available to access those

Manson 38
materials (Boote & Beile, 2005; Kuh & Gonyea, 2003). In a study on citation errors in
doctoral proposals, Jiao et al. (2008) found “library anxiety” as a likely cause for the
errors “because conducting literature reviews involves extensive use of library resources
and services” (p. 949). Research has revealed that basic library instruction has not
always met the needs of students doing academic research (Young, 2016) and recent
studies have shown the potential that gamified library instruction has to increase student
engagement and motivation (Leach & Sugarman, 2005; Margino, 2013; Walsh, 2014).
In the current study, students were asked to assess their perceptions of their
knowledge of and competency with library resources, their desire to complete tasks, and
their level of skill regarding research and writing. They were provided a gamified
learning experience in addition to regular classroom instruction, and upon completion of
the gamified component, students were asked a series of questions that helped the
researcher understand these self-reported feelings of motivation, competency,
engagement, and knowledge of the library resources available to complete research.
Research Questions
1. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ perceptions of their
level of engagement with their doctoral education?
2. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ motivation to
complete additional training on library research skills and resources?
3. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ knowledge and selfreported perceptions of their competency in using library resources for
educational research?

Manson 39
Research Design
To answer the research questions using an existing group structure, the current
researcher will implement a quasi-experimental, pretest posttest design (Creswell, 2011;
Rovai, Baker, & Ponton, 2014). By using just one group of respondents and no control
group, Shadish, Cook, and Campbell (2002) call this type of research “one-group pretestposttest design” (p. 108). As described, the participants were given a pretest, provided
with an intervention, and then given a posttest to determine if participants’ perceptions,
motivation, and knowledge had changed since the introduction of a variable (game
mechanics).
While much of the literature has shown a relationship between gamification and
student engagement (Buckley & Doyle, 2016; Da Rocha Seixas, Gomes, & De Melo
Filho, 2016; Filippou & Cheong, 2014; Nevin et al., 2014; Sera & Wheeler, 2017) and
additional research on gamification and libraries exist (Kim, 2015; Lacy, 2016; Young,
2016), little research has been done with doctoral students and gamification, especially in
such a high need area as library research skills. Campbell (1968) point out that “in quasiexperimental analysis, tentative causal interpretation of data may be made where the
interpretation in question squares with the data and where other rival interpretations have
been rendered implausible” (p. 260); and Shadish et al. (2002) caution that “the strength
of experimentation is its ability to illuminate causal inference. The weakness of
experimentation is doubt about the extent to which that causal relationship generalizes”
(p.18).

Manson 40
Population/Participants
The research participants consisted of doctoral students enrolled in summer
coursework at one small urban liberal arts university and who were seeking a Doctor of
Education degree. The convenience sample of participants was solicited from various
education classes. Students were given the opportunity to assist with the study and enroll
in the gamified learning experience but were reminded that participation was voluntary
and did not impact class standing or potential grades. In selecting a convenience sample,
Creswell (2011) states “the researcher selects participants because they are willing and
available to be studied” (p. 145).
The doctoral students selected for inclusion in the study were at a variety of levels
in their educational pursuits; some were close to beginning the dissertation while some
were beginning the second year of their program. By selecting summer school students,
these students should be familiar with the rigor and demands of graduate school
instruction in addition to juggling their busy lifestyles. Invited student participants were
not enrolled in dissertation classes, yet have had experience researching and writing at an
advanced scholarly level, having completed a minimum 12 hours of doctoral coursework.
Additionally, the group was various ages and backgrounds, with varying educational
goals. Self-identified demographic information was collected from the participants
during the pretest.
The purposeful sample group was chosen due to the small size and accessibility of
the student population. The small size was of convenience not only to the study setting
but also to the researcher who was developing and administering the gamified component
of the class. The researcher recognized the threats to validity that the single group design

Manson 41
brought; however, given the limited time-frame for a summer class the research design
was dependent on the university calendar and thus limited to 5-weeks. Shadish et al.
(2002) noted that despite concerns about the internal validity of a single group pretestposttest design, those concerns can be lessened when the “interval between the pretest
and posttest is short” (p. 110).
Instrumentation/Research Design
In behavioral research, the widely used pretest-posttest design is a method to
compare the characteristics of a group to determine if an intervention, or treatment,
affected the group resulting in a measurable change. As Creswell (2011) explains,
participants are assessed before a treatment is provided to determine a baseline measure,
and after the treatment, participants are measured again for changes in attitudes, beliefs,
habits, or other measurable attributes.
In this study, students were asked to complete an online survey assessing their
knowledge, motivation, comfort levels, and engagement with the university library and
library resources before the start of the class. During the four-week summer class and the
week following, students were provided with additional tools in the form of a gamified
quest to attain additional knowledge. The quest, based on the four learning objectives,
included additional challenges, levels, points scored toward a leaderboard, and an
opportunity to practice newly acquired skills. After the completion of the quest, students
were surveyed again to determine if there was a measurable difference between their selfreported scores at the start of the quest and the conclusion.
In keeping with Knowles theory of andragogy (Knowles et al., 2005), the task
orientated process included challenges which related to their current coursework and

Manson 42
future doctoral research. Points were not taken away for mistakes or failures but were
awarded for achievements, and a leaderboard provided immediate feedback and a
transparent record of class and/or group standings. The quest-like challenge offered
students a road map and directions for self-directed completion so they could work
independently or as a group.
Instrumentation
The study used three Likert-type scales to collect data about motivation and
library engagement: the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, the Academic Motivation scale
(modified for graduate students), and the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale (based
on the Library Anxiety scale). For this study, some of the questions (with the authors’
consent) were modified to reflect attitudes and options relative to adult learners and
doctoral students.
The Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) is a multidimensional measure assessing
several dimensions of intrinsic motivation. Validated by McAuley, Duncan, and
Tammen (1989), the IMI measures “levels of intrinsic motivation as an additive function
of the underlying dimensions of interest-enjoyment, perceived competence, effort and
pressure-tension” (p. 49). Coefficient alphas for the four dimensions (ranging from  =
.68 to = .84) and the overall scale ( = .85) indicated reliability (Cronbach, 1951;
McAuley et al., 1989). This instrument has stated permission to modify as needed for
research purposes and notes that “past research suggests that order effects of item
presentation appear to be negligible, and the inclusion or exclusion of specific subscales
appears to have no impact on the others” (Self-Determinism Theory, n.d., para. 2).

Manson 43
The Academic Motivation scale (AMS), originally developed in French to assess
academic motivation/amotivation toward post-secondary studies, has been adapted to
English and has been widely used to assess academic motivation in students. The scales
in both English and the original French, have consistent internal validity, ranging from 
= .62 to  = .86 on the seven subscales (Vallerand et al., 1992). In analyzing a number of
instruments used to measure internal motivation of graduate students, Hegarty (2010)
found the AMS to be the most accurate tool for assessing motivation. Items from the
AMS were modified to reflect attitudes, opinions, and motivational factors of graduate
students/adult learners.
The Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale (MLAS) was developed to
understand graduate students’ feelings during the research process and their use of the
Internet and online search processes (Van Kampen, 2004). The MLAS is based on the
original Library Anxiety scale (LAS) which has been subjected to substantial validation
and review and found similar results as the MLAS in determining the same or similar five
factors that accounted for 51.8% of the variation in library anxiety (Bostick, 1992;
Bowers, 2010). Scores on the MLAS reflect feelings of inadequacy and lack of
competence and in some cases fear of libraries and the librarians that work there (Jiao &
Onwuegbuzie, 1999, 2004; Onwuegbuzie & Jiao, 1998). Internal consistency was tested
for each factor and found to range between  = .73 to  = .86.
Each of these instruments provided demographic, pretest, or posttest data which
was analyzed to assess graduate student engagement. As Hegarty (2011) reminds, “We
know that by enrolling in a graduate program an individual is motivated. We do not
know, however, what type of motivation, nor do we know its strength” (p. 146).

Manson 44
Data Collection Procedures
Data were collected from three sources: pretest, posttest, and level of performance
in the intervention. An online collection tool, Qualtrics, was used to collect the data for
both the pretest and posttest. The online surveys allow for maximum flexibility in
collecting data from busy professionals (Wright, 2005), and eliminates the perception of
bias or coercion if the student were required to fill out a paper and pencil survey in front
of the professor. Demographic information (age, gender, and educational role) was
collected during the pretest. An online tool tracked students’ progress throughout the
gamified learning experience. Data collected during this phase allowed the researcher to
see progress, post updates to leaderboards, or answer questions; but data was not used to
determine grades or involvement with the formal coursework or instruction.
Additionally, qualitative data was collected from student responses to in-game quest and
side-quest assignments.
Data Analysis
Upon completion of the course and the gamified learning experience, students
were asked to complete the second online survey regarding their attitudes, knowledge,
and experience. The data collected was downloaded and organized into an Excel
spreadsheet and then entered into SPSS, Version 23, for analysis. Parametric tests
(paired samples t-tests) and nonparametric tests (Wilcoxon signed-rank test and MannWhitney U test) were used to compare the means of the gains, or simply put, the change
in the scores from an individual’s pretest before participating in gamified learning and the
posttest after completing the gamified quest, or if not completed, by the course deadline.
Nonparametric tests were introduced due to the effect of an outlier that violated two of

Manson 45
the assumptions of normality for both the paired samples t-test and the independent
samples t-test.
Summary
With this experimental study, the researcher examined if adding gamification to a
doctoral level course improved self-reported levels of satisfaction, engagement, and
confidence in library usage among doctoral students. Gamification has been used in a
variety of educational settings and has been shown to increase engagement and
motivation (Ahmed et al., 2015; Bruder, 2015; Da Rocha Seixas et al., 2016). The
students chosen to participate were considered highly motivated doctoral students and
were selected due to their enrollment in summer courses at one small urban liberal arts
university. While the gamification treatment coincided with their enrollment in summer
courses, the students were given the option to opt out of the gamified component with no
effect on their overall grade or standing in the classroom.
As is the standard design for the pretest-posttest method (Creswell, 2011) students
were asked to complete an assessment prior to the start of the treatment (in this case,
participate in an online gamified learning experience, using quests, challenges, points,
and badges) and after the completion of the quest or the completion of the course,
students were asked to complete a posttest. Students who had started the quest but did
not advance were also given a test to understand their levels of intrinsic motivation as
compared to those who completed the quest. The data was analyzed, and the results and
conclusions will be discussed in Chapters IV and V.

Manson 46

Chapter IV
Analysis of Data
The purpose of the study was to determine whether adding gamification to a
doctoral level class would improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, and engagement and 2) knowledge of the library resources available to
complete research. Students were asked to assess their perceptions of their knowledge of
and competency with library resources, their desire to complete tasks, and their level of
skill regarding research and writing. They were provided an opportunity to participate in
a gamified learning experience, and upon completion, those students were asked a series
of questions to help the researcher understand these self-reported feelings of motivation,
competency, engagement, and knowledge of the library resources available to complete
research.
Research Questions
The researcher used three Likert-type scales to collect data about motivation and
library engagement: the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, the Academic Motivation scale
(modified for graduate students) and the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale (based
on the Library Anxiety scale), and sought the answers to three research questions.
1. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ perceptions of their
level of engagement with their doctoral education?
2. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ motivation to
complete additional training on library research skills and resources?

Manson 47
3. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ knowledge and selfreported perceptions of their competency in using library resources for
educational research?
The study design centered on a pretest-intervention-posttest design; however, as
participation in the intervention (referred to hereafter as the “quest”) dwindled to half of
the total number of participants, the researcher added an additional survey to assess the
motivation of those who started but quit. Open-ended questions asked about barriers to
completion, the offer of an incentive, and changes that might have been made to complete
the quest. Additionally, qualitative data was anecdotally collected during the quest when
a student was asked to respond to a prompt or provide feedback to questions/activities in
order to level up. Qualitative and demographic data is used for discussion and to support
the findings of the study.
In this chapter, the researcher presents an overview of the participants, the
gamified learning experience (the quest), an analysis of the data, data issues and
descriptive statistics, and the results of the data analysis for the research questions that
guided the study.
Participants
A convenience sample of doctoral students was recruited for participation in the
study. The doctoral students selected were students from one small urban liberal arts
university and were enrolled in the Doctor of Education program. Among the
requirements to apply for admission to the Doctor of Education program highly
motivated students must have two or more years as a teacher or administrator, above
average scores on the Graduate Record Exam, and a successful interview with program

Manson 48
faculty. Students selected for the study from this program had completed a minimum of
6 hours of doctoral coursework at this university but had not completed all of the required
classes or finished the qualifying exams to be considered as qualified candidates for the
study.
The researcher visited the on-campus classrooms at the university studied to
solicit volunteers, explain the research study and the quest, answer questions, provide
IRB approved informed consent forms, and collect email addresses from students
interested in participating. Understanding that participants in the study were students
involved in other doctoral coursework, with a limited time frame for summer classes, and
other job/family responsibilities, the researcher designed the quest to be a self-paced
game with activities designed to be taken in small bites. Students could stop and start the
quest at their leisure with no penalty or loss of progress towards completion. Assuming
that some of the information gained from doing the quest would be helpful for doctoral
students, the time frame for the quest coincided with summer school classes plus one
week (a five-week period). The quest was extended one week to allow those finishing
summer classes to also wrap up their participation in the study.
After students volunteered to participate in the research study, a pretest was sent
via email to 31 doctoral students. The pretest included the Library Anxiety scale and the
Academic Motivation Assessment. The scale and assessment are in Appendix A.
Twenty-one students completed the pretest which collected the demographic data shown
in Table 1.

Manson 49
Table 1
Demographic Information
Participants

#

Age
Mean
Median
Range

40.48
41.00
27-70

Female
Male

19
2

Gender

Educational Role
Teacher/Instructor
Administrator
Other

11
5
5

Additionally, using the definitions provided by Howe and Strauss (2000), the
participants were grouped for further analysis into the following three generations: Baby
Boom Generation (1943-1960), n = 1; Generation X (1961-1981), n = 13; Millennial
Generation (1982-2004), n = 7. Once students completed the pretest, they were then
directed to enroll in a gamified learning experience−Becoming an Agent of
N.E.R.D.S−(the quest), which they were to complete on their own time, over a span of 5weeks.
Nineteen students enrolled in the Quest and completed 0-4 levels. Of those 19
students enrolled, 11 completed all four levels and were directed to complete the posttest,
which consisted of the Library Anxiety scale, the Academic Motivation scale, and the
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory. The eight students who did not complete the Quest were
given an opportunity to answer an additional survey to help the researcher understand
why they did not continue. Five participated in the online assessment which also

Manson 50
included the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory. Open-ended questions provided some
qualitative data that was collected from the survey and during the quest. The qualitative
questions are in Appendix B.
The Quest
Students electing to participate in the study were given a dossier, as shown in
Appendix C, which provided instructions on how to register for the game and navigate
through the challenges. There were four levels or quests, each with two to three sidequests that were required to be completed before a student could advance to the next
level. The mission of each quest in the game was to provide information helpful in
developing a research project or an experience relating to conducting library research as
shown in Appendix D. Badges were awarded when students reached specific
achievements or completed designated tasks. Students were able to track their
performance individually in the quest automatically, and leaderboards were manually
introduced through announcement updates. After three weeks of game play, a $5.00 gift
card was introduced to reward those players who had reached the third level, with a
notification of the potential for an additional $5.00 gift card upon completion of the quest
and submission of the posttest.
Analysis
In preparation for analyzing the data, it was determined that a paired-samples ttest for within-group comparisons was the most appropriate test to determine if
significant differences existed between the means of the gains between the scores
reported on the pretest and those reported from the posttest. Pretest and posttest scores
were collected on the Academic Motivation scale (AMS) and the Multidimensional

Manson 51
Library Anxiety scale (MLAS). Pretest scores were not collected on the Intrinsic
Motivation Inventory (IMI), as those questions directly related to student perceptions and
attitudes while completing the quest. Means were calculated for each independent
variable, and the scores from each participant were entered into Excel and IBM SPSS,
Version 23, software for analysis.
To calculate the scores for the AMS, the authors provided the following formula
and definitions to derive a self-determination index (SDI) score:
2((know+acc+stim/3)) + iden - ((intro+reg/2) + 2amo) = SDI
The variables were defined as know = intrinsic motivation to know, acc = intrinsic
motivation to accomplishments, stim = intrinsic motivation to experience stimulation,
iden = identification, introj = introjected regulation, reg = external regulation, and amo =
amotivation (Vallerand et al., 1992).
To compute results for the Library Anxiety scale, questions were grouped and
means were found for six components plus an overall mean:
1. General Library and Research Anxiety (LibResearch)
2. Comfort with Technology and Online Access (TechOnline)
3. Perceived Value of Understanding How to Use the Library (ValueLib)
4. Comfort with Library as a Physical Place (ComfortLib)
5. Perceived Value of Using the Library In-Person (LibInperson)
6. Comfort with Library Staff (LibStaff)
Results from the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory were solicited from all
participants who enrolled in the quest. Mean scores were compared from those who
completed the quest (n = 11) and those who did not (n = 10). While fewer participants

Manson 52
did not complete the quest and even fewer, completed the mid-test questionnaire (n = 5).
Mean scores were computed on the following intrinsic motivational cues:
pressure/tension, interest/enjoyment, perceived choice, perceived competence, perceived
competence, and value/usefulness.
Data Issues
With a paired sample t-test the following four main assumptions were made:
1. The dependent variable scores are numeric, continuous, and can be measured;
this was met by calculating from mean scores the data collected from Likertscaled surveys.
2. Independent variables consisted of two related groups. This assumption was
met by providing unique pre/posttest links and assigning corresponding test
scores back to individual student numbers. Students were assigned a number
to track their progression from pretest to completion of the quest, and after
completion of the quest to the posttest.
3. There are no significant outliers in the difference between the two related
groups. This assumption was violated.
4. The assumption of normally distributed data or distribution of the differences
in dependent variables in normally distributed. This assumption was violated
as well.
With one or more outliers, data violated both the assumption of having no significant
outliers and the assumption of normally distributed variances. Using Shapiro-Wilks test
of normality the researcher found violations in three variables in the Library Anxiety
scale:

Manson 53
ValueLib_pre, p = .019
LibResearch_post, p = .003
LibInperson_post, p = .011
and six variables in the Academic Motivation scale:
KnowPost, p = .011
AmmotivationPre, p = .002
AmmotivationPost, p = .000
IntrinsicAccompPre, p = .050
IntrinsicAccompPost, p = .013
IntrojectedRegPost, p = .048
Due to the violations of the assumptions for conducting a paired samples t-test, the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was also used along with the paired-samples t-test to analyze
the data, for both the Library Anxiety scale and the Academic Motivation scale. The
paired-samples t-test is known to be fairly robust from deviations from normality, so the
data collected was compared to the data from the Wilcoxon signed-rank test when
looking at significance.
To run the Wilcoxon signed-rant test, three assumptions were considered:
1. one dependent variable was measured at an ordinal level
2. one independent variable consisted of related groups or matched pairs
3. the distributions of the differences between the two related groups are
symmetrical
With unequal samples and the presence of an outlier which violated the
assumptions required to conduct an independent samples t-test, a Mann-Whitney U test

Manson 54
was used to compare the intrinsic motivation scores of those who had attempted or
participated in the Quest. Mean scores from the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory were
collected from a posttest survey (sent to those who had completed the quest, n = 11) and
midtest survey (created specifically for those who had started but had not completed the
quest, n = 5). The data met the four assumptions required for the Mann-Whitney U test:
1. one dependent variable was measured at the ordinal level
2. one independent variable consisted of two independent groups
3. the groups scores did not affect each other (those who had completed the
quest were independent of those who had not) so therefore, there was an
independence of observation
4. as calculated through SPSS, the distributions of the means had the same shape
Descriptive Statistics
Using IBM SPSS statistics, measures of central tendency and variability, and
levels of skewness and kurtosis were calculated and analyzed. Due to the small sample
size, the Shapiro-Wilk test was used to assess normality in the AMS and the MLAS.
Several of the variables were below the 0.05 level and therefore deviated significantly
from the normal distribution. The descriptive statistics are in Tables 2-5.
Results
To answer the research questions the paired-samples t-test was used to analyze the
data; however, due to the small sample size and influence of an outlier the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was also performed. Similar results were recorded using both pairedsamples t-test and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and are explored in the next sections
with each research question.

Manson 55
Table 2
Descriptive Statistics–Academic Motivation Scale (Pre/Post)
Academic
Motivation Scale

N

M

SD

SK

Std.
Error

Kurt.

Std.
Error

S-W

RegulationPre

11

4.77

.66

1.02

.66

1.99

1.28

.25

RegulationPost

11

5.59

.87

-.32

.66

1.47

1.28

.11

KnowPre

11

6.25

.68

-1.13

.66

1.10

1.28

.17

KnowPost

11

6.55

.52

-.615

.66

-1.43

1.28

.01

IdentificationPre

11

5.80

1.02

-1.58

.66

3.59

1.28

.06

IdentificationPost

11

6.14

.616

-.091

.66

-1.29

1.28

.28

InstrinsicStimPre

11

4.79

1.32

-.73

.66

.81

1.28

.16

IntrinsicStimPost

11

5.73

1.13

-.68

.66

.46

1.28

.14

AmmotivationPre

11

1.64

.912

1.98

.66

4.38

1.28

.00

AmmotivationPost

11

1.30

.482

1.40

.66

.72

1.28

.00

IntrinsicAccompPre

11

5.36

1.57

-1.31

.66

1.11

1.28

.05

IntrinsicAccompPost

11

6.42

.70

-1.23

.66

.41

1.28

.01

IntrojectedRegPre

11

5.00

1.51

-.49

.66

-.04

1.28

.63

IntrojectedRegPost

11

6.12

.82

-.32

.66

-1.77

1.28

.05

AMSPre

11

8.57

3.63

-.85

.66

-.00

1.28

.23

AMSPost

11

10.14

1.87

-.69

.66

-.74

1.28

.16

Difference

11

1.57

2.70

-.03

.66

-1.09

1.28

.56

Note. SK = Skewness; Kurt. = Kurtosis; S-W = Shapiro-Wilk

Manson 56
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics−Library Anxiety Scale (Pre/Post)
Library Anxiety
Scale

N

M

SD

SK

Std.
Error

Kurt.

Std.
Error

S-W

LibResearch_pre

11

4.90

.93

.13

.66

-.48

1.28

.74

LibResearch_post

11

5.45

.51

-.83

.66

1.26

1.28

.00

TechOnline_pre

11

5.74

.66

-.00

.66

-.96

1.28

.57

TechOnline_post

11

6.20

.45

-1.35

.66

2.73

1.28

.94

ValueLib_pre

11

6.56

.46

-.68

.66

-1.46

1.28

.85

ValueLib_post

11

6.301

.55

-.06

.66

-1.36

1.28

.02

ComfortLib_pre

11

5.86

.63

.33

.66

-.71

1.28

.16

ComfortLib_post

11

6.26

.29

1.93

.66

3.92

1.28

.39

LibInperson_pre

11

4.87

.73

-.30

.66

1.05

1.28

.01

LibInperson_post

11

5.78

.41

-.60

.66

-1.41

1.28

.65

LibStaff_pre

11

4.70

.67

-.46

.66

-1.12

1.28

.14

LibStaff_post

11

6.08

.66

-.26

.66

-1.19

1.28

.93

Overall_pre

11

5.44

.56

-.08

.66

.44

1.28

.80

Overall_post

11

6.02

.345

-.30

.66

.12

1.28

.70

Note. SK = Skewness; Kurt. = Kurtosis; S-W = Shapiro-Wilk

Manson 57
Table 4
Descriptive Statistics–Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Grouped Means)
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory

N

M

SD

Min.

Max.

Pressure_tension

16

2.63

2.06

1.00

7.00

Interest_enjoyment

16

5.50

.91

3.00

6.63

Percieved_choice

16

6.11

.76

4.00

7.00

Percieved_competence

16

5.44

1.40

3.00

7.00

Value_usefulness

16

5.42

1.26

2.78

6.89

Means_all

16

5.53

.91

3.19

6.60

Group

16

1.31

.48

1.00

2.00

Table 5
Descriptive Statistics – Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Individual Groups)
Intrinsic Motivation
Inventory

N

M

SD

SK

Std.
Error

Kurt.

Std.
Error

S-W

Pressure_tension-Post

11

2.45

2.21

1.20

.66

.020

1.28

0.00

Pressure_tension-Mid

5

3.00

1.87

.38

.91

-2.90

2.00

0.11

Interest_enjoyment-Post

11

5.91

.37

.09

.66

.70

1.28

0.91

Interest_enjoyment-Mid

5

4.60

1.14

-.41

.91

-.18

2.00

0.81

Percieved_choice-Post

11

6.34

.40

.23

.66

-1.08

1.28

0.58

Percieved_choice-Mid

5

5.60

1.14

-.41

.913

-.18

2.00

0.81

Percieved_competence-Post

11

6.23

.68

-.47

.66

-.89

1.28

0.24

Percieved_competence-Mid

5

3.70

.84

1.09

.91

.54

2.00

0.31

Value_usefulness-Post

11

5.92

.85

-1.46

.66

1.79

1.28

0.03

Value_usefulness-Mid

5

4.33

1.42

.32

.91

-2.79

2.00

0.24

Means_all-Post

11

6.00

.47

-.71

.66

-.679

1.28

0.27

Means_all-Mid
5
4.50
.82 -1.07
.91
Note. SK = Skewness; Kurt. = Kurtosis; S-W = Shapiro-Wilk

2.41

2.00

0.39

Manson 58
Research question 1. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’
perceptions of their level of engagement with their doctoral education?
Level of engagement was assessed by comparing the scores of the Academic Motivation
scale pretest scores prior to enrolling in the quest and the posttest scores after completing
the quest.
Paired-sample t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did
not elicit a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for
overall self-determination compared to their scores during the pretest, M = 1.57 (SE =
0.817), t(10) = -1.93, p = .08. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a
5-week gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’
overall self-determination index, z = -1.51, p = 0.13, with a large effect size (r = .32).
The median scores increased from pretest (Md = 8.96) to posttest (Md = 10.67).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for external
regulation compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .82 (SE = 0.13), t(10) = 6.25,
p = .00. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified
quest did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for external
regulation, z = -2.82, p = .01, with a large effect size (r = .60). The median scores
increased from pretest (Md = 4.75) to posttest (Md = 5.50).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for intrinsic
motivation to know compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .30 (SE = 0.22),
t(10) = 1.37, p = .20. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week

Manson 59
gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for
intrinsic motivation to know, z = -1.13, p = .26, with a small effect size (r = .24). The
median scores increased from pretest (Md = 6.50 to posttest (Md = 6.75).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for identification
compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .34 (SE = 0.23), t(10) = 1.46, p =.18. A
Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified quest did not
produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for identification, z = -1.29,
p = .20, with a large effect size (r = .27). The median scores remained the same from
pretest (Md = 6.00) to posttest (Md = 6.00).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for intrinsic
motivation to experience stimulation compared to their scores during the pretest, M =.94
(SE = 0.28), t(10) = 3.31, p = .01. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition
of a 5-week gamified quest did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’
intrinsic motivation to experience stimulation, z = -2.30, p = .021, with a large effect size
(r = .49). The median scores increased from pretest (Md = 4.67) to posttest (Md = 5.33).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for amotivation
compared to their scores during the pretest, M = -.33 (SE = 0.22), t(10) = -1.51, p = .16.
A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified quest did not
produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for amotivation, z = -1.37, p

Manson 60
= .17, with a medium effect size (r = .29). The median scores decreased from pretest (Md
= 1.33) to posttest (Md = 1.00).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for intrinsic
motivation to accomplish compared to their scores during the pretest, M = 1.06 (SE =
0.47), t(10) = 2.25, p = .05. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5week gamified quest did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ intrinsic
motivation to accomplish, z = -1.961, p = .05, with a medium effect size (r = .42). The
median scores increased from pretest (Md = 5.67) to posttest (Md = 6.67).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for introjected
regulation compared to their scores during the pretest, M =1.12 (SE = 0.47), t(10) = 2.39,
p = .038. However, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week
gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ introjected
regulation, z = -1.94, p = .052, with a medium effect size (r = .41). The median scores
increased from pretest (Md = 5.00) to posttest (Md = 6.33).
Research question 2. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’
motivation to complete additional training on library research skills and resources?
Due to the differing number of students who had completed the quest and the number of
students who started but did not complete the quest, a Mann-Whitney U test was used to
compare the means of the two independent groups to determine if there were differences
in the intrinsic motivation to participate in a gamified learning experience.

Manson 61
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
overall intrinsic motivation scores between those who started the quest (starters) and
those who finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and
finishers were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The overall intrinsic motivation
score was statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 6.00) than in starters (M =
4.50), U = 2.0, z = -2.89, p = .004 using an exact sampling distribution for U (Dinneen &
Blakesley, 1973).
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
pressure-tension scores between those who started the quest (starters) and those who
finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and finishers
were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The pressure-tension score was not
statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 2.45) than in starters (M = 3.00), U =
19.50, z = -.98, p = .33 using an exact sampling distribution for U (Dinneen & Blakesley,
1973).
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
interest-enjoyment scores between those who started the quest (starters) and those who
finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and finishers
were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The interest-enjoyment score was
statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 5.91) than in starters (M = 4.600), U =
7.00, z = -2.34, p = .019 using an exact sampling distribution for U (Dinneen &
Blakesley, 1973).
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
perceived choice scores between those who started the quest (starters) and those who

Manson 62
finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and finishers
were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The perceived choice score was not
statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 6.34) than in starters (M = 5.60), U =
15.50, z = -1.38, p = .18 using an exact sampling distribution for U (Dinneen &
Blakesley, 1973).
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
perceived competence scores between those who started the quest (starters) and those
who finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and
finishers were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The overall perceived
competence score was statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 6.23) than in
starters (M = 3.70), U = .50, z = -3.09, p = .00 using an exact sampling distribution for U
(Dinneen & Blakesley, 1973).
A Mann-Whitney U test was run to determine if there were differences in the
value-usefulness scores between those who started the quest (starters) and those who
finished the quest (finishers). Distributions of the IMI scores for starters and finishers
were similar, as assessed by visual inspection. The value-usefulness score was
statistically significantly higher in finishers (M = 5.9) than in starters (M = 4.33), U = 5.0,
z = -2.6, p = .01 using an exact sampling distribution for U (Dinneen & Blakesley, 1973).
Research question 3. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’
knowledge and self-reported perceptions of their competency in using library resources
for educational research?
A series of paired-sample t-tests for within-group comparisons was used to
determine if significant differences existed between the students’ self-reported scores on

Manson 63
the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale prior to completing the quest and posttest
scores after completing the quest. Due to the small sample size and the influence of an
outlier, a Wilcoxon signed rank test was also used to analyze the data and found similar
results.
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for overall library
anxiety compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .58 (SE = 0.19), t(10) = 3.00, p =
.01. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified quest
did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ overall library anxiety score (z
= 2.31, p = .02) with a large effect size (r = .49). The median scores increased from
pretest (Md = 5.44) to posttest (Md = 6.02).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for value of
library research compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .55 (SE = 0.30), t(10) =
1.86, p = .09. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week
gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for
library research (z =1.78, p = .08) with a medium effect size (r = .38). The median scores
increased from pretest (Md = 5.13) to posttest (Md = 5.47).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for use of
technology online compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .46 (SE = 0. 21), t(10)
= -2.22, p = .051. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week
gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for

Manson 64
use of technology online (z = 1.69, p = .09) with a medium effect size (r =.36). The
median scores increased from pretest (Md =5 .74) to posttest (Md = 6.20).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience did not elicit
a statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for value of use of
the library compared to their scores during the pretest, M = -.255 (SE = 0. 19), t(10) =
1.38, p = -.199. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week
gamified quest did not produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for
value of the use of the library (z = 1.14, p = .26) with a small effect size (r = .24). The
median scores decreased from pretest (Md = 6.80) to posttest (Md = 6.00).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for comfort in the
library compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .40 (SE = 0. 17), t(10) = 2.38, p =
.038. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified quest
did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for comfort in the library
(z = 1.96, p = .05) with a medium effect size (r = .42). The median scores increased from
pretest (Md = 6.00) to posttest (Md = 6.14).
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for use of the
library in person compared to their scores during the pretest, M = .90909 (SE = 0. 23),
t(10) = 3.91, p = .00. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week
gamified quest did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for use of
the library in person (z= 2.68, p = .01) with a large effect size (r = .57). The median
scores increased from pretest (Md = 4.87) to posttest (Md = 5.78).

Manson 65
Paired t-tests showed participation in a gamified learning experience elicited a
statistically significant improvement in students’ self-reported scores for library staff
anxiety compared to their scores during the pretest, M = 1. 38 (SE = 0.37), t(10) = 3.69, p
= .00. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition of a 5-week gamified quest
did produce a significant change in the doctoral students’ scores for library staff (z = 2.5,
p = .012) with a large effect size (r =.53). The median scores increased from pretest (Md
= 4.86) to posttest (Md = 6.29).
Summary
Both the paired-samples t-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed the addition
of a 5-week gamified quest did not produce a significant change in doctoral students’
self-determination index or academic motivation (z = 1.51, p = 0.13). The formula
provided for the Academic Motivation index produced a score of -18 (very little selfdetermination) to +18 (very high self-determination) and the authors noted most people
who have been tested average around a score of 10 (Buckley & Doyle, 2016). The
doctoral students tested in the current study showed pretest scores ranging from 6.72 to
11.86 with a mean of 8.57 and posttest scores ranging from 6.85 to 12.13 with a mean of
10.14, so while academic motivation improved after the introduction of a gamified
learning experience, the improvement was not statistically significant.
The paired-samples t-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test also showed the addition
of a 5-week gamified quest did produce a significant change in doctoral students’ overall
self-reported scores on the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale (z = -2.31, p = .021).
Significant areas of change included those involving the physical use of the library:

Manson 66
comfort with the library (p = .038), use of the library in person (p = .003), and comfort
with the library staff (p = .004), each with a large effect size.
Finally, the Mann-Whitney U test showed the intrinsic motivation to participate
the gamified quest was statistically different in those that started the quest and those that
finished. The overall intrinsic motivation score was higher in those that completed the
quest. Those that finished also reported a higher internal drive in interest and enjoyment
while doing the activities of the quest, their perceived competence, and the value and
usefulness of the quest.
This chapter contained statistical analysis of data collected and statistical results
for each research question based on these analyses. In Chapter V, the researcher will
further summarize and provide discussion of the findings, draw conclusions based on
these findings, and suggest implications for the use of gamification in increasing adult
motivation and enhancing interactions with library staff and facilities. Recommendations
for future research will also be provided.

Manson 67

Chapter V
Summary, Conclusions, Implications, and Recommendations
The purpose of this quantitative study was to determine whether adding
gamification to a doctoral level class would improve 1) students’ self-reported feelings of
motivation, competency, and engagement and 2) students’ knowledge of the library
resources available to complete research. Thirty-one currently enrolled doctoral students
at one university were invited to participate in a self-directed out-of-classroom gamified
learning experience. Nineteen students participated in the online quest and were
surveyed using a pretest/posttest design. In this chapter, the researcher interprets the
results of the surveys, addresses limitations and barriers of the quest, provides qualitative
feedback from students participating in the quest, discusses implications for the use of an
online gamified experience at a research library, and suggests recommendations for
further study.
Summary of the Study
Thirty-one doctoral students in education at one university were solicited to
participate in a research study where they were invited to enroll in an online gamified
quest. The quest (titled Becoming an Agent of N.E.R.D.S.) was designed to provide
information and activities that would assist students in preparing for extensive library
research. Nineteen students participated; 11 completed the self-directed 5-week out-ofclassroom experience. All invited participants were sent links to the pretest survey.
Once the student completed the pretest survey, he or she was then given instructions to

Manson 68
enroll in the online quest. After completion of the quest, students were sent a link to the
posttest survey. After 5-weeks, the quest closed and those students who had enrolled but
not completed the quest were sent a follow-up questionnaire to ascertain their reasons for
non-completion.
The pretest surveys consisted of questions from the Multidimensional Library
Anxiety scale (MLAS) and the Academic Motivation scale (AMA). The posttest surveys
included the MLAS, the AMA, and added the Intrinsic Motivation Index. Data collected
from the pretest/posttest surveys were analyzed with IBM SPSS initially using a paired
samples t-test, but upon discovering the influence of an outlier, the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test was used and provided similar results. To compare the means of the students who
completed the quest and those who had not, a Mann-Whitney U test was performed rather
than the independent samples t-test, again due to the presence of the influence of an
outlier.
Brief overview of the problem. One of the most significant challenges of
doctoral students is overcoming library anxiety to conduct the research needed to
complete the dissertation (Bair & Haworth, 2004; Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1999). As adult
learners, doctoral students are highly motivated to succeed, yet without formalized
interaction or a structured classroom experience that demands accountability with
deadlines and small projects, doctoral students may become overwhelmed at the thought
of completing the dissertation. Whether from fear, uncertainty, or perfectionism, failure
to complete the research and/or dissertation takes a toll on the student, the faculty, and
the institution (Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1998).

Manson 69
Purpose statement and research questions. The purpose of the current study
was to determine whether adding gamification to a doctoral level class would improve 1)
students’ self-reported feelings of motivation, competency, and engagement, and 2)
knowledge of the library resources available to complete research. Three research
questions guided the study:
1. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ perceptions of their
level of engagement with their doctoral education?
2. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ motivation to
complete additional training on library research skills and resources?
3. Will the addition of game mechanics improve students’ knowledge and selfreported perceptions of their competency in using library resources for
educational research?
Review of the study design. Doctoral students from one university were selected
to participate and enroll in an online gamified learning experience. The students who
volunteered to participate in the research study were asked to complete a pretest which
included questions from the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale and the Academic
Motivation scale. Once the pretest was completed, students were instructed to log into an
online learning module and were given a code to enroll in an online class. Once enrolled
in the online class, students were given a series of in-game quests and side-quests to
complete in order to advance to the next level and complete the overall quest.
The in-game quests and side-quests were activities designed to enhance the
students’ research ability and included opportunities to practice skills needed to complete
doctoral research and writing. Once a student completed the online game, they were

Manson 70
provided a link to complete a posttest survey which included the Intrinsic Motivation
Index as well as the Library Anxiety scale and the Academic Motivation Index. The selfdirected game was expected to coincide with summer school classes at one university and
was made available for a 5-week period. After three weeks the researcher provided a gift
card incentive to those reaching level three in the gamified learning environment and an
additional gift card for those completing the posttest.
Limitations found during the study. The platform used for the quest was a free
resource available for teachers (BlueRabbit.io) and came recommended; however,
numerous limitations faced the researcher as the quest was created. One of the
limitations was the inability to provide feedback to the players/students as they
participated in the quest. This limitation was substantial because providing immediate,
meaningful feedback is considered one of the greatest assets of gamification in education,
and with fast feedback, teachers can use that feedback to refine interactions or motivate
students (Menezes & De Bortolli, 2016).
If the quest has been a combination of face-to-face and online interactions timely
in-game feedback could have been provided, but as a stand-alone online gamified
learning experience, the lack of immediate feedback may have hindered some students’
progress in the game. In fact one of the students who did not complete the quest stated,
“I couldn’t figure out how to navigate the game easily” and “I did find the site a little
cumbersome.” McGonigal (2011) points out that “if the goal is truly compelling, and if
the feedback is motivating enough, we will keep wrestling with the game’s limitations—
creatively, sincerely, and enthusiastically—for a very long time” (p. 27).

Manson 71
As gamification evolves, free or low-cost platforms for teachers and researchers
should become more accessible. Upgrades to the BlueRabbit platform were announced
during the research period which would have made that platform easier to use and might
have remedied some of the issues. Additional research should include a highly intuitive
user-friendly platform that allows for timely feedback in the platform used.
Another limitation was the quest was conceived as an activity where students
would be incentivized (through leaderboards and badges) to check-in daily, thus adding
limited additional outside work to progress through the quest. However, several students
reported doing the quest over a period of one to three days, rather than taking the
assignments in small daily bites and completing the quest during the 5-week period and
the path it was assumed students would follow.
Finally, working with adult learners during the short summer term proved a
greater limitation than initially thought. While many of the participants were classroom
educators or involved in the school system, the summer months of June and July are seen
as a summer break, and they reported using this time to catch up on school, family/family
vacations, and prepare for the upcoming school year. Adding the quest to their already
overflowing list of things to do meant that for some, something else would have to suffer.
The short time frame seemed to be conducive to the study and the motivation to complete
the quest, but future researchers should take into consideration the time of year and the
activities required before soliciting volunteers.
Summary of major findings. Increases were found in 17 of the 21 when the
means were compared from the components of all three scales, Academic Motivation
scale (AMS), Intrinsic Motivation Index (IMI) and the Multidimensional Library Anxiety

Manson 72
scale (MLAS). As shown in Figure 1, eleven of the increases in the mean scores were
statistically significant (p < .05) suggesting the use of a gamified learning environment
might provide some assistance and guidance for graduate and other students struggling
with library anxiety.

MLAS LibResearch
MLAS ComfortLib
Academic Motivation Scale
AMS Identification
AMS IntrinsicAccomp
IMI Pressure_tension
IMI Percieved_competence

MLAS TechOnline
MLAS LibInperson
AMS Regulation
AMS Intrinsic
AMS IntrojectedReg
IMI Interest_enjoyment
IMI Value_usefulness

0.009

0.00001

0.18
0.019

0.002

.052

.172
.050

.005

.021

.131
.012

.007

.092

.050

.021

.075

.198

.256

.260

0.377

Library Anxiety Scale
MLAS ValueLib
MLAS LibStaff
AMS Know
AMS Ammotivation
Intrinsic Motivation Index
IMI Percieved_choice

1

Figure 1. Tests of significance.
The individual mean scores that found significance (p < .05) and answered the
research questions included:
LAS: Overall library anxiety, comfort with library, use of library in person, and
comfort with library staff, which showed the addition of game mechanics
improved students’ knowledge and self-reported perceptions of their competency
in using library resources for educational research.

Manson 73
AMS: Academic motivation-self regulation, academic motivation-intrinsic, and
academic motivation-intrinsic accomplishment, which although improved
significantly individually did not significantly improve the overall perceptions of
their level of engagement with their doctoral education.
IMI: Intrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation-interest and enjoyment, intrinsic
motivation-perceived competence, and intrinsic motivation-value and usefulness
which showed the addition of game mechanized improved students’ motivation to
complete additional training on library research skills and resources.
The data showed the introduction of an online out-of-classroom gamified learning
experience provided some effect on doctoral student motivation and library anxiety. In
looking at the Academic Motivation scale, the scores of seven students increased from
.07 to 5.14 points (average of 3.73 points), but the AMS scores of four students
decreased. Three experienced a decrease of less than one point, with an outlier
experiencing a decrease of 2.93 points. So while the addition of game mechanics
improved 64% of students’ scores of perceptions of self-reported levels of engagement
with their doctoral education, with many students increasing their Academic Motivation
scores by a point or more, the overall effect was not statistically significant.
Intrinsic motivation was measured by the Intrinsic Motivation Index and given to
students only after attempting or completing the quest. Theory would suggest an
individual motivated to complete a task would score higher on a motivational scale than
one who did not complete the task; therefore, it may seem somewhat overstated to show
the difference in the means of the students who completed the quest was higher than the
means of those who did not finish, but more notably, that difference is statistically

Manson 74
significant. As McGonigal (2011) says, “Games don’t fuel our appetite for extrinsic
reward: they don’t pay us, they don’t advance our careers, and they don’t help us
accumulate luxury goods. Instead, games enrich us with intrinsic rewards” (p. 50).
Also, as could be expected, statistical significance was found in the difference
between the means for interest and enjoyment, competence, and value of the activity.
There were only slight differences between means for students’ perceived choice and
pressure-tension, so the data showed the addition of game mechanics improved students’
motivation to complete additional training on library research skills and resources when
those students were engaged with the quest. Those that enrolled participated and
completed the quest recorded higher intrinsically motivated scores than those that did not.
When looking at the data analysis for the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale
MLAS), significance was found in the changes between the pretest/posttest scores for the
overall means. Also, the mean scores for comfort with the library as a physical space, the
value of using the library in person, and comfort with the interactions with the library
staff also increased with statistical significance. With increases in the means of five out
of six of the components of the MLAS it can also be determined that the addition of game
mechanics show improvement in students’ knowledge and self-reported perceptions of
their competency in using library resources for educational research. Carlile (2007)
reported students feel shame when they perceive their library skills are inadequate and
are fearful of being exposed when asking a librarian for help; therefore, they struggle
with library anxiety. The findings showed gamification improved the self-reported
means of the scores on the Library Anxiety scale and thus could reduce library anxiety in
these graduate students.

Manson 75
Conclusions
The introduction of the gamified learning experience, the quest, showed varying
degrees of effectiveness in helping improve students’ feelings of motivation, competency,
engagement, knowledge. Quantitative data from surveys showed areas of statistical
significance. In addition, qualitative data from student responses to assignments or
prompts during the quest provided insights into students’ perceptions of the usefulness of
some of the quest activities as shown in Appendix D. Comments posted during the quest
found many of the activities helpful and included these statements:
“Perfect information for my dissertation topic. These for sure are going to be on
my top qualitative data analysis software . . . thank you for this info.”
“Love the sections of search engines and will definitely use these resources. I
bookmarked both of them.”
“Television Broadcast or Series Episode Citation was pretty challenging. This is
a great resource.”
“This is a good resource and could be used with our Freshman Seminar class.”
“I have signed up for Inter-Library Loan but never used it before . . . thank you
for the reminder.”
“I had no idea we could do this with RefWorks. I would like to know where to
get this video for further references.”
Students who completed the quest found value in many of the activities and were
introduced to resources previously unknown to them. Those students progressed quickly
through the game and reached higher levels than those who did not. Furthermore, as seen
in Table 6, the means of most scores between the pretests and the posttests increased.

Manson 76
Table 6
Participant Information
Pre
Gender

Quest

Mid

Post

Change

Age
LAS

AMA

Level

Score

IMI

LAS

AMA

IMI

LAS

AMA

1

F

29

5.59

8.96

4

12450

5.96

10.67

6.22

0.36

1.71

2

F

38

5.51

2.96

4

8580

5.85

7.32

5.89

0.34

4.36

3

F

33

5.64

7.97

6

18900

5.78

10.17

4.00

0.14

2.19

4

F

30

5.47

12.69

5

10450

6.29

12.13

6.67

0.82

-0.57

5

F

51

5.81

8.89

4

9140

6.28

12.00

6.00

0.47

3.11

6

F

30

6.48

10.60

5

14780

6.58

10.67

5.89

0.10

0.07

7

F

28

5.86

1.68

4

11600

5.34

6.85

6.22

-0.52

5.17

8

F

44

4.84

11.86

4

11600

5.86

8.93

6.22

1.02

-2.93

9

F

27

5.26

9.35

6

17350

6.29

9.15

4.67

1.03

-0.19

10

F

30

4.43

12.60

7

21950

5.76

11.74

6.89

1.33

-0.86

11

F

28

4.94

6.72

4

14750

6.18

11.92

6.44

1.24

5.19

12

M

37

5.5

9.93

2

1650

2.78

13

F

38

5.11

9.86

2

2450

3.44

14

F

41

5.31

11.22

2

2450

4.44

15

M

49

5.29

10.17

2

1650

16

F

70

5.05

6.43

2

1650

17

F

48

5.6

10.13

2

1600

18

F

45

5.72

14.67

2

1650

19

F

42

5.48

4.28

2

2450

20

F

47

5.36

x

0

21

F

47

5.62

x

0

5.89

5.78

Manson 77
However, as could be expected, those students who did not finish the quest did
not find the activity useful. Those students stated barriers to completion were time,
learning how to navigate the quest, feeling overwhelmed during the summer, and having
too many other obligations to focus on an additional activity as shown in Appendix E.
As Wigfield and Cambria (2010) noted when students found little value or reason to do
an activity they may not choose to pursue it, even if they might be successful. One of the
non-completers stated, “I’m pretty confident about my library skills,” so the incentive to
finish the quest and the opportunity to receive gift cards was not enough enticement to
continue. Expectancy-value theory asks “How much do I really want to do this and is it
worth the time spent?” (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). For the students who did not finish
the quest, with all of the reported obstacles and barrier they faced during the summer, the
gamified learning experience was not worth it.
With a minimal number of males enrolled in the Doctor of Education program,
gender did not factor in the data, but age/generational group did which may hold some
implications for further use or research. In reviewing the age ranges of participants,
students were grouped into three generations as defined by Howe and Strauss (2007):
Baby Boom Generation (1943-1960), Generation X (1961-1981), Millennial Generation
(1982-2004). In the group of participants Generation X made up the largest group but
only four completed the quest versus all seven of the students who are classified as
Millennial students finished the quest to completion as shown in Table 7.

Manson 78
Table 7
Impact of Age on Participation
Generation
Participant age ranges

Millennial Generation X

Baby Boomer

27-33

37-51

70

Number of participants in group

7

13

1

% of total participation

33

62

5

# of participants completing game

7

4

0

Game completion (% of total)

64

36

0

Game completion (% of generation)

100

31

0

Given that admission requirements to enter a doctoral program usually stipulate
two to three years of experience post master’s degree, one would not be surprised to find
a large number of students considered Generation X (age 36-56). However, as one looks
to the future, students regarded as part of the Millennial Generation will continue to
enroll in advanced degree programs, and gamification might be a way to interact with
those students in a more positive manner than their peers who are considered Generation
X or Baby Boomers.
As discussed in Chapter I, the small sample size was a limitation of the study and
affected the methods used to analyze the data. The presence of an outlier had a greater
influence on the decision to use parametric or nonparametric tests, however, when both
types of tests were run, the results were similar, and significance was found in the same
independent variables, but at slightly differing strengths. Time constraints and
skepticism also affected the study due to the timing of the research study and the addition
of what was perceived by some as extra work. When teachers and students report back to

Manson 79
school in August, there is much work to be done in July to prepare for their arrival. The
second summer session of a summer school calendar can be an especially busy time.
When asked, one student who had not completed the quest stated, “With the time
constraints of a full-time job, doctoral course load, and parenting, spending the amount of
time required for this project was not possible.” The sentiments of not enough time, too
much to do, too difficult to learn, and not worth the time spent, may have also been
reasons for lack of volunteer participation. Another student who had started the quest but
did not complete it said, “I had so much going on, I forgot to go back to it after I had
started.” Out of 40 doctoral students approached, 31 agreed to participate and submitted
the IRB approved informed consent waivers; however, in the end, only 19 participants
enrolled in the gamified quest, and 11 played through to completion.
The statistical findings also mirrored the theoretical foundation of the study. As
with the expectancy-value theory, when students found value in the quest they became
engaged and followed through to completion (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Adult learners
who found value in the acquisition of knowledge from the quest also continued through
to completion. In his theories on andragogy, Knowles (1973) understood that adult
learners needed to make connections to the materials taught rather than just being fed the
information. As mentioned in the comments, several students were invested in the
materials and how it could be applied to their next steps. “This (information) will be
crucial when writing my dissertation. I already feel overwhelmed with how big the task
seems. I think it is a helpful tip to focus on one piece at a time.” “I don’t have any
(references) on RefWorks, but now I know I should get some in.”

Manson 80
Knowles (1973, 1984) also stated as adults mature, motivation moves from
external influences to internal influences. Students who completed the quest had higher
means on the Intrinsic Motivation Index than those that did not complete the quest.
When the students who did not complete the quest were asked about the influence of a
gift card, four out of five stated it did not affect their desire to complete the quest. The
external motivation of a $10 Starbucks card showed no influence. In fact, of the 11
students who completed the quest and received gift cards, eight of the gift cards remain
unopened three weeks after delivery.
Implications for Practice
In looking at the means for the scores on the Multidimensional Library Anxiety
scale, there are several items to note that might hold value for future use of gamification
in a library setting. First, the three lowest means for overall library anxiety all completed
the quest and their overall mean score increased by at least one point (Table 7-Participant
Information), suggesting for those with self-reported library anxiety the use of a gamified
learning experience might be of value to improve their confidence and feelings of
competency when using the library. The gamified learning experience also showed
improvement in all of the mean scores of the participants who completed the quest,
except for one student whose mean score decreased .52 points.
There is a wealth of information available from other university libraries that
could assist in creating a gamified experience (Bigdeli et al., 2016; Broussard, 2012;
Leach & Sugarman, 2005; Smale, 2011; Young, 2016). Several of the assignments (ingame quests and side quests) in the quest were activities created by other university
library staff, so university library staff have opportunities to create, borrow, and

Manson 81
collaborate, and as Kim (2015) points out, use gamification to engage and motivate
students in the library experience, library instruction, or library orientation.
In a review of literature and best practices, Broussard (2012) found 11 games
online to be shared with other libraries and librarians (17 total games mentioned in the
literature). From trivia games to casual games to social games, all were designed with
active learning in mind, sound learning objectives, fast feedback, and the ability to
engage the learner in a digital environment. Kim (2012) also suggests two approaches
for applying gamification in the library:
1. The ultimate goal can be simply having fun in some library-related context.
There is nothing wrong with this, and, at minimum, it will make the library a
more friendly and interesting place to patrons.
2. Or, we can use game dynamics to transform a more serious task or project
(such as learning how to cite research literature for a term paper) into
something less painful and even enjoyable. (p. 468)
While doing the quest, students were exposed to information in a variety of
formats—videos, web pages, and games created by other university librarians—among
them APA tic-tac-toe, plagiarism (Goblin Threat to Academic Integrity), and citation
jumble. One of the comments left on Goblin Threat to Academic Integrity quest was:
“This was a fun game . . . I learned that plagiarism is also turning in a paper for two
courses, even though I wrote it. Glad I haven’t done that because I keep changing my
subject/topic for every class.”
The second item of note was the statistical significance in the increase in the
means of the scores of the Multidimensional Library Anxiety scale (from pretest to

Manson 82
posttest). Increased scores were found in physical use of the library (comfort with the
library as a physical place, perceived value of using the library in person and interaction
with the library staff) while most of the respondents (71%) stated they frequented the
library in person once a month or less (n = 15). There was no significant difference in the
comfort with technology and online access, which could be expected as 85% of
respondents stated they were frequent users of the library online (n = 18). It is
understandable then the greater number of students who report being tech savvy also
report little change in the overall means for technology and online usage. Table 8 shows
the frequency of library use–in person and online.
Table 8
Library Usage
#

Answer

%

Count

Q6 - On average, how often do you use the library in person?
1 One or more times per week

14.29

3

2 Once every 2-3 weeks

14.29

3

3 Once a month

19.05

4

4 Once every 2-3 months

19.05

4

5 One or fewer times per semester

33.33

7

100.00

21

1 One or more times per week

61.90

13

2 Once every 2-3 weeks

23.81

5

3 Once a month

4.76

1

4 Once every 2-3 months

4.76

1

5 One or fewer times per semester

4.76

1

100.00

21

Total
Q7 - On average, how often do you use the library online?

Total

Manson 83
If students reported infrequent use of the library in person and limited engagement
with library staff then it could be assumed the interaction with staff might be a
contributing factor in library anxiety; therefore the use of gamification that includes
positive interactions with library staff should increase both student and staff engagement,
especially as shown in this study. Carlile (2007) suggests:
library anxiety is not the only reason for low use of academic libraries, of
course, but bringing elements of play and games into the library may help
to engage users, especially current low users of library services, with
library resources and to help them see the library as a more approachable
environment. This is especially as personal interaction appears to be the
central component of reduction strategies and suggestions aimed at
alleviating students’ fears of the academic library. (p. 138)
Despite the online play of the quest, students who participated in the quest showed an
improvement in the personal interaction−MLAS component “LibStaff”−at a statistically
significant level.
Recommendations for Future Research
As gamification is seen more and more in the classroom and other educational
settings (Bruder, 2015), additional research needs to be carried out so gamification can
become an educational strategy, not just a passing fad. As Bruder points out “18% of
teachers use games daily and 95% use digital games created specifically for educational
use” (p. 57). This interactive engagement is created for a new style of learner, because as
Bleed (2005) notes “by age 21, the average student will have spent 10,000 hours on video

Manson 84
games; sent or received 200,000 e-mails; talked for 10,000 hours on a cell phone; and
read for under 5,000 hours” (p. 3).
For these new generations of learners access to technology is sometimes seen as
essential as food and water. Young (2016) cites a report showing college students
believe online search engines are more effective than libraries for “speed, convenience,
and reliability, yet 43% feel that the library sources contain better information” (p. 3), so
there is still a need for library instruction. Effective use of the library is more about
critical thinking, learning processes, and researching skills than memorizing content
(Broussard, 2012); or as Margino (2013) states, “game-based learning in libraries
presents a solution to facilitating students’ engagement with instruction content, selfdiscovery of information, and learning through trial and error” (p. 334).
If gamification showed improvement with adult learners or doctoral students’
comfort and engagement with the library, further study could investigate whether the
same holds true for a younger generation of students. Can the use of a virtual game
create a connection with a physical space? The current research results showed this
conundrum could be solved with gamification. In this study, the doctoral students
participating in an online library research game improved their library anxiety scores as
related to the physical use of the library facilities and resources. Additional areas for
further research include investigating whether the findings hold true for a larger group of
students or different groups of students based on age, gender, level of education, or
degree sought (liberal arts/business/science).
Students chosen for this study were highly motivated, above-average adult
learners, driven to continue their education to the highest level. As doctoral students,

Manson 85
they saw the need to understand and use library resources. Additional research could
focus on the effect of library gamification with younger students, first-time freshmen, or
first-generation college students to whom researching in an academic college library
could be perceived as challenging.
The study showed intrinsic motivation was greater for those completing the quest,
therefore, future research could explore the role that incentives play in motivation.
Research could compare external incentives (gift cards, points, badges) to internal
incentives (the need to acquire knowledge or mastery). Pink (2009) believes mastery and
purpose along with autonomy drive motivation, so future research could examine those
feeling as they relate to a gamified learning experience.
Library staff could also look at specific objectives for further research. A
gamified learning experience could be used for a themed week, library introduction,
orientation for new researchers, or other specific learning objectives. Research could
determine levels of engagement and whether or not that engagement increases knowledge
or academic skill.
Finally, the researcher believed two limitations might have affected the study and
if compensated for, could potentially provide different levels of engagement–the platform
used and the inability to provide feedback through that platform. The researcher
reviewed three gamified classroom sites and despite the basic design of the platform, the
researcher perceived the platform chosen was the best fit for the needs of the study.
However, one student commented, “I did find the site a little cumbersome. I didn’t feel
as if I was in a gaming environment.”

Manson 86
The other main limitation found was overcoming the difficulties of using a new
platform which did not provide students with immediate feedback. Both Knowles (1984)
when discussing adult learners and Kapp (2012) when discussing gamification cite the
importance of immediate feedback on learners’ motivation. Scholarly research could be
done to compare different platforms for gamification and understanding the results that
differing platforms might yield. For example, a researcher might ask if an online
gamified experience is more engaging than an on-campus gamified course, or would a
slicker, more user-friendly interface provide greater interaction. Would a mix of online
and in-person activities provide different results than a strictly online gamified learning
environment?
Concluding Remarks
In the current study, the researcher investigated whether adding gamification
would improve students’ feelings of motivation, competency, and engagement and if
adult learners enrolled in a gamified learning experience would improve feelings of
competence, comfort, and confidence in understanding the library resources available to
complete research required at a doctoral level. The students who participated in the
online quest found improvement in almost all areas surveyed. Additionally, qualitative
data and in-game remarks from the participants supported those findings. There is value
shown in the academic and intrinsic motivation of adult learners to improve their
understanding of library resources. As Walsh (2014) pointed out, correlation has been
seen between use of library resources and positive student outcomes.
Those same positive outcomes for understanding complex ideas were also seen in
research cited by Buckley and Doyle (2016) and Quinney et al. (2010). Their research

Manson 87
used gamification to engage learners in difficult but meaningful concepts (Buckley &
Doyle, 2016; Quinney et al., 2010), and just as in the current study on adult learners,
found positive and significant changes in the means for motivation and engagement. The
doctoral students in this study were also similar to the graduate students studied by
Hegarty (2010) and Templeton (2016). Hegarty (2010) also found no significant
difference in the academic motivation of graduate students and stated this lack of change
could be that the sample chosen was already highly motivated, so any changes would be
minimal. But while Hegarty found a lack of intrinsic motivation with his population of
graduate students, both the current research study and Templeton (2016) found support
for adult learning theory in the intrinsic motivation graduate students had to continue
learning and applying that knowledge to a goal. Through the gamified quest, participants
were able to apply what they learned in each level of the quest to their current and future
research projects, and by doing so, they gained a sense of comfort and competence in
using library resources.
Although gamification is a growing trend in education, business, and industry
(Attali & Arieli-Attali, 2015; Burke, 2014), there are opportunities for gamification to be
used in library settings. Kim (2015) pointed out “libraries are naturally interested in
using gamification of the purpose of improving the pedagogical efficacy of library
instruction as well as both raising library patron awareness of available library services
and resources and promoting their use” (p. 23). Given the time and resources, the use of
a gamified learning experience could assist students (both undergraduate and graduate) in
navigating through the library systems required to produce successful scholarly research
and writing.