The Wicked Problem of Documenting Counterinsurgencies:
A case study of US province reports written during the Vietnam War

A Dissertation presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College School of Library and Information Science

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

By Eliot Wilczek, AB, MS, MA


Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited: 17-1515.

Abstract

Wicked problems are societal problems that are complex, vitally important, ill-defined, and
whose resolution is based on political judgment. Using a historical case study, this dissertation
aims to examine the relationship between how institutions understand and document wicked
problems and how wicked problems can be understood as recordkeeping challenges. The case
study focuses on the province report, a monthly narrative produced by US province advisory
teams during the Vietnam War. A combination of historical research methods, recordkeeping
research in the tradition of the modern diplomatic, and content analysis are used to investigate
this case study.
This dissertation revolves around two core themes: 1) wicked problems as recordkeeping
challenges and 2) institutional recordkeeping effectiveness. Within the first theme, findings
demonstrate that: 1) creating thick description at scale is one of the fundamental challenges of
describing and defining wicked problems; 2) individuals and recordkeeping rules come to the
fore in shaping the content of institutional records in different circumstances; and 3) institutions
use their recordkeeping practices to normalize wicked problems into familiar concepts. The
second theme, institutional recordkeeping effectiveness, encapsulates findings that demonstrate:
1) the key role that thoughtful analysis and concise, efficient, and timely records creation play in
documenting wicked problems; and 2) the risk to institutions that careful and thoughtful
recordkeeping becomes a burdensome task.
The significant of this dissertation is its placement of archival and information science at
the center of the effort to understand and address wicked problems by demonstrating how
grappling with wicked problems is, to a great extent, a recordkeeping act. This dissertation also
makes a significant contribution to the archival literature by framing organizational
recordkeeping as a series of tradeoffs, compromises, and struggles. This framework can facilitate
a richer understanding of the complexities that members of an organization face when
documenting dynamic and multifaceted environments.

Chapter One
Introduction

Background
We live in a measured age. Many organizations, across a diverse array of industries, have
become keenly interested in constructing measurements in order to understand the effectiveness
of processes, tools, programs, and people; the outcomes that they generate; and the nature of the
environments in which they operate. With increasingly tight constraints on education budgets,
for example, government officials, education professionals, and other stakeholders have placed a
strong emphasis on measuring the quality of student learning outcomes and the effectiveness of
educational programs. Beyond the field of education, this work, known as assessment and
evaluation, plays an important role in many other industries, including health care, law
enforcement, international aid and development, social services, and the military.
Researchers and practitioners are often grappling with large, difficult, and seemingly
intractable problems such as poverty, climate change, poor education systems, uneven
distribution of health care, and insurgencies. In their landmark 1973 article, design theorist Horst
Rittel and urban designer Melvin Webber characterized these types of problems as wicked
problems. They used this term to define societal problems that are complex, vitally important, illdefined, and which “rely upon elusive political judgment for resolution.” 1 Articulating the nature
of these problems is often just as difficult and politically contested as finding and implementing
solutions. Many organizations use assessment and evaluation methodologies to gain an
understanding of the nature of problems and effectiveness of solutions. These efforts, however,
are often confounded because the problems are ill-defined, making it challenging to identify

1

Horst W. J. Rittel and Melvin M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” Policy
Sciences 4 (1973): 160.

3

metrics that can yield meaningful insights. This is a struggle in many fields, including design,
urban planning, health care, and environmental science, leading researchers and practitioners to
begin using wicked problems as a frame for conceptualizing the challenges of addressing illdefined problems. 2
For example, recent engagements of the United States in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars
provide examples of the challenges of measuring ill-defined, or wicked, problems. Part of the
new generation of counterinsurgency (COIN) literature from the past decade has focused on
developing assessment and evaluation methods that attempt to accurately depict the state of
conflicts and measure the effectiveness of counterinsurgency operations. 3 COIN warfare is an
extremely tangled and dynamic type of conflict that involves an array of military, political,
social, religious, economic, and technological factors. 4 Insurgencies, in fact, can be understood
as a type of wicked problem. 5

2

Discussions about wicked problems in a wide array of professional literatures are discussed in Chapter
Two.
3 A few significant works on COIN assessment and evaluation include Ben Connable, “Embracing the
Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation,
2012); Stephen Downes-Martin, “Operations Assessment in Afghanistan Is Broken: What Is to Be
Done?,” Naval War College Review 64, no. 4 (Autumn 2011): 103–25; Jonathan Schroden, “Why
Operations Assessments Fail: It’s Not Just the Metrics,” Naval War College Review 64, no. 4 (Autumn
2011): 89–102; David Kilcullen, Counterinsurgency (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 51–76;
Jason Campbell, Michael O’Hanlon, and Jeremy Shapiro, “How to Measure the War,” Policy Review 157
(November 2009): 15–30; Anthony Cordesman, “The Uncertain ‘Metrics’ of Afghanistan (and Iraq)”
(Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 18, 2007).
4 The US Department of Defense defines counterinsurgencies as “comprehensive civilian and military
efforts designed to simultaneously defeat and contain insurgency and address its root causes.”
“Counterinsurgency,” Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint
Publication 1-02 (Washington DC: Department of Defense, November 8, 2010), 53. In turn the Defense
Department defines insurgency as “The organized use of subversion and violence to seize, nullify, or
challenge political control of a region.” “Insurgency,” Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and
Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02 (Washington DC: Department of Defense, November 8, 2010),
121.
5 Connable, “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 27–29; T. C.
Greenwood and Thomas X. Hammes, “War Planning for Wicked Problems: Where Joint Doctrine Fails,”
Armed Forces Journal, December 2009, http://armedforcesjournal.com/article/2009/12/4252237;

4

After relevant metrics for a counterinsurgency campaign such as number of insurgent
attacks, number of schools opened, or levels of trade in marketplaces are identified, the
interpretation of these measurements remains a critical aspect of COIN assessment. For example,
does a drop in the number of attacks on a military outpost mean that the local insurgent forces
have been degraded? Or does it mean that the outpost has become irrelevant to the insurgents and
it no longer hinders their operations? Are there other explanations for a decline in the number of
attacks? If an agile enemy is able to shift goals and tactics frequently, how should the creators
and users of metrics and assessments respond, document, and recalibrate in the face of these
dynamic challenges?
Understanding how the US military has conceptualized COIN conflicts has played a
critical role in framing how the US military and civilian leadership assesses these wars.
Measuring and assessing counterinsurgency warfare is part of the process of making sense of
these conflicts. Documenting war requires the action of normalizing the conflict so a war can fit
within the framework of assumptions that a nation brings to an armed conflict. The complex
network of organizations, which comprise the US military and civilian leadership, have held
many countervailing viewpoints and understandings of the hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan.
These viewpoints are dynamic and have changed over time. While the documentation and
measurements of these wars are shaped by and reinforce existing, brought assumptions, they can
also help to challenge and modify those assumptions.
Measuring the state of insurgencies and effectiveness of counterinsurgency campaigns
can also be examined within a framework of recordkeeping behavior. This is used as an umbrella
term to describe the study of the processes, technologies, infrastructures, cultures, assumptions,

Franklin D. Kramer, “Irregular Conflict and the Wicked Problem Dilemma: Strategies of Imperfection,”
Prism 2, no. 3 (2011): 75–100.

5

and other factors involved in individuals, institutions, and communities creating, managing,
protecting, sharing, using, and destroying records in order to support their activities, values, and
interests. 6 For this dissertation I use two definitions of records articulated by archivist Richard
Pearce-Moses. 1) “Data or information that has been fixed on some medium; that has content,
context, and structure; and that is used as an extension of human memory or to demonstrate
accountability.” 2) “Data or information in a fixed form that is created or received in the course
of individual or institutional activity and set aside (preserved) as evidence of that activity for
future reference.” 7 Gathering, synthesizing, and producing measurements in a COIN
environment for assessment and evaluation work is a recordkeeping activity because it involves
the production of data that documents activities.
This focus on assessment, evaluation, and metrics in the US military is not new. For
example, from the early 1960s through the early 1970s, the US military made use of emerging
data and systems analysis methods to evaluate the state of the Vietnam War and the effectiveness
of various programs and units involved in the conflict. This coincided with a wave of extensive
data gathering and measurement efforts during the war. 8 Since the 2004 invasion of Iraq, military
officials, civilian analysts, and policy makers have examined, with renewed intensity, the earlier

6

I have derived this definition from a wide reading of recordkeeping behavior studies, particularly:
Nancy Cochran, Andrew C. Gordon, and Merton S. Krause, “Proactive Records: Reflections on the
Village Watchman,” Knowledge: Creation, Diffusion, Utilization 2, no. 1 (September 1980): 5–18;
Elizabeth Yakel, “The Way Things Work: Procedures, Processes, and Institutional Records,” The
American Archivist 59, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 454–64; Ciaran Trace, “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply
‘What Happened’: Record Keeping in Modern Organizational Culture,” Archival Science 2, no. 1–2
(2002): 137–59; Kalpana Shankar, “Recordkeeping in the Production of Scientific Knowledge: An
Ethnographic Study,” Archival Science 4, no. 3–4 (2004): 367–82.
7 “Record,” A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology (Chicago: The Society of American
Archivists, 2005), 326.
8 For an overarching assessment of these data gathering and assessment efforts, see Gregory A. Daddis,
No Sure Victory: Measuring U.S. Army Effectiveness and Progress in the Vietnam War (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2011).

6

assessment and evaluation efforts in the Vietnam War to inform the discussion on measuring the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. 9
MACV (Military Assistance Command, Vietnam), a joint-service command that led US
combat and advisory efforts in the Vietnam War, 10 was engaged in gathering a diverse set of
measurements during the Vietnam War. 11 Most notably, American combat units measured the
destruction of North Vietnamese and insurgent forces with body counts, kill ratios, and other
combat tallies. 12 American military and civilian officials also measured an array of political,

9

Questions from officers in the Iraq War about metrics used to assess past COIN campaigns led one US
Army officer to write a dissertation and subsequent book on the US Army’s effort to measure progress in
the Vietnam War: Daddis, No Sure Victory. See also Connable, “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment
and Metrics in Counterinsurgency”; David Gayvert, “Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet
Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in Afghanistan?,” Small Wars Journal, September 8,
2010. This recent broad-based reevaluation of assessment and evaluation efforts made in the 1960s and
1970s has been part of a wider discussion about the lessons that the US should draw from the Vietnam
War, how that conflict should have informed the conduct of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and what it
should tell us about future engagements. For two accounts of the role the debate over the lessons of the
Vietnam War played in policy decisions concerning Afghanistan, see Evan Thomas and John Barry, “The
Surprising Lessons of Vietnam,” Newsweek, November 16, 2009; George Packer, “What Obama and the
Generals Are Reading,” The New Yorker Blogs, October 8, 2009,
http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/georgepacker/2009/10/what-obama-and-the-generals-arereading.html. For a study of literature comparing the Iraq War and the Vietnam war, see David Ryan and
David Fitzgerald, “Iraq and Vietnam: Endless Recurrence or Stirrings Still?,” Critical Asian Studies 41,
no. 4 (2009): 621–53. For a study of how the contested memory of the Vietnam War played a part in the
American conduct of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, see David Fitzgerald, Learning to Forget: US Army
Counterinsurgency Doctrine and Practice from Vietnam to Iraq (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2013), 109–211.
10 MACV was in operation from February 1962 to March 1973. Shelby Stanton, Vietnam Order of Battle
(Washington DC: U.S. News Books, 1981), 59–60.
11 For a study of measurement and assessment efforts undertaken by the US military and civilian
leadership during the Vietnam War, see Daddis, No Sure Victory. For a data-driven study of the Vietnam
War written by one of the key systems analysts in the Pentagon during the conflict, see Thomas C.
Thayer, War Without Fronts: The American Experience in Vietnam (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1985). For an account of the Department of Defense using data-intensive systems analysis to undertake
force planning and weapons systems development during the Vietnam War era, see Alain Enthoven and K
Wayne Smith, How Much Is Enough? Shaping the Defense Program, 1961-1969 (New York: Harper &
Row, 1971).
12 Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 78–82; James Gibson,
The Perfect War: Technowar in Vietnam (Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1986), 112–128; Andrew
Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), 196–204; Nick
Turse, Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in Vietnam (New York: Metropolitan Books,
2013), 206–208.

7

economic, and social factors during the war. MACV carried out many of these non-combat
measures through CORDS (Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support), which
was within MACV and was established by President Lyndon B. Johnson’s administration in
1967 in order to coordinate all American advising and civilian operations in Vietnam. 13
US advisors who worked with the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) and
government officials had the challenge of gathering and evaluating a wide range of factors. For
example, province advisors, who worked with province-level Government of [South] Vietnam
(GVN) officials, had to measure and assess the effectiveness of GVN politicians, civil servants,
and programs, the health of the local economy, agricultural production, the movement and
numbers of displaced persons, the strength and activities of enemy forces, and the general state
of the insurgency in their assigned provinces.
Province advisors were responsible for capturing these data and making assessments and
evaluations in a wide range of reports. The reports’ capstone document was the monthly
province report written by the US province senior advisor of each province. In this five to 15
page typewritten report, in use from November 1967 through February 1973, province senior

13

The US government subsequently renamed CORDS “Civil Operations and Rural Development
Support.” For historical overviews of CORDS see Thomas W. Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification
Support (Washington DC: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1982); Richard Hunt,
Pacification: The American Struggle for Vietnam’s Hearts and Minds (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1995); Dale Andrade and James H. Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix: Counterinsurgency Lessons from
Vietnam for the Future,” Military Review 86, no. 2 (April 2006): 9–23; Mandy Honn et al., “A Legacy
from Vietnam: Lessons from CORDS,” InterAgency Journal 2, no. 2 (Summer 2011): 41–50. For
reflections from CORDS’ first director, see Robert Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing: Institutional
Constraints on U.S.-GVN Performance in Vietnam (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1972), later
published as Robert Komer, Bureaucracy at War: U.S. Performance in the Vietnam Conflict (Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1986). The GVN and US divided the 44 provinces of South Vietnam into four
regions for military and administrative purposes. Moving from north to south along the length of South
Vietnam, the I Corps had five provinces, the II Corps had 12 provinces, the III Corps had 11 provinces,
and the IV Corps had 16 provinces. Over the course of the war, the US and GVN used different terms to
refer these regions, including Tactical Combat Zones, Regional Commands, and Corps. For the sake of
simplicity, I will refer to these regions as corps throughout the dissertation. The structure of the corps will
be discussed in more detail in Chapter Four.

8

advisors had to encapsulate the state of the conflict and the effectiveness of the provincial
government and its programs.
The province report provides an illuminating example of record creators situated within a
large organization using a recordkeeping tool to help document a wicked problem. The monthly
province report serves as the core object of study for this dissertation. Studying the report as a
phenomenon in its own right, rather than using it as a mere vehicle to get at its content, provides
a case study that yields insights into recordkeeping behavior, within the context of organizations
attempting to address wicked problems. Conversely, this study also affords the opportunity to
explore how wicked problems can be understood as recordkeeping challenges.

Problem Statement
As will be discussed in Chapter Two, the literature on wicked problems is primarily populated
with works that can be roughly grouped into three categories: those that focus on the nature of
wicked problems; those describing how various challenges, such as climate change, are wicked
problems; and literature exploring methods to help organizations and communities address
wicked problems. Few of these works discuss the role recordkeeping plays in grappling with
wicked problems. 14 Over the past decade, some scholarship has emerged from the library and
information science field to discuss wicked problems within a LIS context. However, most of
this literature only characterizes a particular challenge within LIS, such as research data
management, as a wicked problem. 15 Some work done by the Archival Education and Research
Initiative (AERI), a consortium of US archival doctoral programs, has engaged in research on
14

One example of such a work is Catrien J. A. M. Termeer et al., “Governance Capabilities for Dealing
Wisely With Wicked Problems,” Administration & Society 47, no. 6 (2012): 680–710.
15 Chris Awre et al., “Research Data Management as a ‘Wicked Problem,’” Library Review 64, no. 4/5
(2015): 356–71; Andrew M. Cox, Stephen Pinfield, and Jennifer Smith, “Moving a Brick Building: UK
Libraries Coping with Research Data Management as a ‘wicked’ Problem,” Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science 48, no. 1 (2016): 3–17.

9

how recordkeeping and archival theory and practice can contribute to the efforts to confront a
wide range of wicked problems. 16 Yet despite this growing work in the LIS and archival fields
on wicked problems, there exists scant work on how recordkeeping informs the nature of wicked
problems.
There is a burgeoning and rich body of literature on recordkeeping behavior emerging
from the archival field and other disciplines, particularly anthropology. This includes several
ethnographic works on recordkeeping practices of law enforcement organizations, a profession
confronting the consequences of wicked problems on a daily basis. 17 However, these studies do
not frame the recordkeeping practices of police officers in the context of wicked problems. Sue
Childs and Julie McLeod, information studies and records management researchers, respectively,
have characterized electronic records management as a wicked problem. Their work has stood
out as being among the few studies of recordkeeping behavior that have been explicitly situated
in a wicked problems context.18 Studies that investigate organizational recordkeeping behavior

16

Anne Gilliland and Sue McKemmish, “Recordkeeping Metadata, the Archival Multiverse, and Societal
Grand Challenges,” in 2012 Proceedings of International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata
Applications (International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications, Kuching, Sarawak,
Malaysia: Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, 2012), 113–114; Marika Cifor and Heather Soyka,
“Identifying Research Contributions of Archival Studies and Recordkeeping to Societal Grand
Challenges: A Report from the AERI Grand Challenges Working Group” (Society of American
Archivists Research Forum, Washington DC, 2014), http://www2.archivists.org/proceedings/researchforum/2014/agenda.
17 Cochran, Gordon, and Krause, “Proactive Records: Reflections on the Village Watchman”; Merry
Morash, “Establishment of a Juvenile Police Record: The Influence of Individual and Peer Group
Characteristics,” Criminology 22, no. 1 (1984): 97–111; John Van Maanen and Brian Pentland, “Cops
and Auditors: The Rhetoric of Records,” in The Legalistic Organization (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 1994); A. J. Meehan, “Internal Police Records and the Control of Juveniles: Politics and
Policing in a Suburban Town,” British Journal of Criminology 33, no. 4 (1993): 504–24.
18 Sue Childs and Julie McLeod, “Tackling the Wicked Problem of ERM: Using the Cynefin Framework
as a Lens,” Records Management Journal 23, no. 3 (2013): 191–227; Julie McLeod and Sue Childs, “A
Strategic Approach to Making Sense of the ‘wicked’ Problem of ERM,” Records Management Journal
23, no. 2 (2013): 104–35; Julie McLeod, “Reinventing Archival Methods: Reconceptualising Electronic
Records Management as a Wicked Problem,” Archives and Manuscripts 42, no. 2 (2014): 193–96.
Probably the most extensive study of recordkeeping behavior in a wicked problems context is Yee May

10

that is explicitly situated within a wicked problems context should be able to provide insights
about the nature of recordkeeping in these circumstances and the nature of wicked problems
themselves.

Purpose, Themes, and Research Questions
The purpose of this dissertation revolves around two core themes. The first theme focuses on
seeing wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges. The second theme centers on the notion of
institutional recordkeeping effectiveness. Each of the two core themes contains three sub-themes.
Table 1.1
Themes and Sub-themes
Themes

Sub-themes

1. Wicked problems
as recordkeeping
challenges

1.1 Thick description at scale
1.2 Role of the individual within an institutional setting
1.3 Normalizing description to the familiar through warrants

2. Institutional
recordkeeping
effectiveness

2.1 Role of thoughtful analysis
2.2 Concise, efficient, and timely report writing
2.3 Burdensome report writing

The first of these themes, wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges, is centered on
the claim that not only can the study of recordkeeping inform our understanding of wicked
problems but also that wicked problems are recordkeeping challenges. As noted earlier in this
chapter, wicked problems are societal problems that are complex, vitally important, ill-defined,
and “rely upon elusive political judgment for resolution.” 19 Wicked problems are, by nature,
large phenomena that cannot be comprehensively observed by single individuals. 20 The problems

Chua, “The Complex System Records Model: Recordkeeping for Wicked Problems” (Masters Thesis,
University of California Los Angeles, 2012).
19 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160.
20 Using the example of a solider in the Napoleonic Wars, philosophy and LIS scholar Geoffrey Bowker
pointed out that a participant in a battle does not understand the event in its totality through direct

11

are so complex that they cannot be solved by single organizations—they require communication
and collaboration that generally span several communities, constituencies, and areas of expertise.
Wicked problems are also invariably long-standing challenges that may persist for generations.
In order for the full extent and complexity to be identified, conceptualized, and articulated,
wicked problems must be documented, and that documentation must be communicated across
space and time. The act of documenting a wicked problem is an act of defining the problem. In
turn, the very action of framing—of describing a wicked problem—is an act in addressing the
problem. Thus, engaging with wicked problems is fundamentally a recordkeeping act.
The first sub-theme is thick description at scale. Wicked problems have deep, dynamic
complexities and ambiguities with critical stakes that require careful, nuanced accounts in order
to capture the full depth of the challenges they present. In short, wicked problems require thick
description. In his landmark 1973 essay, anthropologist Clifford Geertz noted, “Ethnography is
thick description. What the ethnographer is in fact faced with…is a multiplicity of complex
conceptual structures, many of them superimposed upon or knotted into one another, which are
at once strange, irregular, and inexplicit, and which he must contrive somehow to first to grasp
and then to render.” 21 Understanding, describing, and addressing wicked problems with
sufficient fidelity requires an act of documentation—an act of “grasping” and “rendering”—that
has the richness to engage the full depth of the complexities that these problems carry.
At the same time, wicked problems are large and extensive challenges that involve many
constituencies. Grasping the extent of a wicked problem requires description that can encompass
the scope of the challenge. In other words, the description must be able to scale. In a discussion
observation. Rather, “When we experience a war, we are relying on the aggregations of other experiences
to ground and shape our experiences.” Memory Practices in the Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2005), 5.
21 Clifford Geertz, “Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture,” in The Interpretation
of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, Inc., Publishers, 1973), 9–10.

12

about digital humanities, LIS scholar and policy analyst Amy Friedlander noted that scale means
enabling humanists to access “heterogeneous digital information of varying quality and in
quantities that were unimaginable in prior generations.” 22 Doing research at scale also means
engaging with a set of materials that is beyond the capacity of individuals to analyze by hand.
Thus, research “at scale requires computation.” 23 Ideally, this research allows for both “very
expansive and very detailed investigations.” 24 This tension of creating thick description at scale
was clearly at the heart of the US efforts to document the Vietnam War and to evaluate the
counterinsurgency campaign. Embedded within this effort was the goal of producing both
quantitative measures of the war that could scale up to the massive operational scope of the
conflict, and qualitative descriptions that could capture the complexities of a long revolutionary
war that was intertwined with strong social, cultural, political, and economic elements.
The effort to be systematic in order to facilitate scalable insight, while working to
produce rich, thick, thoughtful observations leads to the second sub-theme, role of the individual
within an institutional setting. As US officials developed various reporting systems over the
course of the Vietnam War, they attempted to automate individuals’ biases and idiosyncrasies
out of their data gathering and reporting activities. However, they also asked American advisors
to present thoughtful analysis as part of their reporting. Therefore, this data gathering effort
contained dueling tensions of advisors who were trying to describe the counterinsurgency
conflict insightfully while also presenting their descriptions in the normalized, bureaucratic, and
programmatic terms familiar to American military and civilian officials.

22

“Asking Questions and Building a Research Agenda for Digital Scholarship,” in Working Together or
Apart: Promoting the Next Generation of Digital Scholarship (Washington DC: Council on Library and
Information Resources, 2009), 7.
23 “Asking Questions and Building a Research Agenda for Digital Scholarship,” 7.
24 “Asking Questions and Building a Research Agenda for Digital Scholarship,” 7.

13

The expectation of framing descriptions of the conflict in familiar terms leads to the third
sub-theme, normalizing description to the familiar through warrants. The warrants and rules for
a wide range of advisor reports, including the province report, played an important role in
articulating an expected framing of the war for the US military and civilian agencies.
Institutional recordkeeping effectiveness is the second overarching theme of this
dissertation. As MACV reorganized its counterinsurgency effort with the establishment of
CORDS in 1967, officials also revamped MACV’s reporting process, which included the
establishment of the province report. By examining the province report within the context of this
broader reporting infrastructure, one can see that an institution attempted to improve the
effectiveness of this infrastructure in terms of its efficiency and its ability to produce relevant
and useful information and analysis. Officials within MACV and CORDS emphasized several
issues in this effort. For this dissertation, discussion about these efforts is framed by three
subthemes.
The first of these sub-themes, role of thoughtful analysis, explores how MACV and
CORDS officials pushed advisors to mindfully observe and critically describe the performance
of GVN officials; enemy activities; and the behavior, mood, and actions of the civilian
population.
The second sub-theme, concise, efficient, and timely reporting, is used to examine how
MACV and CORDS officials emphasized to advisors the importance of writing reports concisely
and delivering them in a timely manner via numerous rules, bulletins, and warrants.
Additionally, this sub-theme affords an examination of the broader effort by US civilians and
military officers to create an efficient advisor reporting system that could meet the challenge of
documenting the wicked problem of the insurgency.

14

Although MACV and CORDS officials wanted advisors to create detailed reports that
could richly and systematically describe the war, these officials were concerned that advisors
were spending too much time writing reports, taking time away from directly engaging and
advising GVN civilian and military officials. This concern is the focus of the third sub-theme,
burdensome report writing.
In order to explore these themes and subthemes in relationship to recordkeeping behavior
and wicked problems, this dissertation will carry out a historical study of monthly province
reports written by US advisors during the Vietnam War. Using the case study approach, this
dissertation will explore the two core themes described above: wicked problems as
recordkeeping challenges and institutional recordkeeping effectiveness.
Although this dissertation is driven by the use of a historical case study set during the
Vietnam War, this research is focused on records and recordkeeping behavior. Monthly province
reports are the primary object of study, rather than an evidentiary means to a broader study about
US advisors in the Vietnam War. This approach draws upon Canadian archival scholar Tom
Nesmith’s call for archivists to be scholars in their own right, studying records, recordkeeping
systems, and recordkeeping behavior. 25 Anthropologist and colonial scholar Ann Laura Stoler’s
Along the Archival Grain provides example of an historical study that centers on the nature and
use of records and the role they played in a society. 26 Stoler explored the fraught and contingent
dynamics of Dutch colonial governance by focusing on the role archives and records played in
Netherland Indies society. For Stoler, the colonial archival records were a central part of the

25

“Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” Archivaria 14 (Summer
1982): 5–26.
26 Along the Archival Grain: Epistemic Anxieties and Colonial Common Sense (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2009).

15

story she tells, rather than just historical resources that she used in the process of constructing her
account of the Netherland Indies.
In this study, I ask two research questions that tie directly to the province report historical
case study, and a pair of conceptual research questions that emerge from, but are not confined to,
the case study.
•

Case Study Research Questions
o In what ways did US civilian and military officials use the province report to
document and understand the Vietnam War?
o In what ways did the structure and rules of the province report frame its
documentation of the Vietnam War?

•

Conceptual Research Questions
o In what ways do organizations’ recordkeeping practices frame their understanding
of wicked problems?
o In what ways can wicked problems be seen as recordkeeping challenges?

Significance
This dissertation makes a dual contribution to the study of wicked problems and recordkeeping
behavior. The first contribution—understanding wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges—
places archival, and more broadly, information science, at the center of the effort to understand
and address wicked problems. Societal grand challenges have primarily been explored and
conceptualized within the discipline of design, while a wide range of scholars in other fields have
used wicked problems as a descriptive tool to help frame and understand their work. For
example, climate and environmental scientists have used the concept for explaining the
complexities of climate change, and as a framework for overcoming political obstacles to
reducing humanity’s harm to the environment. 27 This dissertation, more than merely using the
concept of wicked problems to describe recordkeeping behaviors, makes the claim that grappling

27

See Chapter Two for further details on wicked problems and climate science.

16

with wicked problems is, largely, a recordkeeping act. This dissertation aims to make a scholarly
contribution by adding to the understanding of how organizations use their recordkeeping
practices to document wicked problems. Second, it attempts to add to the scholarship of wicked
problems and recordkeeping behavior by making the point that because of the scale and
complexity of wicked problems, efforts to understand and define them are, by necessity,
recordkeeping acts.
This dissertation adds to recordkeeping behavior scholarship by exploring this historical
case study, which is centered on the recordkeeping activities of an organization that is trying to
overcome a wicked problem. In particular, this study describes efforts made to ensure that
records capture a thoughtful analysis of wicked problems while ensuring this analysis is
generated in a concise, efficient, timely, and almost regularized manner, and also making sure
the effort is not a task too burdensome for records creators to complete. By framing
organizational recordkeeping activities as a competing set of tensions, this dissertation helps to
contextualize recordkeeping as a series of tradeoffs, compromises, and struggles. This lens is
particularly useful when exploring recordkeeping in context of wicked problems. It advances the
study of recordkeeping in situations such as the Vietnam War with a nuanced understanding of
what records creators were trying to achieve. By understanding and describing recordkeeping in
challenging situations as interlocking sets of tensions, this dissertation produces transferable
findings that can contribute to a richer understanding of the complexities that members of an
organization face when documenting dynamic and multifaceted environments.

Conceptual Framework
This study uses the concept of wicked problems as its guiding conceptual framework. Rittel and
Webber described wicked problems—as cited above—as societal problems that are complex,

17

vitally important, ill-defined and “rely upon elusive political judgment for resolution.” 28 The
discussion of wicked problems, particularly in the design literature, demonstrates and describes a
close relationship between defining wicked problems and identifying potential solutions. As
noted earlier, defining wicked problems is closely tied to documenting the problem. This
definition provides a framework for exploring the relationship between how organizations
understand, document, and address wicked problems. Additionally, the wicked problems
literature demonstrates that grappling with a wicked problem is a political process, meaning that
documenting these kinds of problems is also a political endeavor.
This dissertation primarily focuses on the first characteristic of wicked problems offered
by Rittel and Webber: “There is no definitive formulation of a wicked problem.” The coauthors
stated that, “the information [that is] needed to understand the problem depends upon one’s idea
for solving it… Problem understanding and problem resolution are concomitant to each other.” 29
The authors presented poverty as an example, pointing out that describing poverty as an issue of
the economy, underdeveloped labor skills, education, health care, or socioeconomic factors is the
same as proposing solutions to poverty. “Every specification of …[a] problem is a specification
28

“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160. Rittel and Webber assigned ten characteristics to
wicked problems:
1. There is no definitive formulation of a wicked problem.
2. Wicked problems have no stopping rule.
3. Solutions to wicked problems are not true-or-false, but good-or-bad.
4. There is no immediate and no ultimate test of a solution to a wicked problem.
5. Every solution to a wicked problem is a “one-shot operation”; because there is no opportunity to
learn by trial-and-error, every attempt counts significantly.
6. Wicked problems do not have an enumerable (or an exhaustively describable) set of potential
solutions, nor is there a well-described set of permissible operations that may be incorporated into
the plan.
7. Every wicked problem is essentially unique.
8. Every wicked problem can be considered to be a symptom of another problem.
9. The existence of a discrepancy representing a wicked problem can be explained in numerous
ways. The choice of explanation determines the nature of the problem’s resolution.
10. The planner has no right to be wrong.
“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161–167.
29 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161.

18

of the direction in which treatment is considered.” 30 In another article, Rittel noted that, “every
formulation of the WP [wicked problem] corresponds to a statement of the solution and vise
versa. Understanding the problem is identical with solving it. Whichever statement is made about
the problem is a statement of solution.” 31 Defining the problem becomes the most essential, and
the most vexing, aspect of addressing wicked problems. 32
The tightly coupled relationship between formulating definitions and solutions to wicked
problems provides a framework for studying the relationship between organizations’
understanding and documenting of wicked problems. The solutions that members of an
organization identify as the best remedies for a wicked problem drive the questions they ask
about that problem. 33 These questions and the conceptualization of the problem define what an
organization will consider to be the meaningful data needed to understand that problem. In turn,
an organization’s understanding of a wicked problem manifests itself in its documentation,
description, and measurement of that problem. These records and data not only manifest an
organization’s understanding of a wicked problem. The production of records are part of a
process that helps to shape and reinforce that understanding.
How an organization defines and documents wicked problems is also influenced by the
predominant worldview of the organization. Described as their ninth characteristic of wicked
problems, Rittel and Webber claimed that, “people choose those explanations which are most
plausible to them… [A person’s] ‘world view’ is the strongest determining factor in explaining a

30

“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161.
“On the Planning Crisis: Systems Analysis of the ‘First and Second Generations,’” Bedrifts Økonomen
8 (1972): 392.
32 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 159.
33 Rittel, “On the Planning Crisis: Systems Analysis of the ‘First and Second Generations,’” 393.
31

19

discrepancy and, therefore, in resolving a wicked problem.” 34 Shaping the definition of a wicked
problem becomes, therefore, a political clash of different perspectives. According to Rittel and
Webber, defining a wicked problem is an ongoing and politically contested dialectic involving
multiple constituencies articulating divergent and often conflicting accounts of the true nature of
a problem. Reaching consensus on the definition of a wicked problem is the hardest part of
addressing the problem. Once consensus has been achieved, the authors claimed, the problem has
been tamed. 35 Defining wicked problems “is a contingent, fraught, and sometimes consensual
process for which there is no authoritative set of rules, criteria, or methods.” 36 According to this
understanding, the more wicked the problem, the more political the process to define the
problem. 37 Addressing wicked problems, such as poverty, malaria, or insurgencies, becomes
more an act of politics than of science. 38 Just as creating records is not a straightforward
recording of what happened, addressing wicked problems is not a straightforward application of
professional best practices or scientific methods. Recordkeeping and addressing wicked
problems are both messy, contested, political activities.
Rittel and Webber wrote “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning” as a reaction to
the promise and then emerging disappointment in the ability of systems analysis and scientific
reasoning to solve societal problems. 39 Embedded within this belief of the applicability of
science and systems analysis for solving social problems was a view that the social sciences

34

“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 166.
“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161.
36 Richard Coyne, “Wicked Problems Revisited,” Design Studies 26, no. 1 (January 2005): 6.
37 Andrejs Skaburskis, “The Origin of ‘Wicked Problems,’” Planning Theory & Practice 9, no. 2 (2008):
279.
38 Rittel, “On the Planning Crisis: Systems Analysis of the ‘First and Second Generations,’” 392; Rittel
and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 169; Chanpory Rith and Hugh Dubberly,
“Why Horst W.J. Rittel Matters,” Design Issues 22, no. 4 (Autumn 2006): 2–3.
39 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 155–57; Coyne, “Wicked Problems Revisited,” 6.
35

20

could be seen as a part of science and engineering. 40 The two authors loudly balked at this view,
writing, “We shall want to suggest that the social professions were misled somewhere along the
line into assuming they could be applied scientists.” 41 Rittel’s formulation of the notion of
wicked problems was part of a broader reaction to the scientific rationalization of social
problems. His forceful writing played a critical role in crystalizing this reaction. 42 He also
elegantly described how large societal challenges are not only very complex, but are also openended problems where even just defining the problem is an elusive and politically contested
act. 43

Insurgencies and the Vietnam War as Wicked Problems
Several authors have characterized counterinsurgency warfare as a type of wicked problem. 44
National security and international affairs expert Franklin D. Kramer, for example, noted, that
COIN conflicts could be seen as wicked problems because “such conflicts are often multi-causal,
unstable, and present problems that keep evolving. They are socially complex, involving
multiple stakeholders and many interdependencies. They often have no clear solution.” 45 Retired
Marine officers T. C. Greenwood and Thomas X. Hammes defined warfare, particularly irregular
warfare, as a wicked problem. 46 They emphasize the critical importance of understanding and
defining problems in military planning. In addition, they noted the need of the military to
reevaluate and redefine the wicked problems they face throughout its engagement in an armed
40

Robert Farrell and Cliff Hooker, “Design, Science and Wicked Problems,” Design Studies 34, no. 6
(2013): 682.
41 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160.
42 Coyne, “Wicked Problems Revisited”; Rith and Dubberly, “Why Horst W.J. Rittel Matters.”
43 Skaburskis, “The Origin of ‘Wicked Problems,’” 279.
44 See, for example, Connable, “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in
Counterinsurgency,” 28–36. Further discussion on the literature about insurgencies as wicked problems is
in Chapter Two.
45 “Irregular Conflict and the Wicked Problem Dilemma: Strategies of Imperfection,” 83–84.
46 Greenwood and Hammes, “War Planning for Wicked Problems: Where Joint Doctrine Fails.”

21

conflict because these problems are dynamic and constantly changing. 47 The US military has
also used the concept of wicked problems to describe the complexities of counterinsurgency
warfare in at least one of its official publications. 48
The Vietnam War can be seen as a complex, multi-faceted conflict that included an
invading force (North Vietnam), a third-party nation (United States), numerous large-unit battles,
and an insurgency attempting to bring down the government of South Vietnam. 49 The insurgency
and the GVN’s counterinsurgency effort had extensive support from North Vietnam and the US,
respectively. Seeing how US, GVN, insurgent, and North Vietnamese forces conceptualized the
war is central to understanding why the conflict unfolded as it did, and for identifying lessons to
be drawn from the conflict. This issue of conceptualization echoes Rittel and Webber’s first and
ninth characteristics of wicked problems: “1. There is no definitive formulation of a wicked
problem.” and “9. The existence of a discrepancy representing a wicked problem can be
explained in numerous ways. The choice of explanation determines the nature of the problem’s
resolution.” 50 US province advisors played a key role in the American counterinsurgency
campaign during the war, supporting and advising GVN province-level officials who were
enmeshed in defeating insurgents. Thus, US province advisors were deeply engaged in a wicked
problem. The advisors used the reports that they wrote, including the monthly province report, as
tools in their efforts to address that challenge.

47

“War Planning for Wicked Problems: Where Joint Doctrine Fails.”
Department of the Army, Commander’s Appreciation and Campaign Design, TRADOC Pamphlet 5255-500 (Fort Monroe, VA: Department of the Army, 2008), 9–12.
49 Other nations, including South Korea, Australia, and others also sent troops to Vietnam during the war.
50 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161, 166.
48

22

The Province Report as a Record
American province senior advisors were responsible for writing province reports every month in
order to provide a picture of their respective provinces. The reports described the state of the
insurgency, the economy, refugees and the local population, and government programs and
leaders. The purpose of these narrative reports was to provide “a current and general evaluation
of the various activities which constitute[d] the pacification/nation building effort.” 51 Although
the province reports often included numeric tables of data, the reports were primarily a vehicle
for a province senior advisor to give his qualitative assessment of his assigned province.
Province advisors submitted these reports from November 1967 through February 1973, when
nearly all US military and advising elements had withdrawn from Vietnam. Each province
advisor was responsible for getting the reports written and sent up the chain of command to his
Corps CORDS senior advisor. Province advisors were also encouraged to share the reports with
other advisors and US military units in their province. 52 The province report was one of the
“primary documents upon which the periodic theater-wide assent of overall progress in the
pacification effort… [was] based.” 53
Although the structure of the report evolved over time, all of the province reports were
divided into four sections: Overall Status, Pacification Programs, Future Planning, and Actions
51

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “MACCORDS Field
Reporting System, Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/MC Directive 2-69,” July 1, 1969, Appendix 1 to
Annex A, 1, Joint Directive No 1-66 THRU Joint Directive No. 4-70, Box 63; MACV Adjutant General
Issuances; Records of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military
Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast
Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
52 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “MACCORDS Field
Reporting System, Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/OSA Directive 4-67,” October 30, 1967, Annex A, 12, MACV Planning Directive No 9-66 THRU MACV Planning Directive No. 1-71, Box 62; MACV
Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the
U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
53 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Annex A, 1.

23

Requested. The Overall Status section served as an executive summary that allowed the province
advisor to highlight what he perceived were the most important events and trends in the province
for that month. The Pacification Programs section was the longest part of the report and was
divided into subsections about various GVN programs and insurgent activities. The organization
of these subsections changed over time. The province reports normally ranged from five to 15
single-space typed pages and became shorter as the war progressed, largely because of the
elimination of district reports which had been incorporated into the province reports until May
1969.
The province reports were authorized by a series of three MACV joint directives: Joint
Directive 4-67, Joint Directive 2-69, and Joint Directive 4-70. All three directives provided the
warrant for the MACCORDS (Military Assistance Command, CORDS) Field Reporting System,
a framework of approximately 50 types of advisor reports, including the province report. Most of
the reports, known as field reports, addressed specific CORDS and GVN programs and efforts.
Topics and programs addressed in the field reports included psychological operations, public
health, public safety, refugees, and education.
These monthly province reports provide a rich and complex vehicle for examining the
intersection between recordkeeping and wicked problems. First, these reports were created in
support of the US and GVN efforts in the Vietnam War, which as discussed above, can be seen
as a wicked problem. Second, the province reports focused on the counterinsurgency portion of
the war and dealt with a wide range of complex issues such as security, governance,
infrastructure, refugees, the economy, and the insurgency. Functioning as a capstone assessment
document, the province report had the scope to cover a broad range of issues that affected the
war within each province. Knowing how MACV structured the reports and what the advisors

24

choose to write in them informs our understanding of the assumptions woven into the province
reports—a tool used to document and help understand the state of the South Vietnamese
insurgency.

Research Design
This dissertation is a historical case study of a single type of report from the Vietnam War: the
monthly province report written by US senior province advisors during the war. There are three
objects of the case study: 1) The rules and warrants governing the creation of the province report;
2) All available province reports from three purposely-selected IV Corps provinces, Phong Dinh,
Kien Hoa, and Tuong Dinh; and 3) All province reports from all IV Corps provinces created for
the month of January from 1968 through 1973. The rational for selecting these provinces is
detailed in Chapter Three. I acquired copies of these province reports from the National Archives
and Records Administration in College Park, Maryland.
I use four approaches to generate and analyze my research data. I carry out a historical
analysis of the social, political, and military context of the creation of the province report. I
conduct two analyses, in the modern diplomatic tradition, of first the province reports’ warrants
and rules and, second, its structure. Finally, I undertake a content analysis of the presence of
Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) data and the description of insurgent forces in the province
reports. 54 I triangulate the findings of these four approaches, particularly in Chapter Seven, to
highlight the themes discussed earlier. Further details about the research design of this
dissertation are in Chapter Three.

54

The Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) was a data system American advisors used from 1967 to 1973 to
quantitatively score the level of GVN control over its hamlets on several security and governance factors.
Further details about the HES are provided in Chapter Six.

25

Limitations
In this dissertation I carry out a historical case study of province reports. Because the embedded
units of analysis are reports that I purposefully, rather than randomly, selected, I do not make
generalizable claims to a population of province reports in the IV Corps or South Vietnam. In the
case study I make claims to theoretical propositions about the intersection of recordkeeping
behavior and wicked problems. These claims are designed to be transferable lessons that can
provide insights, comparative examples, or frameworks for examining wicked problems as
recordkeeping challenges or to support the study of recordkeeping behavior more generally.
However, as with applying the findings of any historical case study, these lessons should be used
with caution.
Restricted to the study of a single type of report from provinces within a single corps of
South Vietnam, this study examines a very narrow slice of the Vietnam War. Although this
dissertation explores the military and political context in which US advisors operated, along with
their reporting and recordkeeping ecology, the province report is the central focus of this case
study. This dissertation does not provide a broad study of assessment and evaluation or
recordkeeping efforts by either CORDS or MACV. 55 Even more narrowly, this dissertation is not
a study of the recordkeeping practices of US advisory teams or, more specifically, US province
advisory teams. This case study is constructed not to provide a history, but in the service of
asking research questions about wicked problems and recordkeeping.
This project fits within the tradition of the modern diplomatic, a research methodology
that generally uses historical research methods to gain a rich understanding of the history and

55

The most extensive work on MACV’s efforts to document and measure the war is Daddis, No Sure
Victory.

26

provenance of records. 56 In this research, the record and its context are the core objects of study.
This approach to records and recordkeeping scholarship is described more extensively in Chapter
Two. Over the past twenty years, a subset of this literature has emerged that uses direct
observation, interviews, and document analysis to examine how contemporary organizations and
individuals create, manage, share, use, and destroy records. 57 These studies often explore factors
that shape records creation and the motivations of the records creators. In contrast, I rely on a
historical analysis of the context and warrants of the province reports and a targeted, systematic
analysis of the content of the reports for this historical case study. I do not use direct observation
of the province report creation process or interviews of people involved in that process. 58 This
does limit my ability to understand the full array of factors that influenced the advisors’ creation
of these reports. However, I do not aim to explore the full array of what motivated the advisors to
write what they did in their province reports. In addition, I do not focus on the variance between
recordkeeping procedures and actual practices, the relationship between procedures and

56

The concept of the modern diplomatic emerged from work and conversations among archival scholars
and practitioners during the 1970s, 1980s, and into the early 1990s. The emergence of the modern
diplomatic is discussed in Chapter Two. For a discussion of the development of the concept from a key
participant, see Tom Nesmith, “Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North
American Rediscovery of Provenance,” in Canadian Archival Studies and the Rediscovery of Provenance
(Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1993).
57 LIS dissertations about recordkeeping behavior that use direct observation and interviews include
Elizabeth Yakel, “Recordkeeping in Radiology: The Relationships between Activities and Records in
Radiological Processes” (Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1997); Karen Gracy, “The Imperative to
Preserve: Competing Definitions of Value in the World of Film Preservation” (Dissertation, University of
California Los Angeles, 2001); Kalpana Shankar, “Scientists, Records, and the Practical Politics of
Infrastructure” (Dissertation, University of California Los Angeles, 2002); Ciaran Trace, “Documenting
School Life Formal and Informal Imprints of a Fifth Grade Classroom” (Dissertation, University of
California Los Angeles, 2004); Dharma Akmon, “The Role of Conceptions of Value in Data Practices: A
Multi-Case Study of Three Small Teams of Ecological Scientists” (Dissertation, University of Michigan,
2014).
58 For an example of a historical study of recordkeeping behavior that does not use interviews or direct
observation see JoAnne Yates, Control Through Communication: The Rise of System in American
Management (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).

27

practices, or people bending recordkeeping practices to their advantage. 59 Finally, while I
examine the rules for creating the province reports, this dissertation is not primarily about the
role of warrants in recordkeeping. 60 Further discussion about the limits of this dissertation’s
methodologies may be found in Chapter Three.
Like many studies of the Vietnam War produced in the US, this research project is an
American-centric examination of the conflict. Even though the content of the province reports
are primarily about South Vietnamese people who were government officials, civilians, or
insurgents, presuming to describe their perspectives is beyond the scope of this study. This
dissertation is limited to examining CORDS and its advisors’ efforts to understand and document
the war as they described it.

Key Terms
Archival Terms
Record
“[1] Data or information that has been fixed on some medium; that has content, context, and
structure; and that is used as an extension of human memory or to demonstrate accountability.
[2] Data or information in a fixed form that is created or received in the course of individual or
institutional activity and set aside (preserved) as evidence of that activity for future reference.” 61

59

Elizabeth Yakel played a critical role in shaping the understanding of the relationship between
recordkeeping rules and practices in “The Way Things Work” and “Recordkeeping in Radiology.” In
summarizing anthropological and ethnographic approaches to studying recordkeeping behavior Ciaran
Trace reviewed studies of law enforcement recordkeeping practices that focused on the differences
between documented and actual recordkeeping practices along with how people use recordkeeping to
their advantage. See “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’.”
60 Warrants are an important component of recordkeeping behavior studies. Essential works on warrants
include Wendy Margaret Duff, “The Influence of Warrant on the Acceptance and Credibility of the
Functional Requirements for Recordkeeping” (Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh, 1996); Richard J Cox and
Wendy Duff, “Warrant and the Definition of Electronic Records: Questions Arising from the Pittsburgh
Project,” Archives and Museum Informatics 11 (1997): 223–31; and Wendy M. Duff, “Harnessing the
Power of Warrant,” American Archivist 61, no. 1 (Spring 1998): 88–105.
61 Pearce-Moses, “Record,” 326.

28

The definition of “record” is a contested discussion within the archival field. In particular, some
archivists suggest broader notions of records that do not depend on Western, bureaucratic notion
of fixity. For example, Australian archival scholar Shannon Faulkhead defined a record as “any
account, regardless of form, that preserves memory or knowledge of facts or events. A record
can be a document, an individual’s memory, an image, or a recording.” 62
For this study of province reports, the above definitions offered by Richard Pearce-Moses
in the Society of American Archivists glossary are the most applicable. The monthly province
reports contained information that was fixed on a medium (paper). The reports had content
(information about the province), context (the reporting process), and structure (the sections and
headers of the report). The reports were created to enable a broader knowledge—memory—of
events and activities in a particular province within a particular month. The second definition
given by Pearce-Moses introduces the notion of an actor creating or receiving records in the
course of activities which enables me to discuss the province reports as a record within a
recordkeeping process that was part of a broader set of advising activities. Additionally, PearceMoses’ discussion and definitions of the context, structure, and content of records undergirds the
organization of this dissertation’s findings chapter, which is outlined below.
Archival scholar Luciana Duranti provides a helpful distinction between probative and
dispositive records. She defines dispositive records as records that are “the essence and substance
of the act.” She defines probative records as records created to “produce evidence of an act
which came into existence and was complete before being manifested in writing.” 63 Having a
distinction between records of an act and records about an act provides me with a basis for

62

“Connecting through Records: Narratives of Koorie Victoria,” Archives and Manuscripts 37, no. 2
(2010): 67.
63 “Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part II,” Archivaria 29 (Winter 1989-90): 7–8.

29

discussing how province reports were part of US advisors’ reporting activities and
responsibilities and were also about a broad range of activities that happened in the provinces
each month.

Recordkeeping Behavior
The processes, technologies, infrastructures, cultures, assumptions, and other factors involved in
individuals, institutions, and communities creating, managing, protecting, sharing, using, and
destroying records in order to support their activities, values, and interests. This definition was
derived from a wide reading of recordkeeping behavior literature. 64 I discuss this literature in
Chapter Two.

Warrants and Rules
The notion of warrant in this dissertation draws heavily from archival scholar Wendy Duff’s
definition of literary warrant, “The justification for a functional requirement for recordkeeping
systems that is drawn from the literature of professional standards, regulations and best practices
that direct the conduct of lawyers, auditors, and information specialists. This literature has
professional authority that regulates the work of members of these professional groups.” 65 In my
dissertation, warrant refers specifically to the documents that provided senior province advisors
with the authority and duty to create, manage, and disseminate province reports. The initial
authorizing document was MACV Joint Directive 4-67. The warrant for the province report was
revised by MACV Joint Directive 2-69, and then MACV Joint Directive 4-70. MACV and
CORDS issued a variety documents—including memos, directives, and letters of instruction—at

64

In particular, I derived this definition from Cochran, Gordon, and Krause, “Proactive Records:
Reflections on the Village Watchman”; Yakel, “The Way Things Work”; Trace, “What Is Recorded Is
Never Simply `What Happened’”; Shankar, “Recordkeeping in the Production of Scientific Knowledge.”
65 “The Influence of Warrant on the Acceptance and Credibility of the Functional Requirements for
Recordkeeping,” 11.

30

the theater, corps, and province level that provided additional rules and instructions for writing,
managing, and disseminating the province reports. I collectively refer to these documents as
rules.

Social Science Terms
Assessment and Evaluation
A wide range of industries, including education, social services, libraries, and the military use
these two terms differently, although all of these fields are generally using the terms in ways that
combine to describe processes to systematically measure and understand the state of an
environment, individual, or cohort of people; the quality and effectiveness of an intervening
treatment, program, or training; and the outcomes of the intervention being applied to the
environment, individual, or population. While some fields make clear distinctions between
assessment and evaluation, current US military doctrine uses “assessment” as an overarching
term that covers areas other fields would parse between “assessment” and “evaluation.” Because
this dissertation focuses on a military case study, I am using the following definition from
current US military doctrine: “[1] A continuous process that measures the overall effectiveness
of employing joint force capabilities during military operations. [2] Determination of the
progress toward accomplishing a task, creating a condition, or achieving an objective.” 66 The US
military considers assessment to include “understanding current conditions of an operational
environment,” “determining the friendly force’s readiness to execute the operation,” and
“evaluating progress of the operation” during, respectively, the planning, preparation, and

66

Department of Defense, “Assessment,” Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
Terms, Joint Publication 1-02 (Washington DC: Department of Defense, November 8, 2010 (As
Amended Through 15 December 2014)), 17.

31

executive phases of operations. 67 I recognize that I am using definitions crafted in the past five
years for contemporary operations, but which I am using to describe and frame actions that
occurred during the Vietnam War. However, this is not a historical study of US advisor
recordkeeping activities. It is a study examining the phenomenon of recordkeeping behavior in
the setting of wicked problems with aim of producing transferrable insights for today. Thus,
using a current definition for this historical case study is appropriate.

Scale
Based on Amy Friedlander’s discussion of scale in the context of digital humanities, in this
dissertation the term signifies managing, accesses, and analyzing “heterogeneous… information
of varying quality and in quantities” that are beyond the capacity of individuals to analyze by
hand, thus “requir[ing] computation.” 68

Thick Description
The work of ethnographers to “grasp and then to render” a “multiplicity of complex conceptual
structures, many of them superimposed upon or knotted into one another, which are at once
strange, irregular, and inexplicit.” 69

Wicked Problems
Societal problems that are complex, vitally important, ill-defined and “rely upon elusive political
judgment for resolution.” 70 Wicked problems have been extensively discussed in the Conceptual
Framework section of this chapter. Its literature is discussed in Chapter Two.

67

Headquarters, Department of the Army, The Operations Process, ADP 5-0 (Washington DC:
Headquarters, Department of the Army, May 2012), 14.
68 “Asking Questions and Building a Research Agenda for Digital Scholarship,” 7.
69 Geertz, “Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture,” 9–10.
70 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160.

32

Military Terms
Insurgency and Counterinsurgency
Counterinsurgencies are “comprehensive civilian and military efforts designed to simultaneously
defeat and contain insurgency and address its root causes.” 71 Insurgencies are “the organized use
of subversion and violence to seize, nullify, or challenge political control of a region. Insurgency
can also refer to the group itself.” 72 These are the current US Department of Defense definitions
of insurgency and counterinsurgency. I use definitions crafted in 2010 and updated in 2014 to
describe and frame actions that occurred during the Vietnam War for the same reasons I discuss
in my definition of assessment and evaluation. In addition, the current Defense Department
definition of insurgency and counterinsurgency emerges from a doctrinal linage that is informed
by American experiences in counterinsurgencies, including the Vietnam War, during the
twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
During the Vietnam War, American officials, the press, and the public generally referred
to the counterinsurgency effort to defeat the insurgency as “pacification.” John Paul Vann, a
prominent and well-known US Army officer and later a civilian advisor during the war, defined
pacification as “the achievement of two objectives. The first is the willing cooperation of the
people with their government because they believe it will be in their own self-interest. The
second and equally important objective is to secure the overt rejection of the enemy by the
people. This they are willing to do only when they are convinced that the government can protect
them against reprisals.” 73

71

Department of Defense, “Counterinsurgency,” 53.
Department of Defense, “Insurgency,” 121.
73 “Thoughts on Pacification,” March 30, 1968, 2. Attached to John Paul Vann, DepCORDS, II Field
Force, “Headquarters, CORDS, II Field Force Vietnam/III Corps Tactical Zone Memorandum,” April 1,
1968. Attached to Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV Corps Information
Bulletin No. 49-69,” February 7, 1969, Box 40, Folder 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Info Bulletins -- 2-69 to
119-69; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/General
72

33

Insurgent
The Communist insurgent forces in South Vietnam have a very complex history. Commonly
referred to as the Viet Cong by Americans, they were also known as the National Liberation
Front and evolved from the Viet Minh in the 1950s. These forces were not a monolithic black
box. They had many elements and factions and had a collaborative, yet complex relationship
with North Vietnamese forces. Because parsing out the nuanced history of these forces is outside
the scope of this dissertation, I collectively describe these forces as insurgents. I recognize that
the act of naming these forces can be seen as politically charged and making assumptions about
the war. 74 I use the term “insurgents” because that is generally how the US military and its
advisors saw these forces.

Kinetic and Non-kinetic
“‘Kinetic’ capabilities focus on destroying enemy forces through the application of physical
effects. . . . ‘Non-kinetic’ capabilities . . . [are] all other capabilities relevant to irregular
warfare.” Kinetic activities usually refer to violently “neutralizing enemy forces” while nonkinetic activities refer to nonviolent actions undertaken to indirectly defeat insurgent forces, such
as supporting the “security and well-being of the host nation population, the stability of the host
nation government, and the coordination of military and civilian activities.” 75

Records, Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions;
Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives
at College Park, College Park, MD.
74 Scott Laderman, Tours of Vietnam: War, Travel Guides, and Memory (Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2009), x–xi.
75 W. J. Hurley et al., “Non-Kinetic Capabilities for Irregular Warfare: Four Case Studies,” IDA Paper
(Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses, March 2009), ES-1, 1.

34

Dissertation Structure
Overview
This dissertation is organized into three parts and eight chapters.

Part One: Framework
This part lays out the structure and purpose of this dissertation. It situates this study within a
conceptual framework and places it within the context of the relevant literature. Finally, this part
describes the methods that I employed in this research project.

Chapter One: Introduction
In this chapter, I state the research problem, the purpose of the dissertation, its research
questions, and the significance of the study. I give a brief overview of wicked problems as the
core conceptual framework of this study. I discuss the Vietnam War as a wicked problem and
province reports as records. I also summarize the dissertation’s research design, limitations, key
terms, and structure.

Chapter Two: Literature Review
Chapter Two is a review of the literature that shapes this dissertation. The literature review is
divided into two main sections: 1) the literature on recordkeeping behavior with a primary focus
on what has emerged from the archival field, and 2) the literature on wicked problems. In this
chapter, I also discuss gaps in the literature and opportunities for the intersection of these two
areas of study.

Chapter 3 Methodology
In this chapter, I describe the research design and methodologies that I used in this study. This
includes a discussion of the case study, the methods for gathering and analyzing data, threats to
validity, and the transferability of findings drawn from this study.

35

Part Two: Findings
Part Two presents three chapters of findings for this dissertation. Taken together, these chapters
tell the story of the historical case study of province reports written by US advisory during the
Vietnam War. The three chapters deliver the findings of this dissertation in three layers: context,
structure, and content. This layered structure is scaffolded by Richard Pearce-Moses’ definition
of “record,” in which he claimed, “a record has fixed content, structure, and context.” 76
Table 1.2
Records Components and Findings Chapters
Records Component

Findings Chapter

Context

Chapter 4 The Social, Political, and Military
Context of the Province Report
Chapter 5 The Recordkeeping Context and
Structure of the Province Report

Structure

Chapter 5 The Recordkeeping Context and
Structure of the Province Report

Content

Chapter 6 The Content of the Province Report

Chapter Four: The Social, Political, and Military Context of the Province Report
Pearce-Moses described context as “the organizational, functional, and operational
circumstances surrounding a record’s creation, receipt, storage, or use. Context includes a
record’s date and place of creation, compilation, or issue, and its relationship to other records.” 77
In Chapter Four, I present the organizational context of the province report, examining how US
civilian and military leaders worked to grasp the nature of the Vietnam War and the development
and organization of the US advisory program. The scope of this account narrows from a brief
overview of the advisory effort and the development of CORDS to a review of the advisory

76
77

“Record.”
“Record.”

36

program in the IV Corps. It further narrows to a discussion of the war at the provincial level,
with a particular focus on Dinh Tuong province.

Chapter Five: The Recordkeeping Context and Structure of the Province Report
In order to examine the recordkeeping context of the province report, I have extended the context
layer of my findings into Chapter Five. This includes a review of the US effort to measure and
evaluate the counterinsurgency campaign against the communist insurgency in South Vietnam as
well as the warrants and rules that governed the creation, dissemination, and use of the province
report.
Pearce-Moses noted that structure “refers to a record’s physical characteristics and
internal organization of the contents. Record structure is the form that makes the content tangible
and intelligible.” 78 The structure layer is presented in Chapter Five, where I discuss the province
report’s physical characteristics and evolving internal organization through a close reading of the
report’s warrants and rules.

Chapter Six: The Content of the Province Report
Pearce-Moses defined content as “the text, data, symbols, numerals, images, sound, graphics,
and other information that make up the substance of the record.” 79 The content layer of this
dissertation’s findings is presented in Chapter Six, where I examine the text of the province
reports written by the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh province advisory teams as well
as the content of the province reports in selected months from the other 16 IV Corps provinces.

78
79

Pearce-Moses, “Record.”
Pearce-Moses, “Record.”

37

Part Three Themes
Part Three contains the discussion and conclusion of this dissertation. It builds on the conceptual
framework, literature review, and findings presented in Part One and Part Two to focus on the
themes and research questions of this research project. Part Three also looks ahead to future
research that could emerge from this work.

Chapter Six Discussion
This chapter recasts the findings presented in Part Two around the two main themes of this
dissertation—wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges and institutional recordkeeping
effectiveness—in order to address its research questions.

Chapter 7 Conclusion
In this chapter I summarize the findings and themes of this dissertation and briefly explore future
research that can build off of this work.

38

Chapter Two
Literature Review

Introduction
As noted in Chapter One, this dissertation uses a historical case study of province reports written
by US advisors during the Vietnam War to examine the relationship between institutional
recordkeeping behavior and wicked problems. Specifically, this research explores how wicked
problems can inform the recordkeeping behavior literature and how wicked problems can be
understood as a recordkeeping challenge. I have centered my examination of the recordkeeping
behavior literature on scholarship that has emerged from the field of archival science. This
review focuses on the emergence of the modern diplomatic and two main strands of thought in
this field: the administrative-juridical perspective on recordkeeping and the socio-cultural
perspective. My analysis of the wicked problems literature includes a review of the concept’s
origins and its role in design. I also examine the use of the concept of wicked problems as a
framework to understand challenges in public policy, environmental policy, counterinsurgency
warfare and international security, as well as challenges in the library and information science
and archives fields. I conclude this chapter with a brief discussion about the opportunity to enrich
the literature on the relationship between wicked problems and recordkeeping behavior, which is
an emergent area of exploration.

Recordkeeping Behavior Literature
Recordkeeping behavior is a topic that has received widespread attention in anthropology,
organizational behavior, science and technology studies, and archival science. This review is
focused primarily on the recordkeeping behavior literature that has emerged from archival
science. In this dissertation, records are the core object of study, not merely a means to another

39

scholarly end. My approach matches the perspective of many scholars from the archival field,
which place the record squarely at the center of their research. For my review I have chosen to
use the definition of recordkeeping behavior that I established in Chapter One: “the processes,
technologies, infrastructures, cultures, assumptions, and other factors involved in individuals,
institutions, and communities creating, managing, protecting, sharing, using, and destroying
records in order to support their activities, values, and interests.” Because this research project
centers on a historical case study set within the US military, this review focuses on the literature
of institutional recordkeeping behavior. I do not address personal recordkeeping or the
burgeoning fields of diary studies or personal information management.
In this review, I give an account of how records and recordkeeping emerged as an object
of scholarly study within the archival field, focusing on how this research agenda crystalized in
the late 1970s and 1980s, particularly in the pages of Canadian archival journal Archivaria. Tom
Nesmith’s 1982 Archivaria article “Archives from the Bottom Up” became a turning point in the
archival profession’s attempt to formulate its own body of scholarship distinct from the broader
study of history. 80 The scholarship that Nesmith, a National Archives of Canada archivist and,
later, an academic, and other archival thinkers described has become known as the “modern
diplomatic.” 81 This approach borrows heavily from historical methodologies to provide an
intellectual framework for examining records, records creation, and recordkeeping as objects of
study in their own right and not merely evidence for another focus of research.
As the modern diplomatic emerged and matured as an area of scholarship in the 1980s
and 1990s, the archival field was also grappling with the pervasive use and creation of electronic
80

“Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship.”
C.N.L. Brooke appears to have coined term “modern diplomatic” in 1970. See “The Teaching of
Diplomatic,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 4, no. 1 (April 1970): 8. Another early reference to this
term is Michael Cook, “Professional Training: International Perspectives,” Archivaria 7 (Winter 1978):
37.

81

40

records, as well as an ever-growing volume of records produced by increasingly complex and
dynamic institutions. Nesmith and other proponents saw scholarly research about records and
recordkeeping as a key of part of the practicing archivist’s job. For example, Nesmith, Canadian
archivist Terry Cook, British and Canadian archivist Hugh Taylor, and others contended that
historical scholarship in institutional recordkeeping practices informed appraisal practices. 82 This
kind of recordkeeping scholarship informed the formulation of functional analysis appraisal and
was an important component of the macroappraisal strategy developed by the National Archives
of Canada. 83 This scholarship also informed studies about the nature of records and
recordkeeping systems, most notably in projects at the University of Pittsburgh, the University of
British Columbia, and the InterPARES project. 84
Most research within the modern diplomatic is informed by two broad frameworks for
studying recordkeeping behavior: administrative-juridical and socio-cultural. The administrativejuridical perspective emphasizes the administrative and legal roles of records and recordkeeping
systems within organizations; rules and warrants for records creation, use, and management; and
the form of records. Scholarship falling under this rubric includes studies on warrants, functional
82

Tom Nesmith, “Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American
Rediscovery of Provenance,” in Canadian Archival Studies and the Rediscovery of Provenance
(Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1993); Terry Cook, “Legacy in Limbo: An Introduction to the Records
of the Department of the Interior,” Archivaria 25 (Winter 1987-88): 73–83; Hugh Taylor, “‘My Very Act
and Deed’: Some Reflections on the Role of Textual Records in the Conduct of Affairs,” The American
Archivist 51, no. 4 (Fall 1988): 456–69.
83 Terry Cook, “Macro-Appraisal and Functional Analysis: Documenting Governance rather than
Government,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 25, no. 1 (April 2004): 6–8.
84 Archival thinking concerning appraisal and the modern diplomatic took on different characteristics in
Canada and United States. Therefore I mention the nationality of authors in the recordkeeping section of
the literature review to help contextualize their contributions to the literature. Richard J. Cox, “ReDiscovering the Archival Mission: The Recordkeeping Functional Requirements Project at the University
of Pittsburgh, a Progress Report,” Archives and Museum Informatics 8, no. 4 (1994): 279–300; School of
Library, Archival & Information Studies, The University of British Columbia, “UBC Project:
Preservation & Integrity - Introduction,” http://interpares.org/UBCProject/intro.htm; School of Library,
Archival & Information Studies, The University of British Columbia, “The InterPARES Project,”
http://www.interpares.org/.

41

analysis, and documentary form. Research reintroducing and using diplomatics, a Renaissanceera methodology for carrying out careful, formal examinations of the authenticity of individual
documents, has comprised a prominent segment of the administrative-juridical focused
recordkeeping behavior literature. Canadian and Italian archival scholar Luciana Duranti’s series
of six Archivaria articles about diplomatics forms the core of this literature. 85 Diplomatics, as
reimagined by Duranti and other twentieth and twenty-first century archival thinkers, provides a
structured framework for understanding the characteristics of records and their role in supporting
work activities and functions of institutions.
Studies guided by a socio-cultural outlook often highlight the messy and frequently
contested nature of recordkeeping behavior. A great deal of socio-cultural recordkeeping
behavior literature also incorporates methodological traditions from other fields such as
organizational behavior, anthropology, and science and technology studies. Unlike
administrative-juridical-focused studies, which tend to focus on explicit warrants, rules,
procedures, and documentary forms, social-cultural-focused studies often examine the implicit
practices, expectations, pressures, and motivations that drive actual recordkeeping practices.
American archival scholars Elizabeth Yakel and Ciaran Trace, in, respectively, a 1996 American
Archivist article and a 2002 Archival Science article, played key roles in articulating the socio-

85

“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part I,” Archivaria 28 (Summer 1989): 7-27;
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part II,” Archivaria 29 (Winter 1989-90): 4-17;
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part III,” Archivaria 30 (Summer 1990): 4–20;
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part IV,” Archivaria 31 (Winter 1990-91): 10–25;
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part V,” Archivaria 32 (Summer 1991): 6–24; “Diplomatics:
New Uses for an Old Science, Part VI,” Archivaria 33 (Winter 1991-92): 6–24. These six articles were
republished in Luciana Duranti, Diplomatics New Uses for an Old Science (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow
Press, 1998).

42

cultural outlook within the modern diplomatic tradition and highlighting the contributions that
can be made by non-history disciplines to recordkeeping scholarship. 86
This review of the recordkeeping behavior literature has four sections. The first section
discusses the emergence of modern diplomatic research on records, recordkeeping systems, and
recordkeeping behavior as it coalesced as an area of scholarship in the 1980s and 1990s. The
second section examines modern diplomatic scholarship with an administrative-juridical
orientation, with a particular focus on diplomatics. The third section emphasizes modern
diplomatic scholarship with a socio-cultural orientation. The last section looks at the current state
of the recordkeeping behavior literature. Examining the administrative-juridical- and the sociocultural-framed recordkeeping scholarship in separate sections poses the danger of conveying the
idea that this research falls neatly in either one camp or the other. Many studies look at how both
of these factors shape recordkeeping behavior. I discuss these two approaches and their
distinctive contributions in order to highlight their characteristics, not to suggest that scholars
should choose, or do choose, one framework to the exclusion of the other.
The Modern Diplomatic
In 1982, the editors of Archivaria devoted volume 14 of the journal to social history because the
emergence of this area of study “has been changing the way history is studied and profoundly
affecting the relationship between archives and academic historical research.” 87 Tom Nesmith
noted in this volume of Archivaria that these changes “have strained the traditional alliance
between historians and archivists.” 88 In describing the rise of social history, Nesmith plunged
into long-standing tensions within the archival field over the importance of historical knowledge

86

“The Way Things Work”; “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’.”
Nesmith, “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 5.
88 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 5.
87

43

in archival education, the role of history in the profession, and the relationship archivists should
have with historians, librarians, and records managers. 89 Nesmith also joined a discussion, which
began in the early 1970s, on archival responses to a new generation of social history research
that was challenging archives to document not just the famous and powerful, but also “ordinary
people.” 90 In his landmark 1974 presidential address to the Society of American Archivists,
Gerald Ham acknowledged the challenge articulated by Howard Zinn and others 91 and sketched
an initial framework for documenting “the broad spectrum of human experience,” 92 work which
requires the “demanding intellectual process of documenting culture.” 93 In 1981, Fredric Miller
outlined some of the contours of social history and demonstrated how social historians were
questioning and using archival records. Miller also discussed how archivists could respond to
this new, broader-based approach to history. 94 The mid-1970s saw additional archival literature
emerge that articulated strategies for documenting aspects of society that were traditionally

89

A full review of this debate about the nature of the archival profession is beyond the scope of this
review. Nesmith provided a summary of this debate, albeit with the point of view that history should
continue to play a significant role in archival practice, “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and
Archival Scholarship,” 11–15. Canadian and British archivist Hugh Taylor played an important role in
articulating a call for archivists to diversify their education and profession background beyond history and
increase their attention on information technology and information retrieval. See “Information Retrieval
and the Training of the Archivist,” Canadian Archivist 2, no. 3 (1972): 30–35 and “The Discipline of
History and The Education of the Archivist,” The American Archivist 40, no. 4 (October 1977): 395–402.
For an example of an archivist claiming that historical research was important component of archival
work, see David Mycue, “The Archivist as Scholar: A Case for Research by Archivists,” Georgia Archive
7, no. 2 (1979): 10–16.
90 Howard Zinn, “Secrecy, Archives, and the Public Interest,” The Midwestern Archivist 2, no. 2 (1977):
25.
91 F. Gerald Ham, “The Archival Edge,” American Archivist 38, no. 1 (January 1, 1975): 5–7.
92 Ham, “The Archival Edge,” 8.
93 Ham, “The Archival Edge,” 13.
94 “Social History and Archival Practice,” The American Archivist 44, no. 2 (Spring 1981): 113–24.

44

underrepresented in archives, such as migrations to the United States 95 and violence within its
borders. 96
This emergence and use of history from the bottom up prompted many archivists to
rethink how they collected and provided access to records, and sparked debate over the role of
history in the archival profession. It was in this context that Nesmith articulated his call for a new
kind of archival scholarship. He pointed to the emergence of research in social history that
engaged in the complexity of records and the meaning of evidence—research that cut across the
grain of archival collections and records to study “ordinary people not usually accounted for in
historical writing.” 97 Nesmith viewed this as an opportunity to push past the binary question of
whether archivists should also be historians or not. 98 Referring to historians’ use of a broader
array of records and the increased complexity of modern records, he claimed that the work of
archivists is “increasingly dependent upon scholarly study of the nature of the records
themselves.” 99 In Nesmith’s estimation, scholarship becomes, once again, a basis for archival
work. 100 This includes, as Nesmith noted, knowing when and how institutions used their records
and the value they attached to them, outlining the history of recordkeeping systems to enable
researchers to intelligently navigate their records, understanding the history and original use of
archival records, and placing these records in a broader context by seeing “record creation and
use as integral aspects of the history of society.” 101

95

Robert M. Warner and Francis X. Blouin Jr, “Documenting the Great Migrations and a Century of
Ethnicity in America,” The American Archivist 39, no. 3 (July 1976): 319–28.
96 Richard Maxwell Brown, “The Archives of Violence,” The American Archivist 41, no. 4 (October
1978): 431–43.
97 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 7.
98 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 6.
99 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 8.
100 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 6.
101 “Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and Archival Scholarship,” 9.

45

As a vigorous debate over the role of history in the archives profession continued through
the 1980s in the pages of Archivaria, 102 Nesmith and others developed a scholarly agenda that
centered on the history of records and recordkeeping. American archivist and scholar Frank
Burke, for example, urged archivists to consider such questions as “What is it within the nature
of society that makes it create the records that it does?,” “What are the sociological aspects of
records management?,” and how does the decision-making structure of organizations “affect
what records will be kept?”103 In 1985, Nesmith claimed that the study of “the recording, use,
disposition, and preservation of documentation” 104 was at the center of archival scholarship, as
“the sustained study of this vast dimension of life gives rise to the discipline of archives.” 105 This
scholarship of records and recordkeeping was not designed to “turn archivists into historians
exploring the subject content of archival records, but rather to use historical research

102

This debate was most actively discussed in Archivaria 14 (1982) through Archivaria 20 (1985).
George Bolotenko, “Archivists and Historians: Keepers of the Well,” Archivaria 16 (Summer 1983): 5–
25 and Hugh Taylor, “Information Ecology and the Archives of the 1980s,” Archivaria 18 (Summer
1984): 25–37 exemplify both sides of the debate most starkly. Tom Nesmith, “Introduction: Archival
Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American Rediscovery of Provenance,” in Canadian
Archival Studies and the Rediscovery of Provenance (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1993), 13–17
provided an overview of this debate. Terry Cook listed the works involved in this discussion in footnote 2
of “From Information to Knowledge: An Intellectual Paradigm for Archives,” Archivaria 19 (Winter
1984-85): 29. The discussion about the role of history in the archives field extended beyond the pages of
Archivaria in the 1980s. A few additional works that address this topic include Lester J. Cappon, “What,
Then, Is There To Theorize About?,” The American Archivist 45, no. 1 (Winter 1982): 19–25; Mattie U.
Russell, “The Influence of Historians on the Archival Profession in the United States,” The American
Archivist 46, no. 3 (Summer 1983): 277–85; Tom Nesmith, “What’s History Got to Do With It?:
Reconsidering the Place of Historical Knowledge in Archival Work,” Archivaria 57 (Spring 2004): 1–27;
Richard J Cox, “Lester J. Cappon and the Relationship of History, Archives, and Scholarship in the
Golden Age of Archival Theory,” The American Archivist 68, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2005): 74–112;
Terry Cook, “The Archive(s) Is a Foreign Country: Historians, Archivists, and the Changing Archival
Landscape,” The American Archivist 74, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2011): 600–632; Francis X. Blouin Jr and
William G. Rosenberg, Processing the Past: Contesting Authority in History and the Archives (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2011); Michael Piggott, Archives and Societal Provenance: Australian
Essays (Oxford: Chandos Publishing, 2012).
103 “The Future Course of Archival Theory in the United States,” The American Archivist 44, no. 1
(Winter 1981): 42–43.
104 “Archivaria After Ten Years,” Archivaria 20 (Summer 1985): 14.
105 “Archivaria After Ten Years,” 14.

46

methodologies and interpretive insights to unravel the full, rich, contextual power of provenance
of archival records.” 106 Archivists must be, Nesmith contended, “historians of the record.” 107
Nesmith considered Hugh Taylor’s 1988 article “‘My Very Act and Deed’” to be an
important moment when many of the key archival actors in the history debate developed a loose
consensus around the notion that “archivists ought to focus more on why and how people have
created documentation, rather than on their subject content.” 108 In “‘My Very Act and Deed’”
Taylor contended that archivists should understand and engage with recent changes in
information and communication technology. He urged that archivists “must thoroughly
understand the strengths of the various media as records and the needs of users.” 109 The work of
Taylor and Nesmith indicated an emerging robustness in the study of records and recordkeeping
behavior because archival thinkers were actively engaging the topic using different intellectual
frameworks, such as social history or communications history. 110 Scholars, including Nesmith,
Taylor, Cook, American archivist Francis Blouin, and other archival figures often referred to this
scholarship as the “modern diplomatic.” Blouin noted that studying recordkeeping in
contemporary institutions “will become the diplomatics of the 21st century” and “will require all

106

Nesmith, “Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American
Rediscovery of Provenance,” 10.
107 “Toward the Discipline of Archives,” Archivaria 19 (Winter 1984-85): 20.
108 “Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American Rediscovery of
Provenance,” 17.
109 “‘My Very Act and Deed’: Some Reflections on the Role of Textual Records in the Conduct of
Affairs,” The American Archivist 51, no. 4 (Fall 1988): 467. Clarke A. Elliott gave a brief but useful
survey of the communications literature and its relationship to the study of records in “Communication
and Events in History: Toward a Theory for Documenting the Past,” The American Archivist 48, no. 4
(Fall 1985): 357–362.
110 Terry Cook referred to archivists who undertake this kind of work as historian-archivists. “From
Information to Knowledge: An Intellectual Paradigm for Archives,” 29.

47

the intellectual energy our profession can muster.” 111 Subsequently in the year 2000, Dutch
archival scholar Eric Ketelaar placed the study of what he calls archivalization—the creation,
use, and management of records before they become archives—as part of archivistics, a term
Ketelaar used to essentially name archival science. 112 He called for archivists to put a greater
emphasis on functional archivistics in order to focus on understanding the “work processes and
actions that give archives [archival records] their context and structure.” 113
By the end of the 1980s, the scholarship of records and recordkeeping had begun to form
its own center of gravity. In “‘My Very Act and Deed,’” Taylor pointed to a number of works
from the archival community that examined the history of records and recordkeeping. 114 He
highlighted Cook’s piece on government records documenting the administration of the northern
Canadian provinces and Canadian archivist Bill Russell’s article on the records of the Canadian
Department of Indian Affairs. Taylor praised their work, which described the challenges of
understanding the context of records managed in complex recordkeeping systems administered
by large bureaucratic organizations. 115 Both Russell and Cook focused their studies on the
recordkeeping practices of Canadian federal agencies during the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Other research conducted by archival thinkers in the late 1970s and 1980s include
studies on electronic recordkeeping practices in the mid-twentieth century such as an
111

“Convergences and Divergences in Archival Tradition: A North American Perspective,” in Second
European Conference on Archives Proceedings (Paris, 1989), 28 quoted in Nesmith, “Introduction:
Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American Rediscovery of Provenance,” 6–7.
112 “Archivistics Research Saving the Profession,” The American Archivist 63, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2000):
328.
113 “Archivistics Research Saving the Profession,” 326–27.
114 “‘My Very Act and Deed’: Some Reflections on the Role of Textual Records in the Conduct of
Affairs,” 461. Taylor referenced several works in footnote 19.
115 “‘My Very Act and Deed’: Some Reflections on the Role of Textual Records in the Conduct of
Affairs,” 462–464; Bill Russell, “The White Man’s Paper Burden: Aspects of Records Keeping in the
Department of Indian Affairs, 1860-1914,” Archivaria 19 (Winter 1984-85): 50–72; Terry Cook, “Paper
Trails: A Study in Northern Records and Northern Administration, 1898-1958,” in For Purposes of
Dominion: Essays in Honour of Morris Zaslow (North York, Ont.: Captus University Publications, 1989).

48

examination of the US State Department’s Foreign Affairs Information System (FAIS) and an
overview of the US military’s use of data systems during the Vietnam War. 116 During this time
Blouin, Canadian sociologist Graham S. Lowe, and American management professor JoAnne
Yates also contributed scholarship on the role of recordkeeping practices in the development of
American and Canadian businesses in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 117
Nesmith’s establishment of the “Studies in Documents” section of Archivaria in 1985
was a key moment in the development of the modern diplomatic because it provided a
publication venue precisely designed to support this kind of scholarship. The stated intent was to
encourage a “greater numbers of shorter articles on the history, structure, evolution, and research
value of archival material.” 118 Nesmith felt that adding “Studies in Documents” was necessary
because this research area was becoming “so large a field and so central in archival work.” 119
Although the number of articles published in this section has dropped over the past ten years,
“Studies in Documents” continues to be a part of Archivaria. 120

116 David H. Herschler and William Z. Slany, “The ‘Paperless Office’: A Case Study of the State
Department’s Foreign Affairs Information System,” The American Archivist 45, no. 2 (Spring 1982):
142–54; Donald Fisher Harrison, “Computers, Electronic Data, and the Vietnam War,” Archivaria 26
(Summer 1988): 18–32.
117 Francis X. Blouin Jr, “A New Perspective on the Appraisal of Business Records: A Review,” The
American Archivist 42, no. 3 (July 1979): 312–20; Graham S. Lowe, “‘The Enormous File’: The
Evolution of the Modern Office in Early Twentieth-Century Canada,” Archivaria 19 (Winter 1984-85):
137–51; JoAnne Yates, “Internal Communication Systems in American Business Structures: A
Framework to Aid Appraisal,” The American Archivist 48, no. 2 (Spring 1985): 141–58. Yates
subsequently wrote a landmark study on the evolution and interplay of business theory, information
technology, and recordkeeping practices in the evolution of nineteenth and twentieth century business.
Control Through Communication: The Rise of System in American Management (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1993).
118 Nesmith, “Archivaria After Ten Years,” 16; Terry Cook, “What Is Past Is Prologue: A History of
Archival Ideas Since 1898, and the Future Paradigm Shift,” Archivaria 43 (Spring 1997): 36.
119 “Archivaria After Ten Years,” 16.
120 Archivaria began including “Studies in Documents” in volume 20 (1985). There have been 62
volumes of the journal (each issue is its own volume) published since then. 35 “Studies in Documents”
articles were published in the first quartile of those volumes (volumes 20-34, 1985-1992). 15 articles were
published in the second quartile (volumes 35-49, 1992-2000). 10 articles were published in the third

49

Scholarship in the modern diplomatic tradition continued in the 1990s, 2000s, and into
the 2010s. A significant portion of this scholarship has focused on particular areas of study or
industries. Several studies have been written about records, recordkeeping, and archives in
ancient, medieval, and renaissance societies. These include broad investigations on the role of
written documents, 121 particular document types, 122 recordkeeping in particular institutions, 123
recordkeeping in support of canonization, 124 and an overview of the role of recordkeeping and
archives in ancient Israel. 125 Partially due to the records-intensive nature of health care work, the
recordkeeping practices of doctors and nurses have garnered particular attention. 126 Volumes 10
(Summer 1980) and 41 (Spring 1996) of Archivaria were devoted to archives and medicine and
the Fall 2014 issue of RBM: A Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage was

quartile (volumes 50-64, 2000-2007). 4 articles were published in the fourth quartile (volumes 65-78,
2008-2016).
121 M.T. Clanchy, “‘Tenacious Letters’: Archives and Memory in the Middle Ages,” Archivaria 11
(Winter 1980-81): 115–25; James E. O’Toole, “Herodotus and the Written Record,” Archivaria 33
(Winter 1991-92): 148–60; James Sickinger, “Literacy, Documents, and Archives in the Ancient
Athenian Democracy,” The American Archivist 62, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 229–46; Heather MacNeil, “From
the Memory of the Act to the Act Itself. The Evolution of Written Records as Proof of Jural Acts in
England, 11th to 17th Century,” Archival Science 6, no. 3–4 (December 2006): 313–28.
122 R. F. Hunnisett, “What Is a Plea Roll?,” Journal of Society of Archivists 9, no. 3 (1988); Phyllis
Culham, “Documents and Domus in Republican Rome,” Libraries & Culture 26, no. 1 (Winter 1991):
119–34.
123 Geoffrey Yeo, “Record-Keeping at St Paul’s Cathedral,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 8, no. 1
(April 1986): 30–44; Giorgetta Bonfiglio-Dosio, “Padua Municipal Archives from the 13th to the 20th
Centuries: A Case of a Record-Keeping System in Italy,” Archivaria 60 (Fall 2005): 91–104.
124 Michelle Light, “Evidence of Sanctity: Record-Keeping and Canonization at the Turn of the 13th
Century,” Archivaria 60 (Fall 2005): 106–23.
125 J. Andrew Dearman, “On Record-Keeping and the Preservation of Documents in Ancient Israel
(1000-587 B.C.E.),” Libraries & Culture 24, no. 3 (Summer 1989): 344–56.
126 Janice P. Dickin McGinnis, “Records of Tuberculosis in Calgary,” Archivaria 10 (Summer 1980):
173–89; D. N. Thompson, “Wirral Hospital Records,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 7, no. 7 (April
1985): 421–42; Phyllisis Ngin, “Recordkeeping Practices of Nurses in Hospitals,” The American
Archivist 57, no. 4 (Fall 1994): 616–30; Carolyn Heald, “Documenting Disease: Ontario’s Bureaucracy
Battles Tuberculosis,” Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996): 88–107; Volker Hess and Sophie Ledebur, “Taking
and Keeping: A Note on the Emergence and Function of Hospital Patient Records,” Journal of the Society
of Archivists 32, no. 1 (April 2011): 21–33.

50

devoted to historical medical libraries and archives. 127 Canadian archival scholar Barbara Craig
has played a leading role in producing scholarship in the modern diplomatic tradition on records
and recordkeeping in medicine, writing several articles and having a hand in editing the archives
and medicine special Archivaria issues. 128 The records and recordkeeping practices of the
Hudson’s Bay Company have also been a rich topic of this kind of scholarship. 129 Other works
of interest that fall within the modern diplomatic approach include studies of recordkeeping in
organizations 130 and government entities 131 and studies that focus on particular recordkeeping
systems and information technologies. 132

127

Gordon Dodds, Peter Bower, and Barbara Craig, “Archives and Medicine,” Archivaria 10 (Summer
1980): 3–4; Barbara L. Craig, “‘Archives and Medicine’ Revisited: Looking Out, Looking In, and
Looking Ahead,” Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996): 41–44; Michelle DiMeo, Jeffrey S. Reznick, and
Christopher Lyons, “Introduction: Emerging Roles for Historical Medical Libraries,” RBM: A Journal of
Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage 15, no. 2 (2014): 94–97.
128 Barbara Craig and Gordon Dodds, “The Picture of Health,” Archivaria 10 (Summer 1980): 191–223;
“Canadian Hospital in History and Archives,” Archivaria 21 (Winter 1985-86): 52–67; “Hospital Records
and Record-Keeping, C. 1850-C. 1950 Part 1: The Development of Records in Hospitals,” Archivaria 29
(Winter 1989-90): 57–87; “Hospital Records and Record-Keeping, C. 1850 - C. 1950 Part 11: The
Development of Record-Keeping in Hospitals,” Archivaria 30 (Summer 1990): 21–38; “Batson’s Trust
for the Royal London Hospital: Records Management 1820s Style,” Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996): 188–
205.
129 Arthur J. Ray, “The Early Hudson’s Bay Company Account Books as Sources for Historical
Research,” Archivaria 1 (Winter 1975-76): 3–38; Philip Goldring, “Labour Records of the Hudson’s Bay
Company, 1821-1870,” Archivaria 11 (Winter 1980-81): 53–86; Mark Walsh, “By Packtrain and
Steamer: The Hudson’s Bay Company’s British Columbia District Manager’s Correspondence, 18971920,” Archivaria 20 (Summer 1985): 127–35; Anne Morton, “‘We Are Still Adventurers’: The Records
of the Hudson’s Bay Company’s Development Department and Fish and Fish Products Department,
1925-1940,” Archivaria 21 (Winter 1985-86): 158–65; Judith Hudson Beattie, “Indian Maps in the
Hudson’s Bay Company Archives: A Comparison of Five Area Maps Recorded by Peter Fidler, 18011802,” Archivaria 21 (Winter 1985-86): 166–75; Alex Ross, “The Records of the Hudson’s Bay
Company Land Department, 1879-1963,” Archivaria 22 (Summer 1986): 114–19; Ruth May, “The Cycle
of Commerce: York Factory Records of Hudson’s Bay Company Supplies for the Northern Department,
1843-1845,” Archivaria 24 (Summer 1987): 47–68; Hugh Grant, “Bookkeeping in the Eighteenth
Century: The Grand Journal and Grand Ledger of the Hudson’s Bay Company,” Archivaria 43 (Spring
1997): 143–57; Siån Madsen, “The Evolution of Recordkeeping at the Hudson’s Bay Company,”
Archivaria 66 (Fall 2008): 26–56.
130 Serena Kelly, “A Sisterhood of Service: The Records and Early History of the National Union of
Women Workers,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 14, no. 2 (1993): 167–74; Elizabeth Yakel,
“Reading, Reporting, and Remembering: A Case Study of the Maryknoll Sisters’ Diaries,” Archivaria 57
(Spring 2004): 89–105.

51

Over the past fifteen years archival scholars have investigated how institutions and
individuals use recordkeeping as a tool of political power and oppression. 133 These studies have
examined recordkeeping and power in a wide range of historical settings from renaissance
Italy, 134 to the colonial Dutch West Indies, 135 to the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia, 136 to
twentieth-century Puerto Rico. 137 Some works in this area have been comparative studies, such
as American archival scholar Michelle Caswell’s use of twentieth century political philosopher
Hannah Arendt’s notion of the banality of evil to explore the role of bureaucratic recordkeeping

131

Brian Masschaele, “Memos and Minutes: Arnold Heeney, the Cabinet War Committee, and the
Establishment of a Canadian Cabinet Secretariat During the Second World War,” Archivaria 46 (Fall
1998): 147–74; Barbara Craig, “Rethinking Formal Knowledge and Its Practices in the Organization: The
British Treasury’s Registry Between 1900 and 1950,” Archival Science 2, no. 1–2 (2002): 111–36;
Gudmund Valderhaug, “Recordkeeping in Local Government in Norway 1950-2000,” Archival Science 3,
no. 2 (2003): 205–12; Sean Darcy, “The Evolution of the Department of Indian Affairs’ Central Registry
Record-Keeping Systems: 1872–1984,” Archivaria 58 (Fall 2004): 161–71; Peter J. Horsman, “A French
Legacy: The Transition from Collegiate to Bureaucratic Record-Keeping in a Dutch Town, 1800–1900,”
Archivaria 60 (Fall 2005): 125–44; Gillian C. Oliver and Kurmo Konsa, “Dismantling Bureaucracies:
Consequences for Record-Keeping in New Zealand and in Estonia,” Journal of the Society of Archivists
33, no. 1 (2012): 89–107.
132 Margaret O’Neill Adams, “Punch Card Records: Precursors of Electronic Records,” The American
Archivist 58 (Spring 1995): 182–201; Thea Miller, “The German Registry: The Evolution of a
Recordkeeping Model,” Archival Science 3 (2003): 43–63; Andrew Janes, “Maps as a Recordkeeping
Technology,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 32, no. 1 (April 2011): 119–34; Jane Zhang,
“Recordkeeping in Book Form: The Legacy of American Colonial Recordkeeping,” Information &
Culture: A Journal of History 49, no. 4 (2014): 469–91.
133 Key works in this rapidly expanding area of the archival literature include Verne Harris, “Claiming
Less, Delivering More: A Critique of Positivist Formulations on Archives in South Africa,” Archivaria 44
(Fall 1997): 132–41; Joan M. Schwartz and Terry Cook, “Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of
Modern Memory,” Archival Science 2, no. 1–2 (2002): 1–19; Verne Harris, “The Archival Sliver: Power,
Memory, and Archives in South Africa,” Archival Science 2, no. 1–2 (2002): 63–86; Eric Ketelaar,
“Archival Temples, Archival Prisons: Modes of Power and Protection,” Archival Science 2, no. 3–4
(2002): 171–85.
134 Richard Brown, “Death of a Renaissance Record-Keeper: The Murder of Tomasso Da Tortona in
Ferrara, 1385,” Archivaria 44 (Fall 1997): 1–43.
135 Ann Laura Stoler, “Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance,” Archival Science 2 (2002): 87–
109.
136 Michelle Caswell, Archiving the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the Photographic Record in
Cambodia (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2014).
137 Joel A. Blanco-Rivera, “The Forbidden Files: Creation and Use of Surveillance Files Against the
Independence Movement in Puerto Rico,” The American Archivist 68, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2005): 297–311.

52

in the Nazi and Khmer Rouge regimes. 138 This research on recordkeeping and political power
has been heavily influenced by, and can be seen as a part of the burgeoning literature on, the role
of records and archives in the areas of human rights and social justice. 139
Research situated in the modern diplomatic can be characterized primarily as archivists
using historical research methods to establish a rich, deep understanding of the provenance of
records. This work includes establishing the context of records’ creation and use and then
defining their relationship to other records, their place within recordkeeping systems, their form
and structure, and their value to their creators and users. 140 Cook noted that this type of research
has the potential to not only facilitate the understanding of particular archival collections or
individual documents, but also make contributions to archival theory and, more broadly, to
humanities and social science scholarship. 141 Cook summarized the nature of this kind of
research, noting, in part, that this research
explores the history, evolving functions, ever-changing structures, legal frameworks,
devolved or regional character, and organizational cultures of institutions that create
records…. It discerns the design, changes, and biases of records classification systems….
It tracks migrations of records. It assesses the possibilities (and limitations) of recording
technologies…. It studies patterns of communications in records in all media, how
records were shared within and across organizations, the delays of time and space
affecting such communication, and the impact of all this on the decision making reflected
in the records. It looks at how records were used (or not) for subsequent or later
transactions…. And of course, it tracks changing ownerships or provenances of the
records. 142

138

“Hannah Arendt’s World: Bureaucracy, Documentation, and Banal Evil,” Archivaria 70 (Fall 2010):
1–25.
139 Human rights records and archives is quickly becoming a vast literature and documenting its extent is
beyond the scope of this dissertation. Two works that provide helpful overviews of the literature are
Michelle Caswell, “Defining Human Rights Archives: Introduction to the Special Double Issue on
Archives and Human Rights,” Archival Science 14, no. 3–4 (2014): 207–13 and Wendy M. Duff et al.,
“Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary Investigation,” Archival Science 13 (2013): 317–48.
140 Cook, “What Is Past Is Prologue: A History of Archival Ideas Since 1898, and the Future Paradigm
Shift,” 35–36.
141 “From Information to Knowledge: An Intellectual Paradigm for Archives,” 40.
142 “The Archive(s) Is a Foreign Country,” 619–20.

53

In the 1980s and 1990s, most of the research coming from the archival community
situated under the rubric of the modern diplomatic consisted of careful, systematic examinations
of records in archives far removed from their creation environment. The context of the creation
and use of these records was studied using historical research methods. For Nesmith, this
scholarship enables archivists to research and understand the history and provenance of
increasingly voluminous and complex records that they must appraise, describe, and preserve. 143
He contended that records and recordkeeping scholarship is not just a side-interest of archivists,
but a key part of their work. Knowledge of the “underlying factors shaping the emergence and
characteristics” of records, noted Nesmith, “is a prerequisite to locating and interpreting them in
archival institutions.” 144
Others, especially Cook, noted that research into recordkeeping and the context of
records creation and their use is vital to archival work. While completing a history of the
Canadian Department of the Interior’s recordkeeping practices, Cook pointed out that the
organization of departments become so complicated that archivists have to make careful
historical studies of the department’s records and recordkeeping systems in order to do the
sophisticated archival work that the archival records, and their users, deserve. 145 Both Yates and
Blouin have demonstrated how understanding institutional functions, operations, and procedures

143

“Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American Rediscovery of
Provenance,” 16–17. This debate about history and recordkeeping scholarship in fact, Nesmith claimed,
laid the intellectual groundwork for the landmark article on provenance, David A. Bearman and Richard
H. Lytle, “The Power of the Principle of Provenance,” Archivaria 21 (Winter 1985-86): 14–27.
144 “Archivaria After Ten Years,” 14.
145 “Legacy in Limbo: An Introduction to the Records of the Department of the Interior,” 81. We can see
the manifestation of this records and recordkeeping scholarship directly informing the work of archivists
with Library and Archives Canada’s macroappraisal efforts. Cook, “Macro-Appraisal and Functional
Analysis: Documenting Governance rather than Government,” 6–8.

54

can and should inform the archivist’s appraisal of business records. 146 In an article discussing
archival education, Cook asserted, “The fundamental (and foundational) characteristic of
archival work is original research by archivists into the history and contemporary nature of
archival records, record creators, recording media, and recordkeeping systems.” 147 Cook
maintained that in researching collections under their archival care, archivists support appraisal,
description, access, and complex reference questions. 148
At a time when the archival profession and education were moving towards librarianship
and away from history as an intellectual anchor, Cook and others, such as Taylor, Nesmith, and
Blouin claimed the centrality of historical recordkeeping research. This shift towards
librarianship created an increased focus on understanding technological challenges and on
establishing and implementing description and access standards. Historical studies of
recordkeeping behavior often promoted the value of historical research into this increasingly
diverse and multi-disciplinary work of archivists. Barbara Craig addressed this tension between
archival practice being rooted in librarianship or history when she noted, “Historical studies
expose the complex roles of contingent choices in daily work. Pursuing records history nurtures
the skill of mature discernment in working records professionals whose practices are increasingly
directed by standards that are universalized and rational as opposed to particular and unique.” 149
In another example of an archivist defending this type of scholarship, Bill Russell talked at
length about the centrality of this research to archival work,
146

Yates, “Internal Communication Systems in American Business Structures: A Framework to Aid
Appraisal,” 154–58; Blouin Jr, “A New Perspective on the Appraisal of Business Records: A Review,”
313-20.
147 “‘The Imperative of Challenging Absolutes’ in Graduate Archival Education Programs: Issues for
Educators and the Profession,” The American Archivist 63, no. 2 (Fall-Winter 2000): 385.
148 “‘The Imperative of Challenging Absolutes’ in Graduate Archival Education Programs: Issues for
Educators and the Profession,” 385–286.
149 “Rethinking Formal Knowledge and Its Practices in the Organization: The British Treasury’s Registry
Between 1900 and 1950,” 113.

55

It is not simply historical curiosity, then, that prompts the study of past records-keeping
policies and practices. Rather, it is a belief that the government records archivist has a
great deal to learn about the records-creating agency through an historical investigation of
the records-keeping process itself...If we are to do justice to the records charged to our
care today, we must understand the relationship between the structure and organization of
the creating agency and the records created, and integrate a knowledge of the recordskeeping process into an understanding of the record. If research into the ‘nuts and bolts’
of the records-keeping function can help provide these insights, then clearly that research
is part of the archivist’s duty to perform. 150
Cultural heritage consultant David Bearman also made important contributions to the
claim that this kind of archival scholarship is a critical part of archivists’ work. In 1985, Bearman
and archivist Richard Lytle proposed strategies for improving access to archival records that
rested on the assumption that archivists had a sophisticated understanding of the provenance of
records produced by modern organizations. The two authors contended that archivists had to
switch from a “mono-hierarchical,” classical understanding of organizations to a “polyhierarchical” view that “captures traditional hierarchical relationships across time as
organizations re-form themselves…[and] relationships which are not within the scope of
superior/subordinate relationships.” 151 In a subsequent article, Bearman highlighted the
importance of documenting “the relationship between the activity and the document created or
received in that activity” for providing access to archival records. 152

The Administrative-Juridical Perspective
As noted above, the emergence in the 1980s and 1990s of the modern diplomatic as a
methodology that could inform archival practice coincided with a growing recognition in the
archival field that the profession needed new strategies for appraising, capturing, describing, and
preserving increasingly voluminous electronic records produced by increasingly complex and
150

“The White Man’s Paper Burden: Aspects of Records Keeping in the Department of Indian Affairs,
1860-1914,” 50.
151 “The Power of the Principle of Provenance,” 17–19.
152 “Documenting Documentation,” Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992): 34.

56

dynamic institutions. These challenges prompted research that focused on the administrative,
functional, and legal roles of records within institutions and the evidentiary relationship between
records, functions, and activities. Most of this research focused predominantly on explicit
warrants, rules, and procedures for recordkeeping activities. This section examines three areas of
the administrative-juridical research: functional analysis, warrants, and the revitalization of
diplomatics to examine modern records.
As archivists grappled with increasingly complex records over the course of the twentieth
century, they developed a range of appraisal, arrangement, and description strategies for meeting
this challenge. Of particular interest in this review are appraisal strategies that focused on
business functions of institutions to determine the value of records rather than concentrating on
the records themselves. This functional approach has had a wide range of implementations and a
long, complicated heritage. Appraisal efforts that use functional approaches have a common
theme of valuing the importance of understanding the records creation process and environment.
The development of the series system in Australia provided a critical aspect of the
development of this appraisal focus on records creators and their business functions. 153 Because
of the complex custodial history of government records in Australia, government archivists, most
notably Ian Maclean and Peter J. Scott, developed the series system as a way to flexibly manage
and describe the relationships between records and government agencies. 154 With this approach,
government archivists emphasized understanding the functional activities of agencies over

153 Chris Hurley, “The Australian (‘Series’) System: An Exposition,” in The Records Continuum: Ian
Maclean and Australian Archives—First Fifty Years (Canberra, Australia: Ancora Press, 1996), 150–172.
154 Adrian Cunningham, Laura Millar, and Barbara Reed, “Peter J. Scott and the Australian ‘Series’
System: Its Origins, Features, Rationale, Impact and Continuing Relevance” (International Congress on
Archives, Brisbane, Australia: International Council on Archives, 2012),
http://www.ica2012.com/files/pdf/Full%20papers%20upload/ica12Final00414.pdf. One of the most
important articulations of the series system is Peter Scott, “The Record Group Concept: A Case for
Abandonment,” The American Archivist 29, no. 4 (October 1966): 493–504.

57

understanding where agencies happened to sit organizationally within the Australian
government. The series system has had a lasting impact on the discourse concerning archival
practice and the understanding of recordkeeping activities. 155
Archivists and archival scholars have looked back to the work of German philosopher
and sociologist Max Weber to gain a theoretical grounding in the nature of bureaucracies. 156
Weber’s theories have played a foundational role in understanding how organizations conduct
their business, and in turn, the role that records play in those activities. 157 While not specifically
referencing Weber or the Australian series system, American archivist Clark A. Elliott, for
example, used functional analysis of institutional recordkeeping with two studies on Harvard
University records, developing a “preliminary classification scheme for document functions” 158
and examining records that supported “action-oriented, instrumentalist function[s].” 159
American Helen Samuels, the Institute Archivist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, played a critical part in articulating the role of functional analysis in appraisal and
urging archivists to turn their attention away from records and towards the activities and business
functions that demanded records creation. She described functional analysis in publications
155

For a discussion of implementing the series system in an American context, see Max Evans,
“Authority Control: An Alternative to the Record Group Concept,” The American Archivist 49, no. 3
(Summer 1986): 249–61. The series system also influenced the development of the records continuum.
For a discussion of the link between the two concepts see Heather Ann Soyka, “Records as Force
Multiplier: Understanding the Records Continuum as a Framework for Examining the Role of Records in
a Community” (Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2015), 45–48.
156 Francis X. Blouin Jr, “A New Perspective on the Appraisal of Business Records: A Review”; Michael
A. Lutzker, “Max Weber and the Analysis of Modern Bureaucratic Organization: Notes Toward a Theory
of Appraisal,” The American Archivist 45, no. 2 (Spring 1982): 119–30; David Bearman, “Diplomatics,
Weberian Bureaucracy, and the Management of Electronic Records in Europe and America,” The
American Archivist 55 (Winter 1992): 168–81.
157 Michael A. Lutzker discussed how Weberian and post-Weberian analysis can inform the study of
institutional recordkeeping. “Max Weber and the Analysis of Modern Bureaucratic Organization: Notes
Toward a Theory of Appraisal,” 124–130.
158 “Communication and Events in History: Toward a Theory for Documenting the Past,” 362–68.
159 “Founding of the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard University, 1846-1847: A Study in Writing
and History,” Archivaria 38 (Fall 1994): 121.

58

outlining documentation strategies at the societal and institutional level.160 Her work on
functional analysis and documentation strategies influenced, and was influenced by, the
development of macroappraisal at the National Archives of Canada. 161 Broadly speaking,
documentation strategies, functional analysis, and macroappraisal, approaches that all matured in
the 1980s and 1990s, moved archival appraisal away from examining records for the information
they contained and towards evaluating the functions and actions that records supported. These
appraisal strategies embodied the modern diplomatic ethos: the study of records and
recordkeeping is an area of scholarship in its own right, as well as an essential component of
archival work.
As discussed earlier, one of the key challenges archivists faced in the second half of the
twentieth century was how to appraise, preserve, and provide access to electronic records. In
particular, archivists debated the applicability of long-standing archival practices and theory in
the context of electronic records. 162 A 1990s project at the University of Pittsburgh, formally
known as “Variables in the Satisfaction of Archival Requirements for Electronic Records
Management” (commonly called the Pittsburgh Project) played a key role in articulating the
“potential of electronic recordkeeping technology” and reemphasizing the importance of

160

Helen Samuels, “Who Controls the Past?,” The American Archivist 49, no. 2 (Spring 1986): 109–24;
Helen Samuels, Varsity Letters: Documenting Modern Colleges and Universities (Metuchen, N.J.:
Scarecrow Press, 1992). For a sense of Samuels’ wide-ranging influence, see Terry Cook, ed., Controlling
the Past: Documenting Society and Institutions: Essays in Honor of Helen Willa Samuels (Chicago:
Society of American Archivists, 2011).
161 Terry Cook, “Documenting Society and Institutions: The Influence of Helen Willa Samuels,” in
Controlling the Past: Documenting Society and Institutions: Essays in Honor of Helen Willa Samuels
(Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011), 22–25. Key works by Samuels include “Who Controls
the Past?,” The American Archivist 49, no. 2 (Spring 1986): 109–24 and Varsity Letters: Documenting
Modern Colleges and Universities (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1992).
162 For a brief synopsis of this discussion see Cox, “Re-Discovering the Archival Mission: The
Recordkeeping Functional Requirements Project at the University of Pittsburgh, a Progress Report,” 279–
282. For a more extensive study see Richard J. Cox, The First Generation of Electronic Records
Archivists in the United States: A Study in Professionalization (New York: Haworth Press, 1994).

59

preserving the evidential value of records. 163 One of the key outcomes of the project was on the
role of warrants in the creation of records and recordkeeping systems. This research, led by
archival scholars Wendy Duff and Richard J. Cox, provided a framework for examining the
authorizations that institutions generate in order to produce records with reliable evidential value
that can be judged as authentic. 164
The Preservation of the Integrity of Electronic Records project (also known as the
University of British Columbia Project) was another important 1990s electronic records study. 165
This project directly led to the InterPARES project, a three-part international research effort that
began in 1998 and finished in 2012, which also studied the nature of records and requirements
for recordkeeping systems to produce durable and authentic electronic records. 166 Led by
Luciana Duranti, the two projects were deeply influenced by her work to reintroduce the
Renaissance-era document analysis methodology of diplomatics as an analytic framework to

163

Cox, “Re-Discovering the Archival Mission: The Recordkeeping Functional Requirements Project at
the University of Pittsburgh, a Progress Report,” 280. For an extensive report on the Pittsburgh Project,
see Wendy Duff, David Thomas, and David Wallace, “Working Meeting on Electronic Records,”
Archives and Museum Informatics 8, no. 4 (1994): 301–52.
164 Wendy Margaret Duff, “The Influence of Warrant on the Acceptance and Credibility of the Functional
Requirements for Recordkeeping” (Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh, 1996); Wendy Duff, “Increasing the
Acceptance of Functional Requirements for Electronic Evidence,” Archives and Museum Informatics 10,
no. 4 (1994): 326–51; Richard J Cox and Wendy Duff, “Warrant and the Definition of Electronic
Records: Questions Arising from the Pittsburgh Project,” Archives and Museum Informatics 11 (1997):
223–31; Wendy M. Duff, “Harnessing the Power of Warrant,” The American Archivist 61, no. 1 (Spring
1998): 88–105.
165 This project examined that nature of the record, its characteristics in principal and in electronic
recordkeeping systems, and requirements for systems to create reliable and authentic records. School of
Library, Archival & Information Studies, The University of British Columbia, “UBC Project:
Preservation & Integrity - Introduction.”
166 The InterPARES Project aimed to develop “the knowledge essential to the long-term preservation of
authentic records created and/or maintained in digital form and providing the basis for standards, policies,
strategies and plans of action capable of ensuring the longevity of such material and the ability of its users
to trust its authenticity.” School of Library, Archival & Information Studies, The University of British
Columbia, “The InterPARES Project.” A useful overview of InterPARES I and II is in Luciana Duranti,
“The InterPARES 2 Project (2002– 2007): An Overview,” Archivaria 64 (Fall 2007): 113–21. The
InterPARES Project now continues as the InterPARES Trust project (2013-2018),
https://interparestrust.org.

60

systematically evaluate the trustworthiness of electronic recordkeeping systems and the
authenticity of electronic records.
Duranti defined diplomatics as the “discipline which studies the genesis, forms, and
transmissions of archival documents, and their relationship with the facts represented in them
and with their creator, in order to identify, evaluate, and communicate their true nature.” 167
Although diplomatics is focused on the study of documents, it provides a process for examining
the creation of records, making it a potentially useful tool for the study of recordkeeping
behavior. Canadian archival scholar Heather MacNeil noted that diplomatics helps archivists
understand the juridical system that provides the records creation context, the act that the record
is documenting, the procedures that guide the record’s creation, and the documentary form—the
elements and their structure—of the record. 168 Diplomatics presents a formal structure for
studying the process of records creation and the actors and contexts that shape the record. 169
Duranti articulated the core of her work on diplomatics in a series of six Archivaria
articles published from 1989 to 1992. 170 With these six articles and other writings, Duranti
fostered a new interest in the North American archival literature on the feasibility of diplomatics
as a tool to help archivists face the appraisal and preservation challenge of modern, electronic

167

“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part I,” 17.
“Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of Inquiry: Lessons Learned from Two Research
Projects,” Archival Science 4, no. 3–4 (September 2004): 205.
169 Durant describes the relationship of facts, acts, and records, and the role of juridical systems in the
second of her six-article series. She describes the various roles that people occupy in the records creation
process in the third article and records creating procedures in the fourth article. “Diplomatics: New Uses
for an Old Science, Part II”; “Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part III”; “Diplomatics: New
Uses for an Old Science, Part IV”.
170 “Diplomatics,” Summer 1989; “Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part II”; “Diplomatics:
New Uses for an Old Science, Part III”; “Diplomatics,” Winter 1990-91; “Diplomatics,” Summer 1991;
“Diplomatics,” Winter 1991-92.
168

61

records. 171 Much of this literature was written in the 1990s and was highlighted by a special
issue of The American Archivist in 1996 on diplomatics. 172 In describing diplomatics, several
authors gave histories of the methodology’s origins and evolution in Europe. 173 Several
archivists wrote case studies examining the effectiveness and feasibility of using diplomatics to
appraise archival records. 174 Three archivists explored the feasibility of using diplomatics to
explore photographs and one archivist used the methodology to examine technical drawings. 175
Several authors in the 1990s discussed the usefulness of diplomatics for appraising and studying
modern records. 176

171

Duranti’s other key works on Diplomatics include a republishing of the six Archivaria articles in a
single volume Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, and “From Digital Diplomatics to Digital
Records Forensics,” Archivaria 68 (Fall 2009): 39–66.
172 Francis Blouin and Bruno Delmas, “Introduction,” The American Archivist 59, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 412–
13.
173 Don C. Skemer, “Diplomatics and Archives,” The American Archivist 52, no. 3 (Summer 1989): 376–
82; Bearman, “Diplomatics, Weberian Bureaucracy, and the Management of Electronic Records in
Europe and America”; Oliver Guyotjeannin, “The Expansion of Diplomatics as a Discipline,” The
American Archivist 59, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 414–21; Bernard Barbiche, “Diplomatics of Modern Official
Documents (Sixteenth - Eighteenth Centuries): Evaluation and Perspectives,” The American Archivist 59,
no. 4 (Fall 1996): 422–36; MacNeil, “Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of Inquiry:
Lessons Learned from Two Research Projects,” 202–4; Charlotte Harrison, “Thomas Madox and the
Origins of English Diplomatic Scholarship,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 29, no. 2 (October 2008):
147–169.
174 Janet Turner, “Experimenting with New Tools: Special Diplomatics and the Study of Authority in the
United Church of Canada,” Archivaria 30 (Summer 1990): 91–103; Barbiche, “Diplomatics of Modern
Official Documents (Sixteenth - Eighteenth Centuries): Evaluation and Perspectives”; Tom Belton, “By
Whose Warrant? Analyzing Documentary Form and Procedure,” Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996): 206–20;
Susan E. Storch, “Diplomatics: Modern Archival Method or Medieval Artifact,” The American Archivist
61, no. 2 (Fall 1998): 365–383.
175 Joan Schwartz, “‘We Make Our Tools and Our Tools Make Us’: Lessons from Photographs for the
Practice, Politics, and Poetics of Diplomatics,” Archivaria 40 (Fall 1995): 40–74; Elisabeth Parinet,
“Diplomatics and Institutional Photos,” The American Archivist 59, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 466–79; Nancy
Bartlett, “Diplomatics for Photographic Images: Academic Exoticism?,” The American Archivist 59, no. 4
(Fall 1996): 486–94. The examination of technical drawings is in Paul J. Sillitoe, “Diplomatic Analysis of
Technical Drawings: Developing New Theory for Practical Application,” Archival Science 14, no. 2
(2014): 125–68.
176 Bearman, “Diplomatics, Weberian Bureaucracy, and the Management of Electronic Records in
Europe and America”; Blouin and Delmas, “Introduction”; Bruno Delmas, “Manifesto for a
Contemporary Diplomatics: From Institutional Documents to Organic Information,” The American
Archivist 59, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 438–52; MacNeil, “Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of

62

Some archivists and archival scholars voiced critiques about the usefulness and
applicability of diplomatics to the work of most late twentieth-century archivists. 177 Diplomatic
analysis is designed to be applied to individual documents. By using an inductive approach for
analysis of a document’s characteristics, one learns about the process of its creation, the acts it is
documenting, and the people who created it. Terry Cook noted that this approach “must still be
coupled with a broader understanding…of the animating functions, structures, and
interrelationships of the creators that contextualize those isolated, individual documents.” 178
Cook contended that archivists should use the archival approach that works from the context
down to the record along with the diplomatic approach that works from the record up to the
context. He claimed that “the top-down approach permits a better understanding of function,
process, and activity; the bottom-up approach allows sharper insight into evidential
transactions.” 179
Discussion about diplomatics in the literature also examined how the approach is used, or
not used, to examine the relationship of records and institutional power. Canadian archivist Joan
Schwartz, for example, questioned some of the assumptions implicit in diplomatics, noting that
the methodology was developed as an instrument that “served to maintain the hegemonic
ideologies, political powers, and economic might of the great families, the state, and the
Inquiry: Lessons Learned from Two Research Projects.” Duranti focuses most of her first and sixth article
in her diplomatics series to the question of the methodology’s applicability to modern records.
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part I,” Summer 1989; Duranti, “Diplomatics: New Uses for
an Old Science, Part VI,” Winter 1991-92.
177 For example, MIT archivist Susan Storch claimed that diplomatics provided a helpful intellectual
frame for thinking about records, but was less useful as a tool to examine particular archival collections or
series. “Diplomatics: Modern Archival Method or Medieval Artifact,” 383.
178 “What Is Past Is Prologue: A History of Archival Ideas Since 1898, and the Future Paradigm Shift,”
37. Joan Schwartz noted, “diplomatic microanalysis strikes a chord of methodological dissonance in the
post-custodial era of archival abundance.” “‘We Make Our Tools and Our Tools Make Us’: Lessons from
Photographs for the Practice, Politics, and Poetics of Diplomatics,” 61.
179 “What Is Past Is Prologue: A History of Archival Ideas Since 1898, and the Future Paradigm Shift,”
37.

63

church.” 180 Schwartz also claimed that while diplomatics was oriented toward seeking the
“truth” of records, studies using the method tended to deemphasize the contested nature of
records and archives. 181 Yakel stated that diplomatic analysis cannot reveal the full complexity
and political nature of the processes that produced the documents, in large part because of the
divergence found in most organizations between their documented procedures and their actual
practices. 182 In a study of Italian Renaissance recordkeeping and records destruction, Canadian
archivist Richard Brown contended that in Duranti’s diplomatics research, she has looked at the
history of recordkeeping through an exclusively administrative-juridical lens that leaves issues of
power consolidation and social control through records unexplored. 183
Underlying these critiques was a contention that diplomatics, particularly as Duranti
envisioned it, supports a systematic examination of records to discern universal characteristics
about records while ignoring political and social-cultural factors that influence recordkeeping,
especially the use of records in the service of the state and the powerful. Certainly Duranti and
MacNeil articulated diplomatics as a scholarly methodology designed to reveal the “true” nature
of records. MacNeil claimed that diplomatics “reflected a belief in the possibility of discovering
a consistent, underlying truth about the nature of a record through the application of rigorous
techniques for analyzing its various components.” 184 Conversely, recordkeeping scholarship

180

“‘We Make Our Tools and Our Tools Make Us’: Lessons from Photographs for the Practice, Politics,
and Poetics of Diplomatics,” 61.
181 “‘We Make Our Tools and Our Tools Make Us’: Lessons from Photographs for the Practice, Politics,
and Poetics of Diplomatics,” 61.
182 “The Way Things Work,” 458–63.
183 “Death of a Renaissance Record-Keeper: The Murder of Tomasso Da Tortona in Ferrara, 1385,” 3–7,
22–24. More generally, Brown critiques Duranti’s interpretation of role of records and recordkeeping in
European Renaissance society. For a critique of Duranti’s interpretation of the role of archives in Roman
society see Frank Boles and Mark A. Greene, “Et Tu Schellenberg? Thoughts on the Dagger of American
Appraisal Theory,” The American Archivist 59, no. 3 (Summer 1996): 300–302.
184 “Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of Inquiry: Lessons Learned from Two Research
Projects,” 207.

64

produced by archival scholars such as Schwartz, Yakel, and Brown has tended to emphasize
contingent circumstances, power relationships, and personal and political motivations over
universal truths about records and recordkeeping. 185
The differences between the scholarship that has emphasized the universality of records
and the scholarship that has emphasized the contingencies of recordkeeping has also driven the
divergent methodological frameworks of recordkeeping research. Diplomatics centers on
documents and written processes while socio-cultural-driven recordkeeping research emphasizes
the context and circumstances of recordkeeping practices. Both methodological approaches,
however, are often used in case studies. 186 It is from the particulars of case studies that many
researchers have tried to make broader conclusions about universal characteristics of records and
to develop new insights about the role of records in society and power relationships. From this
common case study approach are opportunities for incorporating administrative-juridical and
socio-cultural perspectives in the same research. Indeed, MacNeil suggested that diplomatics
could be aligned with socio-cultural perspectives by positioning the diplomatics model “within
the framework of the emerging contextualist approach.” 187
The Socio-Cultural Perspective
In the 1990s and 2000s, a second area of scholarship emerged within the modern diplomatic that
focused on the socio-cultural aspects of records and recordkeeping. As discussed above, this
scholarship has been characterized by a focus on the complex and contested factors that shape

185

Education scholars Yvonna S. Lincoln and Egon G. Guba describe this outlook as being driven by a
notion of reality known as “constructed reality.” Naturalistic Inquiry (Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE
Publications, 1985), 83–85.
186 Diplomatic studies of a particular record or set of records is known as special diplomatics. Duranti,
“Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science, Part I,” 9.
187 “Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of Inquiry: Lessons Learned from Two Research
Projects,” 230.

65

records creation, keeping, and use. This section focuses on how the socio-cultural recordkeeping
literature of the modern diplomatic has built on the influence of postmodernism in archival
thinking, and recordkeeping scholarship in organizational behavior, sociology, anthropology, and
science and technology studies. This review also discusses the emergence of ethnographicallyinspired methodologies within the modern diplomatic scholarship.
In a 1996 article, published in the special American Archivist issue devoted to
diplomatics, Yakel expanded on Duranti’s articulation of the diplomatic study of the process—
the genese—of records creation by reviewing how organizational theorists discussed the role of
records in organizations. 188 Yakel traced the maturation of this scholarship to the fact that
organizational behavior and sociology scholars began to treat records not just as vessels of
information, but as a result of creation, management, and use activities that are as complex and
important as any aspect of organizational life. 189 In particular, Yakel highlighted the work of
American anthropologist and science and technology studies scholar Lucy Suchman. Yakel
pointed to Suchman’s scholarship which exposed the complex relationship between work,
procedures, and records and her contention that records do not descend neatly from procedures
as a perfect reflection of actions and decisions. 190 Craig echoed Suchman’s themes when she
noted that “procedures fixed in manuals, rules, and orders…all aimed to provide sense of order…
However, the reality of work … [was] never in any way as stable as textual fixity implies and

188

“The Way Things Work.”
“The Way Things Work,” 456–59.
190 “The Way Things Work,” 460. Yakel also used Suchman’s work to build the framework of her
dissertation about radiologists’ recordkeeping practices. “Recordkeeping in Radiology: The Relationships
between Activities and Records in Radiological Processes” (Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1997),
13–17. In particular, Yakel referenced “Office Procedure as Practical Action: Models of Work and
System Design,” ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 1, no. 4 (October 1983): 320–28.
189

66

generally orderly organization of files tends to suggest.” 191 Processes, rules, practices, and
records, claimed Craig, emerged out of relationships that were continuously negotiated within
organizations. 192
Ciaran Trace built on Yakel’s exploration of organizational behavior scholarship related
to recordkeeping with a review of several sociological and anthropological studies of the
recordkeeping practices of law enforcement officers. 193 She discusses the work of sociologists
Harold Garfinkel and Aaron Cicourel, criminal justice scholar Merry Morash, and organizational
behavior scholars Brian Pentland and John Van Maanen, among others. 194 The scholarship of
these and other authors, claimed Trace, demonstrated the complex array of factors that
influenced the creation, management and use of records. Trace examined their work around the
issues of how institutional socialization shapes records creation, the relationship between the
purpose and use of records, and how the anticipation of internal and external uses of records
influenced their production. 195 In a 2016 article, Trace delved into what ethnomethodology can
offer for the study of recordkeeping behavior. Exploring the work of Garfinkel, Edmund Husserl,
and Alfred Schütz, among others, Trace noted that ethnomethodology “emphasizes the ties that
exist between documents and the social order that creates and is created by these documents.” 196
The concepts of natural attitude, reflexivity, and indexicality, within an ethnomethodological
191

“Rethinking Formal Knowledge and Its Practices in the Organization: The British Treasury’s Registry
Between 1900 and 1950,” 135–36.
192 “Rethinking Formal Knowledge and Its Practices in the Organization: The British Treasury’s Registry
Between 1900 and 1950,” 115.
193 “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’.”
194 Trace referenced the following works by these authors: Harold Garfinkel, “Good Organizational
Reasons for ‘Bad’ Clinic Records,” in Studies in Ethnomethodology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall, 1967); Aaron V Cicourel, The Social Organization of Juvenile Justice (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1968); Morash, “Establishment of a Juvenile Police Record: The Influence of Individual and Peer
Group Characteristics”; Van Maanen and Pentland, “Cops and Auditors: The Rhetoric of Records.”
195 “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’,” 141.
196 “Ethnomethodology: Foundational Insights on the Nature and Meaning of Documents in Everyday
Life,” Journal of Documentation 72, no. 1 (2016): 55.

67

framework, claimed Trace, can be used study how people within a community make sense of
records and recordkeeping rules and use those records and rules to make sense of their world. 197
Additionally, Trace discussed how records and recordkeeping is examined in workplace studies,
computer supported cooperative work (CSCW), and genre studies. 198 Trace has also situated
research on recordkeeping behavior within human information behavior. 199
Trace closely aligned this anthropological and sociological recordkeeping research with
the growing influence of postmodernism in archival theory, referencing an extensive set of
literature. 200 She noted that this recordkeeping research she reviewed, such as the postmoderninspired literature on archives, recast records from being neutral byproducts of activities to
politically contested objects that people and organizations consciously shape. This research about
recordkeeping and archives, she claimed, enriched archival scholarship practice, because “only
in problematizing the nature of the record will archivists finally begin to develop a true theory of
the record.” 201 She also claimed that this new wave of research enriched archival practice,
noting, “By drawing on new analytic frameworks and methodologies, the archival profession can
broaden and deepen archivists’ understanding of the nature of the material that they manage.” 202
With their discussion of anthropological and sociological research on recordkeeping,
Yakel and Trace suggested a new methodology for the modern diplomatic. This approach
emphasizes the direct observation of recordkeeping activities—especially records creation—over
197

“Ethnomethodology: Foundational Insights on the Nature and Meaning of Documents in Everyday
Life,” 55–61.
198 “Documenting Work and Working Documents: Perspectives from Workplace Studies, CSCW, and
Genre Studies,” in Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Honolulu, HI, 2011).
199 “Information Creation and the Notion of Membership,” Journal of Documentation 63, no. 1 (2007):
142–63.
200 See footnote 5 for references to works discussing postmodernism and archives. “What Is Recorded Is
Never Simply `What Happened’,” 140.
201 “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’,” 138.
202 “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’,” 138.

68

the sole reliance of examining documents long after their creation. 203 This moves the direction of
the modern diplomatic away from historical approaches and toward anthropological research
strategies. Separately, American archival scholars Karen Gracy and Kalpana Shankar detailed
their use of ethnographically-inspired techniques to study the recordkeeping behaviors of a film
preservation lab and a university lab conducting basic scientific research. 204 Gracy and Shankar,
reporting on their respective doctoral research projects, 205 demonstrated how modern diplomatic
scholarship could be driven by the observation and interviews of people and communities rather
than the analysis of records in archives. American information scientist Dharma Akmon also
provided examples of modern diplomatic research that methodologically focused primarily on
people rather than records. 206
This socio-cultural focused and ethnographically inspired recordkeeping behavior
research builds on a long history of research produced since the 1960s in the fields of
anthropology and sociology. These studies have evolved from examining how researchers
needed to understand records creation processes to support their research on another topic—
making the assumption that records are merely vessels of data for scholar’s research—to
research that is now focused on the records creator’s perspective and motivations, thus making

203

Yakel, “The Way Things Work,” 459.
Karen Gracy, “Documenting Communities of Practice: Making the Case of Archival Ethnography,”
Archival Science 4, no. 3–4 (2004): 335–65; Shankar, “Recordkeeping in the Production of Scientific
Knowledge.”
205 Karen Gracy, “The Imperative to Preserve: Competing Definitions of Value in the World of Film
Preservation” (Dissertation, University of California Los Angeles, 2001); Kalpana Shankar, “Scientists,
Records, and the Practical Politics of Infrastructure” (Dissertation, University of California Los Angeles,
2002).
206 Dharma Akmon et al., “The Application of Archival Concepts to a Data-Intensive Environment:
Working with Scientists to Understand Data Management and Preservation Needs,” Archival Science 11,
no. 3 (2011): 329–48; Akmon, “The Role of Conceptions of Value in Data Practices: A Multi-Case Study
of Three Small Teams of Ecological Scientists.”
204

69

the record and recordkeeping the object of study. 207 In addition, recordkeeping behavior research
in the archival field has been influenced by scholarship from the science and technology studies
field. For example, Shankar used sociologist Leigh Star and systems scholar Geoffrey Bowker’s
notion of “infrastructural inversion” to frame her research on the production of scientific data in
a research lab. 208 In particular, recent recordkeeping scholarship in the archival field has been
influenced by research on values and biases embedded in systems. Rather than taking
institutional and societal systems, including recordkeeping systems and processes, at face value,
this line of research has endeavored to expose and interrogate the full complexity and contested
nature of these systems. Star, Bowker, and organizational behavior scholar Wanda Orlikowski
have made key contributions to this area of research. 209 This scholarship traces a lineage to
sociologist and anthropologist Bruno Latour and philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn, who both
have produced landmark work on the production of knowledge in the sciences. 210 Beyond the
fields of anthropology, sociology, organizational behavior, and science and technology studies,

207

For an example of research on records really serving as methodological advice, see Garfinkel, “Good
Organizational Reasons for ‘Bad’ Clinic Records.” For a critique of this kind of scholarship, see Stanley
Raffel, Matters of Fact: A Sociological Inquiry (Boston: Routledge & K. Paul, 1979). For a discussion of
sociological and anthropological research where records and recordkeeping truly are the object of study,
see Annelise Riles, “Introduction: In Response,” in Documents: Artifacts of Modern Knowledge (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2006), 1–38.
208 “Recordkeeping in the Production of Scientific Knowledge,” 368; Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan
Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
1999).
209 Bowker and Star, Sorting Things Out; Geoffrey Bowker, Memory Practices in the Sciences
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); Wanda J. Orlikowski and C. Suzanne Iacono, “Research
Commentary: Desperately Seeking the ‘IT’ in IT Research—A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact,”
Information Systems Research 12, no. 2 (June 2001): 121–34.
210 Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts, 2nd ed.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986); Thomas S Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962).

70

there have been, since the 1990s, a proliferation of social and popular histories that incorporate
research about a wide range of recordkeeping activities. 211
This new direction in recordkeeping research in the archival field does not fundamentally
alter the goal of the modern diplomatic to produce a rich scholarship of records and
recordkeeping. The research discussed by Yakel, Trace, Shankar, and Gracy proposes new
methodological avenues for the modern diplomatic without precluding the use of documentcentric methods. Akmon and her co-authors, for example, studied the data management practices
of materials scientists, mixing document analysis with their direct observation and interviews. 212
By broadening the range of tools for recordkeeping scholarship, Trace claimed that archivists can
also enrich their archival practice, noting “that there is a need for archivists to conduct their own
research, whether based on social science methodologies, or otherwise, in order that the
profession of the record fully understands and documents that which it collects: the record.” 213
Situating this new type of recordkeeping research as one that informs archival scholarship and
defines practice fits with the explicit construct that researching the nature of records and
recordkeeping is a core part of archival work.

Recordkeeping Behavior Literature Today and Going Forward
Research on records and recordkeeping behavior has continued through the 2010s. In 2004 and
2013, archival scholars Sue McKemmish and Anne Gilliland articulated archival research
frameworks describing agendas, methodologies, and infrastructures. 214 They situated

211

Richard J. Cox, “Records of Life: The Resurgence of Scholarly Interest in How People Create
Records,” Records & Information Management Report 21, no. 4 (2005): 13–14.
212 “The Application of Archival Concepts to a Data-Intensive Environment,” 334.
213 “What Is Recorded Is Never Simply `What Happened’,” 159.
214 “Building an Infrastructure for Archival Research,” Archival Science 4, no. 3–4 (September 2004):
149–97; “Archival and Recordkeeping Research: Past, Present and Future,” in Research Methods:
Information, Systems, and Contexts (Prahran, Victoria: Tilde Publishing, 2013), 79–112.

71

investigations of recordkeeping behavior as sitting squarely within this framework, describing
the “impact on the record of organizational and technological change and vice versa,” the
“psychology and ethnology of recordkeeping and use, including socialization into document
creation and use,” and the “sociology and politics of the record and recordkeeping” as all being
“major and emergent area of archival research engagement.” 215 In 2011, Barbara Craig identified
six promising historical research areas in archival science, which included studying the
development of communications technologies; examining interconnections between people,
tools, and assumptions within a material culture and history framework; and case studies that
carefully examine the context and factors that shape recordkeeping. 216
In the 2000s and 2010s, the establishment of International Conference on the History of
Records and Archives (I-CHORA) helped to continue and extend research on the history of
archives, records, and recordkeeping. 217 Topics at I-CHORA conferences have included the role
of archives in society, institutional and personal recordkeeping, indigenous and community
records in archives, and the role of technologies in recordkeeping practices. 218 Beginning in
2009, the Archival Education and Research Initiative (AERI) has held annual institute meetings.
215

Gilliland and Mckemmish, “Building an Infrastructure for Archival Research,” 152.
“The Past May Be the Prologue: History’s Place in the Future of the Information Professions,”
Libraries & the Cultural Record 46, no. 2 (2011): 211–16.
217 There have been seven I-CHORA meeting: I-CHORA 1, Toronto, 2003, selected papers published in
Archivaria 60; I-CHORA 2, Amsterdam, 2005, selected papers published in Archival Science 6, no. 3–4;
I-CHORA 3, Boston, 2007, selected papers published in Libraries & the Cultural Record 44, no. 1; ICHORA 4, Perth, 2008, selected papers published in Archival Science 9, no. 1-2; I-CHORA 5, London,
2010, selected papers published in the Journal of the Society of Archivists 32, no. 1; I-CHORA 6, Austin,
2012; I-CHORA 7, Amsterdam, 2015.
218 For a discussion of the topics and issues addressed at I-CHORA 1 though 4, see Barbara L. Craig,
Philip B. Eppard, and Heather MacNeil, “Exploring Perspectives and Themes for Histories of Records
and Archives. The First International Conference on the History of Records and Archives (I-CHORA),”
Archivaria 60 (Fall 2005): 1–10; Karen Anderson, Eric Ketelaar, and Elizabeth Yakel, “Preface,”
Archival Science 6, no. 3–4 (2006): 265; Barbara L. Craig, “Introduction,” Libraries & the Cultural
Record 44, no. 1 (2009): 1–8; Joanna Sassoon and Toby Burrows, “Minority Reports: Indigenous and
Community Voices in Archives. Papers from the 4th International Conference on the History of Records
and Archives (ICHORA4), Perth, Western Australia, August 2008,” Archival Science 9, no. 1–2 (2009):
1–5.
216

72

These institutes have provided archival educators and doctoral students with a venue to present
and discuss their scholarly work. Research on recordkeeping behavior has been well represented
at these institutes, indicating a strong interest in this research area among the next generation of
archival scholars. 219

Wicked Problems Literature
This section of the chapter reviews the literature of wicked problems, a concept discussed in
Chapter One. This review covers the emergence of the concept and the critical role it has played
in the field of design. I discuss how wicked problems have been used in climate and
environmental science, public policy, and other fields to frame a variety of challenges. Because
this review is in support of a historical case study set in the Vietnam War and comes out of an
archival intellectual tradition, I examine how wicked problems has been used to understand
counterinsurgency conflicts, international security, and challenges found in archival and library
and information science.

Wicked Problems Origins and its Place in Design and Planning Literature
As discussed in Chapter One, design theorist Horst Rittel and urban designer Melvin Webber’s
landmark 1973 Policy Sciences article, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” described
the concept of wicked problems in a set of ten characteristics. 220 They defined wicked problems
as societal problems that are complex, vitally important, ill-defined and “rely upon elusive

219 At the 2016 AERI meeting at Kent Sate University there were numerous presentations on institutional
recordkeeping in federal agencies, police departments, and health care institutions. Kent State University,
“AERI 2016 July 8-12, 2016 Final Program” (Kent State University, 2016),
https://du1ux2871uqvu.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/file/AERI_2016_FinalProgram%20Sheet1.pdf.
For a summary of research presentations at AERI from 2009 through 2012, see Gilliland and
McKemmish, “Archival and Recordkeeping Research: Past, Present and Future,” 82–83.
220 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning.” The ten characteristics are listed in Chapter One,
footnote 28.

73

political judgment for resolution.” 221 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning” was part of
Rittel’s development of the concept of wicked problems over the course of the late 1960s and
early 1970s while he was a professor of science and design at the University of California at
Berkeley, a leading institution in the field of design at the time. Rittel began describing wicked
problems in seminars at Berkeley in the late 1960s. 222 Wicked problems as a term first appeared
in print in a short 1967 article by systems scientist C. West Churchman in 1967, a fellow
member of the design faculty at Berkeley who hosted the seminars where Rittel articulated his
ideas. 223 Churchman recounted Rittel’s description of wicked problems as “that class of social
system problems which are ill-formulated, where the information is confusing, where there are
many clients and decisions makers with conflicting values, and where the ramifications in the
whole system are thoroughly confusing.” 224
In the early 1970s Rittel published other articles about wicked problems before his
widely known Policy Sciences article. In a 1971 article about design education Rittel
characterized design problems as “ill-behaved.” 225 In 1972, Rittel and a colleague noted that
information systems were often deployed to address wicked problems, which he described as
having six properties. 226 Rittel expanded on his description of wicked problems with a 1972
article in a Scandinavian economics journal. 227 It is his “Dilemmas in a General Theory of
Planning” article however that has become the commonly cited cornerstone article of wicked
221

“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160.
Andrejs Skaburskis, “The Origin of ‘Wicked Problems,’” Planning Theory & Practice 9, no. 2
(2008): 277.
223 “Wicked Problems,” Management Science 14, no. 4 (December 1967): 141–42.
224 “Wicked Problems,” 141.
225 “Some Principles for the Design of an Educational System for Design,” Journal of Architectural
Education 25, no. 1/2 (1971): 19.
226 Werner Kunz and Horst W. J. Rittel, “Information Science: On the Structure of Its Problems,”
Information Storage and Retrieval 8, no. 2 (1972): 95–98.
227 “On the Planning Crisis: Systems Analysis of the ‘First and Second Generations.’”
222

74

problems. In particular, Rittel and Weber’s framing of wicked problems into ten characteristics is
frequently referenced, and often used to demonstrate how a particular challenge, such as climate
change, is a wicked problem. 228
In addition to describing wicked problems as a set of ten characteristics, Rittel and Weber
used the article as a manifesto of sorts to critique the field of design, which they contented had
relied too heavily on methodologies, particularly systems approaches, from the natural sciences
and engineering to try to solve social problems. 229 This approach bifurcated design processes
into two phases: “problem definition and problem solution.” 230 The type of challenges designers
and planners faced, contended Rittel, did not lend themselves to this step-wise approach. Rittel
and Weber called this approach first generation design and urged a second-generation approach
to societal challenges—wicked problems—that required less scientific knowledge and more
political artfulness. 231
In 1960s and 1970s, others in design, systems engineering, and other allied fields were
writing about similar concepts to wicked problems as part of a larger effort to wrestle with
challenges that bedeviled planners, government officials, engineers, community leaders, and

228

Many examples of this are discussed below.
Farrell and Hooker, “Design, Science and Wicked Problems,” 682.
230 Richard Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” Design Issues 8, no. 2 (1992): 15.
231 Rittel discussed the notion of first and second generation design more extensively in a 1972 interview,
see Second-generation Design Methods, The DMG 5th Anniversary Report: DMG Occasional Paper No.
1, 1972, reprinted in Nigel Cross, ed., Developments in Design Methodology (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1984), 317–327. For further discussion of Rittel’s notion of first and second generation design, see
Chanpory Rith and Hugh Dubberly, “Why Horst W.J. Rittel Matters,” Design Issues 22, no. 4 (Autumn
2006): 1–2. For a discussion of the place of Rittel’s work within the intellectual history of mid- and latetwentieth century planning and design, see Judith E. Innes, “Planning Theory’s Emerging Paradigm:
Communicative Action and Interactive Practice,” Journal of Planning Education and Research 14, no. 3
(1995): 183–89. For a critique of Rittel’s distinction between science and design and a binary presentation
of tame versus wicked problems, see Farrell and Hooker, “Design, Science and Wicked Problems.”
229

75

academics during those decades. 232 In 1960 political scientist and economist Herbert Simon
discussed the concept of ill-structured, as opposed to well-structured problems. Ill-structured
problems, according to Simon, required non-programed—in contrast to programmed—decisionmaking. 233 As Rittel and colleagues were articulating the term wicked problems, organization
and systems theorist Russell Ackoff formulated the closely related concept of messes. 234 Ackoff
defined a mess as a “system of external conditions that produces dissatisfaction.” 235 He coined
the term messes to stand for the concept of “a system of problems,” which existed because,
“every problem interacts with other problems and is therefore part of a set of interrelated
problems.” 236 Addressing messes, Ackoff contended, required a focus on the interconnectedness
of problematic component parts of a system. He claimed, “Because messes are systems of
problems, the sum of the optimal solutions to each component problem taken separately is not an
optimal solution to the mess. The behaviour of a mess depends more on how the solutions to its
parts interact than on how they act independently of each other.” 237
Organizational theorist Ian Mitroff and his colleagues provided early examples of using
the concepts of wicked problems, ill-structured problems, and messes in research during the
1970s and early 1980s. For example, Mitroff discussed wicked problems in the context of

232

Richard Coyne described the intellectual context in which wicked problems emerged in “Wicked
Problems Revisited.”
233 The New Science of Management Decision (New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1960), 8.
Simon expanded on the concept of ill-structured problems in “The Structure of Ill Structured Problems,”
Artificial Intelligence 4, no. 3–4 (1973): 181–201. For an example of research using Simon’s concept of
ill-structured problems, see M Basadur, SJ Ellspermann, and GW Evans, “A New Methodology for
Formulating Ill-Structured Problems,” Omega 22, no. 6 (November 1994): 627–45.
234 Redesigning the Future: A Systems Approach to Societal Problems (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1974).
235 Redesigning the Future: A Systems Approach to Societal Problems, 21.
236 Redesigning the Future: A Systems Approach to Societal Problems, 21.
237 “The Future of Operational Research Is Past,” The Journal of the Operational Research Society 30,
no. 2 (1979): 100.

76

management information systems. 238 He also built on the notions of ill-structured problems and
messes to suggest management methodologies to approach these challenges. 239 Mitroff also
delved into the nature of wicked problems, describing it as having six characteristics. 240
People in design and related fields have continued to re-describe the characteristics of
wicked problems and develop related concepts through the present. In 1988, for example, urban
planning scholar Donald Schön used the metaphor of a swamp to characterize important
problems, noting, “On the high ground, manageable problems lend themselves to solution
through the application of research-based theory and technique. In the swampy lowland, messy,
confusing problems defy technical solution…In the swamp lie the problems of greatest human
concern.” 241 Systems scholar Jake Chapman and colleagues used the term “wicked issues” which
they give four characteristics. 242 Collaborative technology consultant Jeff Conklin consolidated
the ten characteristics of wicked problems down to six.243
Wicked problems, and in particular, Rittel and Weber’s articulation of wicked problems,
has become the most widely accepted and referenced of these terms and has come to serve as the

238 Richard O. Mason and Ian I. Mitroff, “A Program for Research on Management Information
Systems,” Management Science 19, no. 5 (1973): 475–87.
239 Ian I. Mitroff and James R. Emshoff, “On Strategic Assumption-Making: A Dialectical Approach to
Policy and Planning,” Academy of Management Review 4, no. 1 (1979): 1–12.
240 The six characteristics were interconnectedness, complicatedness, uncertainty, ambiguity, conflict,
and societal constraints. Richard O. Mason and Ian I. Mitroff, Challenging Strategic Planning
Assumptions: Theory, Cases, and Techniques (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1981), 12–13.
241 Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Toward a New Design for Teaching and Learning in the
Professions (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1988), 3.
242 The four characteristics were: “Wicked issues are not amenable to conventional policy-making
processes.” “Wicked issues involve profound disagreement.” “Wicked issues are unbounded.” “Wicked
issues are complex.” Jake Chapman, Charlie Edwards, and Simon Hampson, Connecting the Dots
(London: Demos, 2009), 15–19.
243 Those six characteristics were: “You don’t understand the problem until you have developed a
solution.” “Wicked problems have no stopping rule.” “Solutions to wicked problems are not right or
wrong.” “Every wicked problem is essentially unique and novel. “Every solution to a wicked problem is a
‘one-shot operation.’” “Wicked problems have no given alternative solutions.” Jeff Conklin, Dialogue
Mapping: Building Shared Understanding of Wicked Problems (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006), 14–15.

77

umbrella notion for terms referring to grand, societal challenges. 244 Wicked problems emerged as
a core concept in the development of design as a discipline during the 1980s and 1990s. Its role
was solidified in particular by architectural and industrial design practitioner and scholar Nigel
Cross and design theorist Richard Buchanan, both leading figures in the field. In a landmark
1982 article on the emergence of design thinking, Cross claimed that design problems are wicked
problems and placed wicked problems squarely at the center of design. 245 Buchanan reinforced
the centrality of wicked problems in design in a 1992 article that became a landmark in the
field’s intellectual history. 246 The work of design, Cross and Buchanan claimed, was to address
wicked problems. The value behind Rittel’s articulation of wicked problems was not the
formulation of solutions but the re-characterization of problems. 247 This re-characterization
shifted design from science to politics and provided a framework for dealing with design
disciplines’ limits in finding and implementing solutions to wicked problems. 248 As noted below,
scholars and practitioners in a wide range fields have continued to use and adapt wicked
problems to grapple with the challenges they face. Urban policy scholar Moira Zellner and urban
planning academic Scott D. Campbell posed an explanation for this endurance, noting that the

244

Chapman, Edwards, and Hampson, Connecting the Dots, 14–15.
Nigel Cross, “Designerly Ways of Knowing,” Design Studies 3, no. 4 (1982): 221–227.
246 Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking.” For a discussion of this article, see Jon Kolko,
Thoughts on Interaction Design: A Collection of Reflections, Second Edition (Boston: Morgan
Kaufmann, 2011), 96. For an extended discussion on the nature of wicked problems and its emergence
within different schools of thought in design, see Jeff Conklin, Min Basadur, and GK VanPatter,
“Rethinking Wicked Problems: Unpacking Paradigms, Bridging Universes,” NextD Journal:
ReReThinking Design 10, no. 1 (2007): 2–30.
247 Conklin, Basadur, and VanPatter, “Rethinking Wicked Problems: Unpacking Paradigms, Bridging
Universes,” 3.
248 Rith and Dubberly, “Why Horst W.J. Rittel Matters.”
245

78

concept “cogently captures the world we work in, sharply articulates the gap between natural
science and social science problems, and has yet to be over-taken by a more compelling term.” 249

Use of Wicked Problems in Public Policy, Environmental, and Other Literature
Scholars in a wide range of fields have used wicked problems, particularly in the last ten years,
to explore and characterize the challenges of their work. Several authors have identified child
welfare, 250 health care, 251 emergency response, 252 cyber security, 253 and education 254 as wicked

249

“Planning for Deep-Rooted Problems: What Can We Learn from Aligning Complex Systems and
Wicked Problems?,” Planning Theory & Practice 16, no. 4 (2015): 471.
250 Boyd Hunter, “Conspicuous Compassion and Wicked Problems: The Howard Government’s National
Emergency in Indigenous Affairs,” Agenda 14, no. 3 (2007): 35–51; John Devaney and Trevor Spratt,
“Child Abuse as a Complex and Wicked Problem: Reflecting on Policy Developments in the United
Kingdom in Working with Children and Families with Multiple Problems,” Children and Youth Services
Review 31 (2008): 635–641; Jake Chapman, “Lessons from a Pluralist Approach to a Wicked Policy
Issue,” Integral Review 6, no. 1 (2010): 236–51; Ida Drury, “Performance Management for Wicked
Problems: Reflections from Child Welfare’s Front Line,” Administrative Theory & Praxis 36, no. 3
(2014): 398–411; Carol Hayden and Craig Jenkins, “‘Troubled Families’ Programme in England:
‘Wicked Problems’ and Policy-Based Evidence,” Policy Studies 35, no. 6 (2014): 631–649.
251 Johanna I. Westbrook et al., “Multimethod Evaluation of Information and Communication
Technologies in Health in the Context of Wicked Problems and Sociotechnical Theory,” Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association 14, no. 6 (2007): 746–55; Marcelline Harris, Catherine
Vanderboom, and Ronda Hughes, “Nursing-Sensitive Safety and Quality Outcomes: The Taming of a
Wicked Problem?,” Applied Nursing Research 22, no. 2 (2009): 146–51; Ben Hannigan and Michael
Coffey, “Where the Wicked Problems Are: The Case of Mental Health,” Health Policy 101, no. 3 (2011):
220–27; Carlos Quiñonez, “Wicked Problems: Policy Contradictions in Publicly Financed Dental Care,”
Journal of Public Health Dentistry 72 (2012): 261–64; Louis N. Signal et al., “Tackling ‘Wicked’ Health
Promotion Problems: A New Zealand Case Study,” Health Promotion International 28, no. 1 (2012): 84–
94; Diane Burn, Paula Hyde, and Anne Killet, “Wicked Problems or Wicked People? Reconceptualising
Institutional Abuse,” Sociology of Health & Illness 35, no. 4 (2013): 514–28; Alison Wicks and Maggie
Jamieson, “New Ways for Occupational Scientists to Tackle ‘Wicked Problems’ Impacting Population
Health,” Journal of Occupational Science 21, no. 1 (2014): 81–85; Marie Hutchinson et al., “Leadership
When There Are No Easy Answers: Applying Leader Moral Courage to Wicked Problems,” Journal of
Clinical Nursing 24 (2015): 3021–23.
252 Daniel Nohrstedt, “Explaining Mobilization and Performance of Collaborations in Routine
Emergency Management,” Administration & Society 48, no. 2 (2016): 135–162.
253 Dave Clemente, “Cyber Security As A Wicked Problem,” Theworldtoday.org, October 2011; Eloise
F. Malone and Michael J. Malone, “The ‘wicked Problem’ of Cybersecurity Policy: Analysis of United
States and Canadian Policy Response,” Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 19, no. 2 (2013): 158–77.
254 Michelle E. Jordan, Robert C. Kleinsasser, and Mary F. Roe, “Wicked Problems: Inescapable
Wickedity,” Journal of Education for Teaching 40, no. 4 (2014): 415–30; Judith W. Wegner, “Reframing
Legal Education’s Wicked Problems,” Rutgers Law Review 61, no. 4 (2009): 867–1009; Hilda Borko,
Jennie Whitcomb, and Daniel Liston, “Wicked Problems and Other Thoughts on Issues of Technology

79

problems. Endangered musical heritage, 255 corruption, 256 economic gender equality, 257 the
enforcement of public drinking laws, 258 heroine addiction, 259 aboriginal land rights, 260
NIMBYism (“Not In My Back Yard”), 261 and an array urban policy issues 262 have also been
identified as wicked problems. Because wicked problems are by their nature broad societal
challenges, a significant portion of the literature describes how local, state, and national
governments are faced with wicked problems. For example, a 2012 Australian Government
report by the Australian Public Service Commission described the array and the
interconnectedness of wicked problems faced by the national government, and suggested
strategies for dealing with these problems. 263 Public policy researcher Brian W. Head and
management scholar John Alford observed that addressing wicked problems necessitates a
and Teacher Learning,” Journal of Teacher Education 60, no. 3 (2009): 3–7; David Watson, “Managing
in Higher Education: The ‘Wicked Issues,’” Higher Education Quarterly 54, no. 1 (2000): 5–21.
255 Catherine Grant, “Endangered Musical Heritage as a Wicked Problem,” International Journal of
Heritage Studies 21, no. 7 (2015): 629–41.
256 Amr G E Sabet, “Corruption, Governance and Collective Sanctions: Can a Wicked Problem Be
Tamed?,” Studies of Changing Societies 1, no. 6 (2012): 67–104.
257 Lorna Turnbull, “The ‘Wicked Problem’ of Fiscal Equality for Women,” Canadian Journal of Women
and the Law 22, no. 1 (2010): 213–39.
258 Amy E. Pennay, “‘Wicked Problems’: The Social Conundrum Presented by Public Drinking Laws,”
Drugs: Education, Prevention and Policy 19, no. 3 (2012): 185–191.
259 Chapman, Edwards, and Hampson, Connecting the Dots, 25–44.
260 Pascal Scherrer and Kim Doohan, “Taming Wicked Problems: Towards a Resolution of Tourism
Access to Traditional Owner Lands in the Kimberley Region, Australia,” Journal of Sustainable Tourism
22, no. 7 (2014): 1003–22.
261 Frank Fischer, “Citizen Participation and the Democratization of Policy Expertise: From Theoretical
Inquiry to Practical Cases,” Policy Sciences 26 (1993): 173–76.
262 David Adams, “The ‘Wicked Problem’ of Planning for Housing Development,” Housing Studies 26,
no. 6 (2011): 951–60; Ian Cole, “Housing Market Renewal and Demolition in England in the 2000s: The
Governance of ‘Wicked Problems,’” International Journal of Housing Policy 12, no. 3 (2012): 347–366;
Tony Harrison, “Urban Policy: Addressing Wicked Problems,” in What Works?: Evidence-Based Policy
and Practice in Public Services (Portland, OR: The Policy Press, 2000).
263 “Tackling Wicked Problems: A Public Policy Perspective” (Australian Public Service Commission,
2012), http://www.apsc.gov.au/publications-and-media/archive/publications-archive/tackling-wickedproblems. For a discussion of strategies for public officials to manage wicked problems, see Brian W.
Head, “Wicked Problems in Public Policy,” Public Policy 3, no. 2 (2008): 101–8. While most studies of
wicked problems are set in the public policy realm, wicked problems research has also been conducted in
the for-profit sector. See John C. Camillus, “Strategy as a Wicked Problem,” Harvard Business Review,
May 2008, 98–106.

80

transformative experience for government agencies. They noted that this work “calls for public
officials to forge new ways of thinking, leading, managing, and organizing that recognize the
complexity of the issues and processes, and that make new demands not only on their own
organizations but also on other relevant actors and institutions in their environments.” 264
Scholars and practitioners involved a wide range of environmental sciences have
extensively used wicked problems as a framework to describe the challenges of their work and as
a way to inform approaches to overcoming these challenges. Forestry researchers Gerald M.
Allen and Ernest M. Gould Jr. were among the first in the field to characterize an aspect of
environmental management—public forestry—as a wicked problem in 1986. 265 The vast
majority of the literature connecting wicked problems to environmental issues has been written
since 2000. In the past ten years there have been several articles framing forestry, land, lake, and
ecosystem management as a wicked problem, building on the work of Allen and Gould. 266
Protecting wildlife has also been characterized as a wicked problem. 267 Also fitting within the

264

“Wicked Problems: Implications for Public Policy and Management,” Administration & Society 47,
no. 6 (2015): 722.
265 “Complexity, Wickedness, and Public Forests,” Journal of Forestry 84 (1986): 20–23.
266 Matthew S. Caroll et al., “Managing Fire Danger in the Forests of the US Inland Northwest: A Classic
‘Wicked Problem’ in Public Land Policy,” Journal of Forestry 105, no. 5 (2007): 239–44; Anthony
Pesklevits, Peter N. Duinker, and Peter G. Bush, “Old-Growth Forests: Anatomy of a Wicked Problem,”
Forests 2 (2011): 343–56; Hal Salwasser, “Confronting the Implications of Wicked Problems: Changes
Needed in Sierra Nevada National Forest Planning and Problem Solving,” USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report (USDA Forest Service, 2004); James Palmer, “Risk Governance in an Age of Wicked
Problems: Lessons from the European Approach to Indirect Land-Use Change,” Journal of Risk Research
15, no. 5 (2012): 495–513; Jeffrey Thornton et al., “Eutrophication as a ‘Wicked’ Problem,” Lakes and
Reservoirs: Research and Management 18 (2013): 298–316; Kathryn K. Davies et al., “Improving
Ecosystem Service Frameworks to Address Wicked Problems,” Ecology and Society 20, no. 2 (2015):
37–49.
267 I.L. Boyd, “Assessing the Effectiveness of Conservation Measures: Resolving the ‘wicked’ Problem
of the Steller Sea Lion,” Biological Conservation 143, no. 7 (2010): 1664–74; Terry P Hughes, Hui
Huang, and Matthew Young, “The Wicked Problem of China’s Disappearing Coral Reefs,” Conservation
Biology 27, no. 2 (2012): 261–69; Andreas Duit and Annette Löf, “Dealing With a Wicked Problem?: A
Dark Tale of Carnivore Management in Sweden 2007-2011,” Administration & Society, July 21, 2015, 1–
25; Umar Ghuman and Wendy Olmstead, “Utilizing Flux and Chaos: A Case Study of Wicked Problems

81

broad concept of environmental management are publications on how the concept of wicked
problems helps to navigate the challenging issues of pollution, 268 nuclear energy safety, 269 and
sustainable agriculture and food security. 270 Not surprisingly, a number of researchers have
categorized climate change—particularly the political efforts to slow climate change and
mitigate its effects—as a wicked problem. 271 In 2007 public policy expert Graeme Auld and

in Environmental Management,” International Journal of Organizational Theory and Behavior 18, no. 4
(2015): 379–404.
268 James J. Patterson, Carl Smith, and Jennifer Bellamy, “Enabling and Enacting ‘Practical Action’ in
Catchments: Responding to the ‘Wicked Problem’ of Nonpoint Source Pollution in Coastal Subtropical
Australia,” Environmental Management 55 (2015): 479–95.
269 Jonathan B. King, “Learning to Solve the Right Problems: The Case of Nuclear Power in America,”
Journal of Business Ethics 12 (1993): 105–16.
270 Robert F. Durant and Jerome S. Legge, “‘Wicked Problems,’ Public Policy, and Administrative
Theory Lessons From the GM Food Regulatory Arena,” Administration & Society 38, no. 3 (2006): 309–
34; Sandra S. Batie, “Wicked Problems and Applied Economics,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 90 (2008): 1176–1191; Ralph Hamann et al., “The Role of Business and Cross-Sector
Collaboration in Addressing the ‘Wicked Problem’ of Food Insecurity,” Development Southern Africa 28,
no. 4 (2011): 579–94; Kyle Powys Whyte and Paul B. Thompson, “Ideas for How to Take Wicked
Problems Seriously,” Journal of Agricultural Environmental Ethics 25, no. 4 (2012): 441–445; Thomas
Seager, Evan Selinger, and Arnim Wiek, “Sustainable Engineering Science for Resolving Wicked
Problems,” Journal of Agricultural Environmental Ethics 25 (2012): 467–484; Bryan G. Norton, “The
Ways of Wickedness: Analyzing Messiness with Messy Tools,” Journal of Agricultural Environmental
Ethics 25, no. 4 (2012): 447–465; Paul D Thompson and Kyle Powys Whyte, “What Happens to
Environmental Philosophy in a Wicked World?,” Journal of Agricultural Environmental Ethics 25, no. 4
(2012): 485–498; Catrien J. A. M. Termeer et al., “Governance Capabilities for Dealing Wisely With
Wicked Problems,” Administration & Society 47, no. 6 (2012): 680–710; Otto Doering, “A Truly Wicked
Problem,” Resource, December 2014; Sarah J. Morath, “The Farm Bill: A Wicked Problem Seeking a
Systemic Solution,” Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum 25 (2015): 389–425.
271 Ellen M. van Bueren, Erik-Hans Klijn, and Joop F. M. Koppenjan, “Dealing with Wicked Problems in
Networks: Analyzing an Environmental Debate from a Network Perspective,” Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory 13, no. 2 (2003): 193–212; Steve Rayner, “Wicked Problems:
Clumsy Solutions--Diagnoses and Prescriptions for Environmental Ills” (Jack Beale Memorial Lecture on
Global Environment, Sydney, Australia, July 2006); Chapman, Edwards, and Hampson, Connecting the
Dots, 45–60; Marco Verweij, Clumsy Solutions for a Wicked World: How to Improve Global Governance
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 1–69; Martin Sharman and Musa C. Mlambo, “Wicked: The
Problem of Biodiversity Loss,” GAIA: Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society 21, no. 4 (2012):
274–77; Brian W. Head, “Evidence, Uncertainty, and Wicked Problems in Climate Change Decision
Making in Australia,” Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 32 (2014): 663–79; Cynthia
H. Stahl, “Out of the Land of Oz: The Importance of Tackling Wicked Environmental Problems without
Taming Them,” Environmental Systems Decisions 34 (2014): 473–77.

82

colleagues proposed that climate change is a super wicked problem. 272 In addition to having the
ten characteristics of wicked problems identified by Rittel and Webber, they claimed that climate
change has four additional characteristics that make it a super wicked problem. 273
Many of these articles linking environmental issues and wicked problems have had a
pattern of claiming and demonstrating that a particular environmental issue—such as wildlife
management, pollution, or climate change—is a wicked problem and then following this
determination with a second conceptual framework to use as a tool for approaching and
managing the problem. For example, sociologist and fisheries expert Svein Jentoft and marine
science researcher Ratana Chuenpagdee described the management of fisheries and the
governance of coastal environments as wicked problems. They then claimed that the concept of
interactive governance theory could be used as framework to further understand and manage this
wicked problem. 274 This article exemplifies the central thrust of the literature—that
environmental challenges, particularly climate change, are not merely complex scientific
problems. They are wicked because they are political problems with competing interests.
Solutions for one constituency may be obstructions for others. Framing environmental challenges
as wicked problems has helped to identify the real obstacles to sustainably and satisfactorily
managing these challenges. Methods discussed in addressing environmental challenges have
tended to focus on ways to build consensus among parties with different agendas.
272

Graeme Auld et al., “Playing It Forward: Path Dependency, Progressive Incrementalism, and the
‘Super Wicked’ Problem of Global Climate Change” (International Studies Association Annual
Convention, Chicago, 2007).
273 The additional characteristics were: “Time is running out.” “Those seeking to end the problem are also
causing it.” “There is no central authority for the problem.” “Policy makers discount future
consequences.” Kelly Levin et al., “Overcoming the Tragedy of Super Wicked Problems: Constraining
Our Future Selves to Ameliorate Global Climate Change,” Policy Sciences 45, no. 2 (2012): 127–128. For
work that builds on the concept of super wicked problems, see Richard J. Lazarus, “Super Wicked
Problems and Climate Change: Restraining the Present to Liberate the Future,” Cornell Law Review 94,
no. 5 (2009): 1153–1233.
274 “Fisheries and Coastal Governance as a Wicked Problem,” Marine Policy 33, no. 4 (2009): 553–60.

83

Beyond the wicked problems literature focused on environmental challenges, many
scholars and practitioners have examined a wide range of frameworks, methods, and techniques
for addressing wicked problems. 275 Examples of these approaches include interdisciplinary
(polyocular) research, 276 critical action learning, 277 general morphology analysis, 278 participatory
policy analysis, 279 problem structuring, 280 dialogue mapping, 281 and transdisciplinary
imagination. 282 Other frameworks for confronting wicked problems include a concept known as
soft systems that focuses on systematic enquiry to navigate through constituencies with divergent
goals and outlooks. 283 Some have suggested networked approaches over hierarchical
bureaucratic approaches to public policy wicked problems. 284 Education scholar Donna Mertens

275

For a survey of these approaches see Jonathan Rosenhead, “What’s the Problem? An Introduction to
Problem Structuring Methods,” Interfaces 26, no. 6 (1996): 117–31 and Brian W. Head and John Alford,
“Wicked Problems: Implications for Public Policy and Management,” Administration & Society 47, no. 6
(2015): 711–39.
276 Hugo F. Alrøe and Egon Noe, “Second-Order Science of Interdisciplinary Research: A Polyocular
Framework for Wicked Problems,” Constructivist Foundations 10, no. 1 (2014): 65–76; Bland
Tomkinson, Charles Engel, and Rosemary Tomkinson, “Dealing with Wicked Global Problems: An InterDisciplinary Approach,” in Collected Essays on Teaching and Learning: A World of Learning, vol. II
(Windsor, ON: Society for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 2009), 24–32.
277 Cheryl Brook et al., “On Stopping Doing Those Things That Are Not Getting Us to Where We Want
to Be: Unlearning, Wicked Problems and Critical Action Learning,” Human Relations 69, no. 2 (2016):
369–389.
278 Tom Ritchey, Wicked Problems--Social Messes: Decision Support Modeling with Morphological
Analysis (New York: Springer, 2011); Tom Ritchey, “Wicked Problems: Modeling Social Messes with
Morphological Analysis,” Acta Morphologica Generalis 2, no. 1 (2013): 1–8.
279 Fischer, “Citizen Participation and the Democratization of Policy Expertise: From Theoretical Inquiry
to Practical Cases.”
280 Michael Pidd, “From Problem-Structuring to Implementation,” The Journal of the Operational
Research Society 39, no. 2 (1988): 115–21.
281 Conklin, Dialogue Mapping: Building Shared Understanding of Wicked Problems.
282 Valerie A Brown, John A Harris, and Jacqueline Y Russell, eds., Tackling Wicked Problems through
the Transdisciplinary Imagination (Washington, DC: Earthscan, 2010), 4–5.
283 Chapman, “Lessons from a Pluralist Approach to a Wicked Policy Issue.”
284 Kathryn R. Gabriele, “Lessons From a Buried Past: Settlement Women and Democratically Anchored
Governance Networks,” Administration & Society 47, no. 4 (2015): 393–415. Laurence J. O’Toole, Jr.
also discussed the role of networks in public administration in the face of wicked problems. “Treating
Networks Seriously: Practical and Research-Based Agendas in Public Administration,” Public
Administration Review 57, no. 1 (1997): 45–52.

84

discussed the role of mixed methods research in addressing wicked problems. 285 Philosopher
Danielle Lake posited feminist pragmatist methodology as an essential approach for confronting
wicked problems, using the work of social reformer and public philosopher Jane Addams as an
example. 286
Public policy expert Anne Khademian and political scientist Edward Weber have
collaborated on several works examining wicked problems and strategies for these challenges.
They articulated the importance of networks and knowledge sharing in addressing wicked
problems in part because these challenges invariably cut across the knowledgebase of multiple
domains, constituencies, and interest groups. Knowledge, they claimed, has to be shared across
disciplines in order for a wicked problem to be addressed. 287 Defense analyst Nancy Roberts
provided a framework of coping strategies—authoritative, competitive, and collaborative—for
dealing with wicked problems. Using the case study of humanitarian aid in Afghanistan during
the 1990s, she suggested that collaborative strategies are generally most appropriate for
grappling with wicked problems, although those strategies have their own challenges and
shortcomings. 288 In addition, management academic Keith Grint has discussed the intersection of

285

“Mixed Methods and Wicked Problems,” Journal of Mixed Methods Research 9, no. 1 (2015): 3–6.
“Jane Addams and Wicked Problems: Putting the Pragmatic Method to Use,” The Pluralist 9, no. 3
(2014): 77–94.
287 “Wicked Problems, Knowledge Challenges, and Collaborative Capacity Builders in Network
Settings,” Public Administration Review 68, no. 2 (2008): 334–349; “Managing Collaborative Processes:
Common Practices, Uncommon Circumstances,” Administration & Society 40, no. 5 (2008): 431–64;
“From Agitation to Collaboration: Clearing the Air through Negotiation,” Public Administration Review
57, no. 5 (1997): 396–410.
288 “Wicked Problems and Network Approaches to Resolution,” International Public Management
Review 1, no. 1 (2000); “Coping with Wicked Problems: The Case of Afghanistan,” in Learning from
International Public Management Reform, vol. 11B, Research in Public Policy Analysis and Management
(Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science Ltd., 2001), 353–75.
286

85

wicked problems and leadership, 289 while business scholar Deanna Grant-Smith and social
justice researcher Natalie Osborne have highlighted the emotional, moral, psychological, and
cultural dimensions of wicked problems. 290
Use of Wicked Problems in Counterinsurgency and International Security Literature
Some scholars and practitioners have identified counterinsurgency warfare as a type of wicked
problem. 291 National security and international affairs expert Franklin D. Kramer, for example,
described irregular warfare—another term for counterinsurgency warfare—as a wicked problem,
noting that these kinds of conflicts “are often multicausal, unstable, and present problems that
keep evolving. They are socially complex, involving multiple stakeholders and many
interdependencies. They often have no clear solution, and, in any event, solutions often are not
right or wrong but rather better or worse or good enough.” 292 International policy analyst and
retired Marine Corps officer Ben Connable also characterized counterinsurgency warfare as a
wicked problem. 293 He used the concept of wicked problems to frame counterinsurgency warfare
in order to discuss notions of complexity in counterinsurgency assessment. 294 Counterinsurgency
expert and Australian military officer David Kilcullen described the war in Iraq as a wicked
problem, noting “Iraq represents a fiendishly difficult, complex, and constantly changing set of

289

“Problems, Problems, Problems: The Social Construction of ‘leadership,’” Human Relations 58, no.
11 (2005): 1467–1494; “Wicked Problems and Clumsy Solutions: The Role of Leadership,” in The New
Public Leadership Challenge (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), 169–86.
290 “Dealing with Discomfort: How the Unspeakable Confounds Wicked Planning Problems,” Australian
Planner 53, no. 1 (2016): 46–53.
291 See, for example Andrew Rathmell, “Adapting Government for Stabilisation and Counter-Insurgency
Operations,” The RUSI Journal 154, no. 6 (2009): 10, and Bernie McMahon, “Pakistan’s FATA--A
Wicked Problem,” Strategy Research Project (Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War College, 2009).
292 “Irregular Conflict and the Wicked Problem Dilemma: Strategies of Imperfection,” 83.
293 “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 29.
294 “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 27–33.

86

problems whose dynamic interaction drives the conflict.” 295
In the late 2000s, after almost a decade of counterinsurgency warfare in Iraq and
Afghanistan, two retired Marine officers (T.C. Greenwood and Thomas X. Hammes), reviewed
the US military’s effort to incorporate wicked problems frameworks and principles into military
doctrine. 296 One example of a doctrine publication that discusses wicked problems is a US Army
Training and Doctrine Command on designing and implementing campaigns. 297 Applying the
concept of wicked problems to counterinsurgency warfare is not without critiques, however.
Conflict specialist and attorney Cynthia Irmer, for example, argued that while wicked problems
can describe and illuminate the nature of insurgencies, it still frames these conflicts within a
“linear, problem/solution paradigm,” which limits the concept’s ability as a tool for identifying
strategies that can help mitigate and manage a society’s insurgency threats. 298
Scholars and practitioners have also identified a wide range of other international security
challenges—many of them closely related to insurgencies—as wicked problems. These include
topics such as maritime security in the Asia Pacific, 299 fragile and failed states, 300 and
humanitarian relief. 301 Some of these publications touch on documentation and assessment
aspects of failing states and nation-building. Peace-building scholar, policy advisor, and

295

The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2009), 152–153.
296 “War Planning for Wicked Problems: Where Joint Doctrine Fails.”
297 Department of the Army, “Commander’s Appreciation and Campaign Design.”
298 “A Systems Approach and the Interagency Conflict Assessment Framework (ICAF),” in Cornwallis
XIV: Analysis of Societal Conflict and Counter-Insurgency (Vienna: The Cornwallis Group, 2009), 170.
299 Sam Bateman, “Solving the ‘Wicked Problems’ of Maritime Security: Are Regional Forums up to the
Task?,” Contemporary Southeast Asia 33, no. 1 (2011): 1–28.
300 Kenneth J. Menkhaus, “State Fragility as a Wicked Problem,” Prism 1, no. 2 (2010): 85–100; Derick
W. Brinkerhoff, “State Fragility and Failure as Wicked Problems: Beyond Naming and Taming,” Third
World Quarterly 35, no. 2 (2014): 333–344.
301 Peter Tatham and Luke Houghton, “The Wicked Problem of Humanitarian Logistics and Disaster
Relief Aid,” Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management 1, no. 1 (2011): 15–31;
Roberts, “Chapter 20. Coping with Wicked Problems.”

87

practitioner Erin McCandless contended that understanding peace-building and state-building as
wicked problems helps facilitate an approach to measuring and assessing peace- and statebuilding that is driven by the at-risk nation itself, rather than imposed in cookie-cutter fashion by
Western powers, the United Nations, and Western non-governmental organizations. 302
In discussing fragile and failed states as wicked problems, public management researcher
Derick Brinkerhoff addressed issues of naming and measuring. He noted that the term “fragile
states” is fraught and it, along with a set of standardized measures of state fragility, is designed
to serve the interests of international aid organizations, the United Nations, and wealthy donor
countries. 303 These measurements, he contended, have a tendency to simplify and standardize
decision-making, to generate a self-reinforcing set of internal logic and decision-making that
seems scientific and authoritative, and to produce “facts” that have the effect of suppressing
debate. 304

Use of Wicked Problems in Archival and Library and Information Science Literature
The connection between wicked problems and information science stretches all the way back to
the initial formulation of wicked problems when Rittel, along with systems scholar Werner
Kunz, posited in a 1972 article that a wide range of managers, planners, leaders, and the public at
large deploy information systems to address wicked problems. They argued that the study of
information systems must, therefore, not be limited to scientific and technical details but must
encompass a broader understanding of the problems they are used to manage. 305

302

“Wicked Problems in Peacebuilding and Statebuilding: Making Progress in Measuring Progress
Through the New Deal,” Global Governance 19 (2013): 240–42.
303 “State Fragility and Failure as Wicked Problems: Beyond Naming and Taming,” 337.
304 “State Fragility and Failure as Wicked Problems: Beyond Naming and Taming,” 338.
305 Kunz and Rittel, “Information Science: On the Structure of Its Problems.”

88

Despite this connection with the initial articulation of wicked problems, it was not until
the mid-2000s that the concept gathered momentum within the information science literature.
Some authors have started to use design thinking and wicked problems together to inform library
practice and information systems research. 306 Researchers have used wicked problems within the
umbrella LIS field as a theoretical framework to analyze the use of social media to support social
innovation and its use by government agencies 307 and as a rubric for LIS graduate education. 308
Some authors have characterized research data management as a wicked problem because of its
wide array of stakeholders who often have divergent interests and professional outlooks; the
often-decentralized nature of governance at universities that can make decision-making and
strategic planning challenging; and the nature of research data itself. 309
In the 2010s, the lens of wicked problems has started to inform the recordkeeping and
archives literature. For example, IT manager and doctoral candidate Gregory Rolan used wicked
problems as a way to conceptualize the challenge of facilitating archival systems
interoperability. 310 In a 2012 masters thesis, UCLA student Yee May Chua proposed the
“complex system records model,” to explore the recordkeeping practices of organizations
306

Zaana Howard and Kate Davis, “From Solving Puzzles to Designing Solutions: Integrating Design
Thinking into Evidence Based Practice,” Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 6, no. 4
(2011): 15–21; Steven J. Bell, “Design Thinking,” American Libraries, February 2008; Alan R. Hevner et
al., “Design Science in Information Systems Research,” MIS Quarterly 28, no. 1 (2004): 7.
307 Yannis Charalabidis, Euripidis Loukis, and Aggeliki Androutsopoulou, “Fostering Social Innovation
through Multiple Social Media Combinations,” Information Systems Management 31, no. 3 (2014): 225–
39; Enrico Ferro et al., “Policy Making 2.0: From Theory to Practice,” Government Information
Quarterly 30, no. 4 (2013): 359–68.
308 Joyce Yukawa, “Preparing for Complexity and Wicked Problems through Transformational Learning
Approaches,” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 56, no. 2 (2015): 158–68.
309 Chris Awre et al., “Research Data Management as a ‘wicked Problem,’” Library Review 64, no. 4/5
(2015): 356–71; Andrew M. Cox, Stephen Pinfield, and Jennifer Smith, “Moving a Brick Building: UK
Libraries Coping with Research Data Management as a ‘wicked’ Problem,” Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science 48, no. 1 (2016): 3–17; Childs and McLeod, “Tackling the Wicked Problem of ERM:
Using the Cynefin Framework as a Lens,” 212–13.
310 “Towards Archive 2.0: Issues in Archival Systems Interoperability,” Archives and Manuscripts 43,
no. 1 (2015): 42–60.

89

attempting to confront wicked problems. 311 Using the President’s Malaria Initiative as a case
study, Chua explored how, when trying to manage a wicked problem, organizations use their
recordkeeping practices to “reinforce a particular organizational reality.” 312 In other words,
organizations use their recordkeeping infrastructure and practices to normalize wicked problems
into familiar, institutionally reinforcing terms. 313
Building off of their work on the AC+erm project, Accelerating positive change in ERM,
records management scholar Julie McLeod and information studies scholar Sue Childs
characterized electronic records management as a wicked problem. 314 They claimed electronic
records management is a wicked problem because it is extensively driven by an institution’s
context and shaped by the perspective of professionally divergent stakeholders, creating unique
challenges that are defined by political interests within an organization. Additionally, while there
are a wide array of electronic records management solutions, none provide all-encompassing
silver bullet solutions (no matter what a solution provider claims), which means there are no
“right” solutions, only ones that are, at best, good enough. Finally, full implementations of
records management solutions have consequences that cannot be undone. 315 Childs and McLeod
also offered the Cynefin framework as a conceptual model for working through and managing
the challenges of electronic records management. 316

311

“The Complex System Records Model: Recordkeeping for Wicked Problems,” 1.
“The Complex System Records Model: Recordkeeping for Wicked Problems,” 5.
313 “The Complex System Records Model: Recordkeeping for Wicked Problems,” 4–5, 19, 62–66.
314 Julie McLeod and Sue Childs, “A Strategic Approach to Making Sense of the ‘wicked’ Problem of
ERM,” Records Management Journal 23, no. 2 (2013): 104–35; Childs and McLeod, “Tackling the
Wicked Problem of ERM: Using the Cynefin Framework as a Lens”; Julie McLeod, “Reinventing
Archival Methods: Reconceptualising Electronic Records Management as a Wicked Problem,” Archives
and Manuscripts 42, no. 2 (2014): 193–96.
315 McLeod and Childs, “A Strategic Approach to Making Sense of the ‘wicked’ Problem of ERM,” 105–
7; McLeod, “Reinventing Archival Methods,” 194.
316 Childs and McLeod, “Tackling the Wicked Problem of ERM: Using the Cynefin Framework as a
Lens”; McLeod and Childs, “A Strategic Approach to Making Sense of the ‘wicked’ Problem of ERM,”
312

90

The AERI community has engaged in research to examine how “archival and
recordkeeping imperatives, frameworks, processes, technologies and standards can contribute in
significant ways to addressing many of society’s most pressing grand challenges.” 317 Grand
challenges as understood by AERI are essentially synonymous with wicked problems. Anne
Gilliland, who has played a leading role in AERI, characterized grand challenges as presenting
themselves “as massive scale, unsolvable, inevitable, impossibly and impassably complex and
paradoxical problems that threaten entire regions or even the world, and yet, for humanity’s sake,
absolutely need to be solved and the cycle of their inevitability broken.” 318 This work has
investigated how recordkeeping and archives knowledge, practices, and theory can inform efforts
to address challenges in the areas of corporate governance and social responsibility, climate
change, global health, human rights and social justice, and peace and security. 319

Conclusion and Gaps
In this chapter I reviewed the literature of recordkeeping behavior as articulated by the archival
field and the literature of wicked problems. In my analysis of the recordkeeping literature I
focused on the emergence of the modern diplomatic and two intellectual strands within that
tradition: the administrative-juridical and socio-cultural perspectives. I then looked at literature

109–113. The Cynefin framework is a sense-making construct to help people “make sense of problems
and situations, in different dynamic business contexts, and take appropriate action.” Childs and McLeod,
“Tackling the Wicked Problem of ERM: Using the Cynefin Framework as a Lens,” 192.
317 Anne Gilliland, “Permeable Binaries, Societal Grand Challenges, and the Roles of the Twenty-First
Century Archival and Recordkeeping Profession,” Archifacts, 2015, 9,
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/90q5538g.
318 Gilliland, “Permeable Binaries, Societal Grand Challenges, and the Roles of the Twenty-First Century
Archival and Recordkeeping Profession.”
319 Anne J. Gilliland and Sue McKemmish, “Recordkeeping Metadata, the Archival Multiverse, and
Societal Grand Challenges,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Dublin Core and
Metadata Applications (Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, 2012), 113–14,
http://dcpapers.dublincore.org/pubs/article/view/3661/1884; Cifor and Soyka, “Identifying Research
Contributions of Archival Studies and Recordkeeping to Societal Grand Challenges: A Report from the
AERI Grand Challenges Working Group.”

91

from the archival field as it continues to emerge to this day. My review of the wicked problems
literature focused on its emergence in the late 1960s and early 1970s and the central role it has
played in design and planning. I then reviewed how researchers and practitioners have used
wicked problems to frame challenges in public policy; environmental policy; counterinsurgency
warfare and international security; and information, data, and records management.
There has been a limited amount of study on the recordkeeping and data management
challenges associated with wicked problems. This work stretches back to Rittel who noted in an
interview that one “cannot understand the problem without having a concept of the solution in
mind; and that you cannot gather information meaningfully unless you have understood the
problem but that you cannot understand the problem without information about it.” 320 As
discussed in Chapter One, there is a close connection in wicked problems as articulated by Rittel
between understanding a problem, documenting a problem, and solving a problem. According to
Rittel these three activities are closely intertwined, inform each other, and occur concurrently
and iteratively.
Public administration and policy scholar Catrien Termeer and colleagues published a
2012 study that explored the work of documenting wicked problems, which they denoted as the
dimension of “observing the wickedness of problems.” 321 They noted that the lack of literature
on “modes of observing” even though “the paradox of wicked problems is that strategies for
solving such problems are informed by the way one looks at them.” 322 Additionally, in 2008
Weber and Khademian emphasized how the flow of information and knowledge in a network
dealing with a wicked problem is dependent on carefully managed collaborative and deliberative

320

Rittel, Second-generation Design Methods; Cross, Developments in Design Methodology, 321.
Termeer et al., “Governance Capabilities for Dealing Wisely With Wicked Problems,” 681.
322 Termeer et al., “Governance Capabilities for Dealing Wisely With Wicked Problems,” 681–82.
321

92

activities. 323
While the recent incorporation of wicked problems in the LIS and recordkeeping and
archival literature has begun to popularize the concept within this set of allied fields, most of this
literature has, to date, still followed the pattern of merely describing a challenge as a wicked
problem, rather than describing how recordkeeping and information management practices
influence and inform the study of wicked problems. It is here that research on grand challenges
associated with AERI has demonstrated the most promise by taking this line of thinking into
account, although this work is still in its early stages. 324 There is, therefore, ample space within
the literature to explore the role of recordkeeping in grappling with wicked problems, both as a
community of practice to contribute to the mitigation of wicked problems and as an area of
scholarship to shed light on the nature of these problems.

323

“Wicked Problems, Knowledge Challenges, and Collaborative Capacity Builders in Network
Settings.”
324 Full disclosure: I am a member of the AERI community and have participated in some of its work on
grand challenges.

93

Chapter Three
Methodology

Introduction
In this dissertation, I have examined how wicked problems can provide insights into
recordkeeping behavior and, conversely, how wicked problems can be understood as
recordkeeping challenges. At the center of this research is a historical case study of monthly
province reports, written by US province advisors during the Vietnam War. This case study is
framed by the concept of wicked problems, which describes the close relationship between
defining societal problems that are complex, vitally important, politically contested, and illdefined (such as insurgencies), and identifying potential solutions. 325 The conceptual framework
of wicked problems, combined with this historical case study of province reports, supports an
exploration of the relationship between recordkeeping behavior and wicked problems.
For the purpose of exploring this relationship, I have framed this inquiry with two
research questions tied directly to the case study and two conceptually focused research
questions.
•

Case Study Research Questions
o In what ways did US civilian and military officials use the province report to
document and understand the Vietnam War?
o In what ways did the structure and rules of the province report frame its
documentation of the Vietnam War?

•

Conceptual Research Questions
o In what ways do organizations’ recordkeeping practices frame their understanding
of wicked problems?
o In what ways can wicked problems be seen as recordkeeping challenges?

325

Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 160.

94

Case Study Framework
Overview
This study of the province report is framed in this dissertation as an historical case study. The
essence of the case study, as a methodological approach, centers on the selection of an object of
study and the definition of its boundaries. 326 Case studies allow researchers to examine their
object of study in extensive depth and in their context over time. 327 Political scientist and
behaviorist Alexander L. George and internal relations scholar Andrew Bennett defined a case
“as an instance of a class of events.” 328 They define a class of events as “a phenomenon of
scientific interest…that the investigator chooses to study with the aim of developing theory (or
‘generic knowledge’) regarding the causes of similarities or differences among instances (cases)
of that class of events.” 329 Much of the core case study literature, such as social scientist Robert
Yin’s Case Study Research: Design and Methods, comes from the education and sociology
domains and makes an underlying assumption that the subject of a case study is
contemporaneous with the researcher. Yin, in fact, defined case study in part as “an empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon in depth and within its real-life
context.” 330 However, George and Bennett hail from the field of international relations, where
case studies often focus on historical events. Coming from that tradition, they defined case
studies as “a well-defined aspect of a historical episode that the investigator selects for analysis,
rather than the historical event itself.” 331 This definition supports my construction of this

326

Bent Flyvbjerg, “Case Study,” in The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, 4th ed. (Los Angeles:
SAGE Publications, 2011), 301.
327 Linda Mabry, “Case Study in Social Research,” in The SAGE Handbook of Social Research Methods
(Los Angeles: SAGE Publications, 2008), 214; Flyvbjerg, “Case Study,” 310.
328 Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 17.
329 Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences, 17–18.
330 Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 4th ed. (SAGE Publications, 2009), 18.
331 Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences, 18.

95

dissertation’s historical case study of province reports created during the Vietnam War. My goal
in this research project is not to tell a history of the province report, but to use the history of the
report to explore the relationship between recordkeeping and wicked problems.
Analysis of a case study should be guided by a theoretical inquiry. 332 The theoretical
frame should help the researcher determine how to approach a case and what evidence from the
case to select for analysis. In their case study research methods book, George and Bennett
described three case studies of the Cuban missile crisis that use the event to examine deterrence,
coercive diplomacy, and crisis management. 333 These different theoretical inquiries produced
three different case studies of the same historical event. Case studies can also be used to
investigate multiple theoretical propositions for understanding historical events. Political
scientist Graham Allison and US government official, attorney, and historian Phillip Zelikow, for
example, used the Cuban missile crisis to examine the rational actor model, the organizational
behavior model, and the governmental politics model. 334 Case studies of historical events are not
primarily intended to tell a historical narrative for the sake of that narrative, but to develop,
extend, or refute theories or models. I have engaged in this historical case study of province
reports not to tell the story of these reports, but to examine how the study of wicked problems
and recordkeeping behavior can inform each other.
The goal of this case study is to make an “analytic generalization,” about the concept of
wicked problems and the study of recordkeeping behavior. Yin defined analytic generalization as
the process of generalizing from a case study to expand and generalize theory. 335 I do not aim to

332

Yin, Case Study Research, 130–31.
Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences, 18.
334 Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 2nd ed. (New York: Addison Wesley
Longman, Inc, 1999), 2–7.
335 Case Study Research, 15.
333

96

make a generalizable claim out of this study of province reports from IV Corps provinces to a
broader population of province reports created in other provinces or to other reports created
during the Vietnam War. I am not attempting to make a statistical generalization about
recordkeeping behavior by enumerating the frequency of a particular behavior in this case and
extrapolating these occurrences to other settings. 336
The province report—the object of study for this dissertation—can be seen as a
“specified or bounded phenomenon.” 337 The province report was clearly defined as a specific
record type by Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) in three directives. These
directives (MACV Joint Directive 4-67, 2-69, and 4-70) defined the characteristics of the
province report and provided the warrant for its creation. Individual province reports were
closely tied to the context of their creation. I examined province reports in conjunction with other
records produced at the theater, corps, and province level that provide evidence of the context of
the province reports’ creation. Using a case study approach provides the methodological
framework to consider the province reports along with their context.
I examined the province report as an instrumental case study that provides an opportunity
to carefully explore an example of an organization documenting a wicked problem. Education
scholar Robert Stake defined instrumental case studies as studies used to understand something
other than the case itself and can serve as a means to studying a larger phenomenon or engaging
in theory building or testing. 338 While using the province report as an instrumental case study, I
did not use the reports as a vehicle to examine broader topics about the Vietnam War, such as the
role of US advisors in the war effort. Instead, I squarely focused this dissertation on the study of

336

Yin, Case Study Research, 15.
Mabry, “Case Study in Social Research,” 214.
338 The Art of Case Study Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1995), 3.
337

97

records and recordkeeping behavior as an area of scholarship in its own right. This approach fits
with the research tradition of the modern diplomatic as described in Chapters One and Two. This
study goes beyond the examination of a document type for understanding it more fully. I
examined the province report in order to incorporate recordkeeping behavior into the concept of
wicked problems and to inform the study of recordkeeping behavior with the concept of wicked
problems.
The province report presented several advantages as an object of study for this research
project. First, most of the reports still exist and are available at the US National Archives and
Records Administration (NARA) in College Park, Maryland. Second, all of the warrants for the
report’s creation, as well as a rich set of documents that constitute additional rules for the
province report, are available at NARA. The availability of virtually the full corpus of relevant
records facilitated my research into the context of the province reports. Third, the reports are
substantive documents—normally running five to 15 single-space typed pages—that allow for
rich analysis. Fourth, for over five years, the production of province reports was a critical
recordkeeping activity in support of the US military effort to tame a wicked problem. The
province report was the capstone document of each senior province advisor’s extensive reporting
responsibilities. These advisors, along with their province advisory teams, played a critical role
in the US effort to support the GVN’s campaign against the insurgency. Province advisors were
deeply enmeshed in the wicked problem of defeating the insurgency. Finally, the report’s
warrants and rules instructed senior province advisors to document significant events in their
province each month including their interpretation of these events and their overall assessment of
the state of affairs in their province.

98

The monthly province reports contain assessments of government programs, officials,
and defense forces along with descriptions of the state of the population, insurgent forces, and
the war in each of South Vietnam’s 44 provinces. Advisors created these reports from November
1967 through February 1973. Using content analysis, I examined the province reports from three
provinces in the IV Corps, Phong Dinh, Dinh Tuong, and Kien Hoa, as well as province reports
created by all 16 IV Corps province advisory teams during the month of January from 1968
through 1973. Based on this systematic exploration, my analysis and discussion is informed by
an examination of the historical context in which province advisors wrote the reports and the
warrants and rules that governed their creation.

Selection of Population
This study could have been framed around a random sample of province reports from across
South Vietnam, or even within one of the four corps. However, I chose to review province
reports from three purposely selected IV Corps provinces as embedded units of analysis for this
case study for several reasons. First, because I was making analytical generalizations to produce
new insights about a concept rather than statistically generalizing to a population, making a
random sample from a population was not critical to the success of this study. Second, I selected
three provinces to allow for comparison of province reports created by different province teams.
This places the focus of the study on the province report rather than on the recordkeeping
behavior of a particular province advisory team. Third, I selected three provinces that were all
within the same corps because many of the rules that governed the creation and management of
the province reports (in addition to feedback about the reports) were issued at the corps level.
Looking at province reports within a single corps afforded the opportunity to examine the role
that a set of corps-issued rules, commentary, and feedback played in the production of these

99

reports. Furthermore, reviewing all January province reports from all 16 IV Corps provinces
provided another access point for examining how corps-level instructions and rules shaped the
reports.
I selected province reports from three IV Corps provinces and January reports from all
provinces in the IV Corps as my units of analysis because of the prominent role that insurgency
warfare played in the Delta region (at the southern end of Vietnam). In comparison to the other
three corps of South Vietnam, counterinsurgency warfare was the dominant form of conflict in
IV Corps during the war. There were comparatively few conventional battles in the Delta region
and the vast majority of US combat troops were deployed in the other three corps, making the
war in the IV Corps primarily an insurgency—in other words, a wicked problem. 339
I selected the province reports from Phong Dinh, Dinh Tuong, and Kien Hoa for the
following reasons:
•

Phong Dinh Early in this research project, I conducted an exploratory study of the
province reports and other documents created by this US advisory province team. That
work helped me to frame this study. The records from Phong Dinh province are among
the most complete set of province advisory team records located at NARA. 58 of 64
(90%) of Phong Dinh province reports were available for this study. I was not able to
locate Phong Dinh province reports for November 1967 or the months of August through
December of 1968.

•

Dinh Tuong Insurgent forces had an active presence in this province during much of the
war and extensive insurgency and counterinsurgency activities took place in Dinh Tuong.
This province was also the subject of two extensive studies: David W.P. Elliott’s The

339

For discussion about the nature of the war in the IV Corps, see Hunt, Pacification, 94, 188–92.

100

Vietnamese War: Revolution and Social Change in the Mekong Delta 1930-1975 and
William R Andrews’ The Village War: Vietnamese Communist revolutionary activities in
Dinh Tuong province, 1960-1964. These works, especially Elliott’s, provided social and
political context that informed and enriched my analysis of the province reports from
Dinh Tuong. 340 83% of Dinh Tuong province reports (53 of 64) were available for this
study. I was not able to locate Dinh Tuong province reports from November 1967 and the
months of March through December 1968.
•

Kien Hoa This province, like Dinh Tuong, also had an active insurgent presence during
the war and was the site of significant insurgency and counterinsurgency activity. 98% of
the province reports from Kien Hoa (63 of 64) are located at NARA. Kien Hoa is one of
the few IV Corps provinces for which a nearly complete set of province reports is
available at NARA. I was not able to locate the September 1968 Kien Hoa province
report.
I examined all IV Corps province reports from the month of January from 1968 through

1973. January is the only month where copies from all IV Corps province reports are available
from NARA for all six of those years. January did have some distinctive activities and
occurrences during the war. Tet, the most significant festival and holiday in Vietnamese culture,
normally occurs in late January. Tet marks year-end activities and because of festivals and
family-centered traditions, many government services and initiatives slowed in January during
the war. During Tet in 1968, insurgent forces, supported by North Vietnamese military elements,
made a major attack across South Vietnam, one of the war’s most significant events. There was
340

The Vietnamese War: Revolution and Social Change in the Mekong Delta, 1930-1975, vol. I
(Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2003); The Vietnamese War: Revolution and Social Change in the Mekong
Delta, 1930-1975, vol. II (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2003); The Village War: Vietnamese Communist
Revolutionary Activities in Dinh Tuong Province, 1960-1964 (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri
Press, 1973).

101

another extensive insurgent attack, although not as large or historically significant, during Tet in
1969. In southern Vietnam, January occurs in the dry season and coincides with a crop harvest.
More broadly, a preponderance of the war’s large combat operations and offensives occurred
during the dry season, which is generally between November and April. 341 With those distinctive
characteristics noted, many normal government and military operations also occurred during
January over the course of the war. Most significantly, reading the complete set of IV Corps
province reports during that month affords a systematic comparison of these reports, over six
years and across all 16 of these provinces.

Data Gathering
I accessed the province reports and vast majority of MACV and Civilian Operations and
Revolutionary Development Support (CORDS) records from NARA. I photographed documents
held at NARA over the course of four trips in February and March 2013, December 2013, June
2014, and August 2014. 342
All of the records I examined at NARA are paper records in RG 472, Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975. Most of the province reports that I examined
are located in a series of province reports from the Reports Division of the Reports and Analysis
Directorate of CORDS. The province report warrants and related policies are from the MACV
Adjutant General’s Office. Many of the province report rules (in the forms of information
bulletins, letters of instruction, and staff memos) are from the records of the CORDS Delta
341 Thomas C. Thayer, ed., “The Situation in Southeast Asia,” A Systems Analysis View of the Vietnam
War 1965-1972 (Washington DC: OASD(SA)RP Southeast Asia Intelligence Division, Department of
Defense, 1975), 88; Thayer, War without Fronts, 12–13.
342 These research trips were supplemented by a visit to the Lyndon Banes Johnson Presidential Library
in June 2013 and online searches for province reports and related documents during 2013 and 2014 from
the Vietnam Center and Archive at Texas Tech University. I did not directly use any documents from
these archives in my study, although they supplemented my understanding of the US involvement in the
Vietnam War.

102

Regional Command. Additional records, including documents that constituted province report
rules and records about various GVN counterinsurgency programs and the Hamlet Evaluation
System (HES) are in the records of the Phong Dinh, Dinh Tuong, and Kien Hoa province
advisory teams at NARA.

Data Analysis
Because case study research does not prescribe a set of methods, 343 I had to select a set of
methods that best addresses my research questions. As outlined in Chapter One, I have used the
concept of records being composed of context, structure, and content to frame my use of
methods in four areas of analysis: 1) a historical analysis of the social, political, and military
context in which the province report was created, 2) an analysis in the tradition of the modern
diplomatic of the recordkeeping context of the report’s warrants and rules, 3) an analysis of the
structure of the reports, also in the tradition of the modern diplomatic and 4) a content analysis of
the content of the reports. I triangulated my data sources along with this combination of
methodological approaches in order to explore my research questions.
Norman K. Denzin describes four types of triangulation: data, investigator, theory, and
methodological. 344 I triangulated my research data by examining province reports from three IV
Corps provinces and reports from the month of January across all IV Corps provinces.
Examining province reports across four embedded units of analysis (the three provinces and
reports from January across the corps) generated data that can support insights on the patterns
prevalent in creating these reports, rather than just revealing the recordkeeping and
documentation practices of a single province advisory team. In addition, I combined my study of
343

Flyvbjerg, “Case Study,” 301.
The Research Act: A Theoretical Introduction to Sociological Methods (Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Co, 1970), 301. Michael Quinn Patton discusses these four types of triangulation further in Qualitative
Research & Evaluation Methods, 3rd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 2002), 555–63.

344

103

province reports along with the warrants, rules, and other contemporaneous documents about the
reports that civilian and military offices issued at theater, corps, and province level. Studying the
warrants and rules for the province report informs my content analyses of the reports.
I also triangulated my research methodologically. To do this, I conducted a historical
analysis of the military, political, and social contexts in which the province advisory teams wrote
their reports. I used a modern diplomatic approach to analyze the structure of the reports and the
warrants and rules that governed their creation and management. Additionally, I have carried out
a content analysis of all of the available province reports from Phong Dinh, Dinh Tuong, and
Kien Hoa and reports of all IV Corps provinces in the months of January over the six-year period
from 1968 through 1973. In this content analysis, I focused on the discussions about insurgent
forces and the presence of HES data, as well as discussions about the HES in the province
reports.

104

Table 3.1
Overview of Areas of Analysis, Methods, and Data Sources
Area of Analysis

Method

Data Source

Record Element

Findings
Chapter

The social,
political, and
military context in
which the
province report
was created

Historical
analysis

Contemporary and secondary
works about US
counterinsurgency efforts
during the Vietnam War.

Context
(Social, Political,
Military)

Chapter 4

The province
report’s warrants
and rules

Modern
diplomatic
analysis

Province report warrants and
rules.

Context
(Recordkeeping)

Chapter 5

The structure of
the province
report

Modern
diplomatic
analysis

Province report warrants and
rules.

Structure

Chapter 5

The content of
the province
report (HES data
and discussion
and insurgent
forces
description)

Content
analysis

Province reports from Dinh
Tuong, Kien Hoa, and
Phong Dinh advisory teams.

Content

Chapter 6

Contemporary documents
discussing the quality of
province reports.

Province reports from all IV
Corps province advisory teams
Januarys 1968 – 1973.

Historical Analysis and Modern Diplomatic Analysis of the Social, Political, and Military
Context; the Recordkeeping Context; and Structure of the Province Report
I have described the first three areas of analysis together in this section because of their
methodological similarities and interconnectedness. In these areas, I made informed decisions to
include certain documents for examination (and not others) based on my expertise and insights
into the subject area, as described below. In the first area of research (the social, political, and
military context of the province report) I carried out a historical study of the military and
political setting in which US advisors created their province reports by synthesizing the
secondary literature on the MACV and CORDS US advisor program, as well as primary
documents created by those two organizations. In my second (the recordkeeping context of the

105

province report) and third (the structure of the province report) areas of research, I conducted a
historical analysis of the province report’s warrants and rules and structure, respectively. The
second area contains qualitative analysis of warrants and rules that governed the province
reports, and a description of the report’s evolution from its initial creation in 1967 to its final use
by province advisory teams in 1973. This includes an examination of the directives (MACV
Directive 4-67, 2-69, and 4-70) that provided the warrants for the creation, dissemination, and
use of the province reports; a range of memos, letters of instructions, and bulletins that provide
additional rules about the creation of the province report; and other contemporary documents that
provided evidence of the broader recordkeeping ecology of US advisors. I also placed the
province report within the context of the US advisor program and within the recordkeeping
ecology of province advisors, connecting and triangulating my first and second approaches of my
study. In my third area of analysis, I qualitatively examined province report warrants and rules,
as well as the province reports themselves, in order to describe the structure of the reports and
the changes to that structure from 1967 through 1973.
The primary distinction between the first area of analysis and the second and third areas
is that in the latter two areas, my examination of the province reports and related documents
focused on the province report as the main object of study, not as a means to another historical
topic. Therefore, the second and third areas of my research were historical studies in the modern
diplomatic tradition because my examination of province report was not an exploration of their
“subject content” but—in the words of Tom Nesmith—a use of “historical research
methodologies and interpretive insights to unravel the full, rich, contextual power of” the
province report in and of itself. 345
345

“Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North American Rediscovery of
Provenance,” 10.

106

Content Analysis of the Province Report
For the final piece of data analysis, I coded all available province reports from the Phong Dinh,
Kien Hoa, and Dinh Tuong provinces, and all reports from the 16 IV Corps provinces from the
month of January, over the six-year period from 1968 through 1973.
Table 3.2
Number of Province Reports Coded
Province Report
Sources
Dinh Tuong Province
Kien Hoa Province
Phong Dinh Province
January reports from
IV Corps
Total

Number of
Reports Coded
53
63
58
78

Missing
Reports
11
1
6
0

271

17

The 78 January reports total excludes the reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong
Dinh provinces. With those three provinces included there were 96 IV Corps provinces reports
from the month of January. There were 16 provinces in the IV Corps.
Social scientist Klaus Krippendorf defined content analysis as a “research technique for
making replicable and valid inferences from text (or other meaningful matter) to the contexts of
their use.” 346 The crucial characteristic of text for Krippendorf is that “a text means something to
someone, it is produced by someone to have meaning for someone else.” 347 For the province
reports, each province senior advisor produced a text that encoded a set of meanings for himself
and others. Advisors transmitted the report to CORDS at the corps level, which would
redistribute the reports to various headquarters and civilian offices at the corps and theater level
as well as to offices in Washington DC. The reports held their own set of meanings for each of
the recipients of the reports. Texts, according to Krippendorf, are not reader-independent objects
with immutably fixed meanings. Every reader formulates his or her own meaning of a text. This
346

Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology, 3rd ed. (Los Angeles: SAGE Publications,
2012), 24.
347 Content Analysis, 25.

107

includes any researcher undertaking a content analysis of a text. Content analysis does not give
researchers omniscient powers over a text. 348 Content analysis serves as a method to produce
“replicable and valid inferences” about a set of meanings, not the meaning, within these province
reports. 349 Because texts are not reader-independent I did not attempt to identify the particular
meanings that the report authors and recipients ascribed to the province reports. I used content
analysis to answer the dissertation’s research questions—questions that differ from the concerns
of province and regional advisors during the Vietnam War.
For this content analysis, I carried out a targeted, narrow examination of the province
reports, and sought the presence of two types of content: 1) Hamlet Evaluation System data or
discussions about the HES and 2) descriptions and assessments of insurgent forces. My coding
for these two topics illuminated the patterns of how frequently these issues appeared, and where
they appeared in the reports. I also analyzed how province advisors discussed these topics. This
produced a body of data that I was able to present, analyze, and discuss in my findings chapters.
I managed all of my content analysis coding in Excel. More details about my coding structure
and definitions are in a set of coding guidelines in Appendix A.
I chose to code province reports for HES content because this evaluation system has been
a focal point in the debates about US military and civilian measurement and evaluation efforts
during the Vietnam War. 350 It gave me an opportunity to contextualize the coding data I
generated within a broader discussion of military assessment. Additionally, coding for HES
scores and discussion of the measurement system afforded me the opportunity to assess how

348

Krippendorff, Content Analysis, 28.
Krippendorff, Content Analysis, 30.
350 The Hamlet Evaluation System was a data system managed by MACV and CORDS that American
advisors used from 1967 to 1973 to quantitatively score the level of GVN control over Vietnamese
hamlets, based on several security and governance factors. Further discussion about the HES is in Chapter
Six.
349

108

province advisors used a quantitative system to portray the state of the war, evaluate
performance, and frame notions of success in a qualitative report. Coding for HES scores helped
me to unpack one of the ways province advisors tried to document and define a wicked problem.
Table 3.3
Content Analysis Framework
Content
Topics

Province Report
Sections Coded

Province Report Population

HES Scores
and
Discussion

Overview

All IV Corps advisory teams, Januarys 1968 – 1973
Dinh Tuong advisory team, all available months
Kien Hoa advisory team, all available months
Phong Dinh advisory team, all available months

Territorial
Security

All IV Corps advisory teams, Januarys 1968 – 1973
Dinh Tuong advisory team, February 1969 – January 1972
Kien Hoa advisory team, February 1969 – January 1972
Phong Dinh advisory team, February 1969 – January 1972

Insurgent
Forces

Enemy Situation

All IV Corps advisory teams, Januarys 1968 – 1973

The approach for my content analysis of the province report entries evolved dramatically
over the course of this study. I originally intended to code the reports for three topics: 1) HES, 2)
GVN officials, and 3) Chieu Hoi, a GVN program to flip insurgents to the other side of the war
and support the government. Initially, I conducted a pilot study and drafted a highly detailed
codebook. However, I moved away from this initial content analysis approach because, without
me fully recognizing it, my coding scheme was geared towards answering historical questions
about how US advisors understood the war, the GVN’s counterinsurgency programs, and their
GVN counterparts. My initial coding scheme began to use the province report as an evidential
means to a historical study about US province advisors, rather than keeping the province report
as a record at the center of my investigation. The content analysis approach I ultimately used in

109

my study was designed to squarely address questions about the intersection of recordkeeping and
wicked problems. This revised coding scheme maintained my recordkeeping focus by enabling
me to look how PSAs used quantitative data in a narrative report and to examine the roles that
warrants and individuals played in shaping the content of province reports.

Content Analysis of the Hamlet Evaluation Content in the Overview Section
I carried out my content analysis of Hamlet Evaluation System data and discussions about the
HES for two sections of the province report: the Overview section and Territorial Security
section. This analysis of HES content in the Overview section supported my exploration of
subthemes 1.1 Thick description at scale and 1.2 Role of the individual within an institutional
setting. In order to examine HES content appearing in the Overview section, I looked at reports
from all available province reports from the Dinh Tuong (53 reports), Kien Hoa (63 reports), and
Phong Dinh (58 reports) advisory teams and all (16) of the IV Corps advisory teams’ January
reports (78 reports, excluding Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh). First, I coded for the
presence of HES content in the Overview and noted any overriding pattern of where they
appeared in the section and the language used to present the content. Then I coded HES content
in this section into five categories that helped me investigate how advisors used HES scores to
describe the war and how they talked about HES as a management and evaluation tool. The five
categories were 1) HES Scores as Description, 2) Explaining HES Scores, 3) Predicting HES
Scores, 4) Administration, 5) Validity and Reliability. I developed these categories during my
close read of the Overview section entries for the presence of HES content. I defined these
categories in a set of content analysis coding guidelines (Appendix A). These definitions are
illustrated with coding examples.

110

Content Analysis of the Hamlet Evaluation Content in the Territorial Security Section
For the second component of my analysis of HES content in the province report, I coded
province reports for HES content in the Territorial Security section of the report. This analysis
supported my exploration of subthemes 1.2 Role of the individual within an institutional setting
and 1.3 Normalizing description to the familiar through warrants. My examination of HES
content in this section revolves around February 1970 IV Corps Office of CORDS Information
Bulletin 78-70, which was the only document that stipulated the inclusion of HES data in this
section, or any section, of the province report. 351 I examined all province reports from the Dinh
Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh advisory teams from February 1969 through January 1972
(36 months, 108 reports). This period spanned twelve months before the information bulletin was
issued to twelve months after the revised rules superseding the bulletin were issued. I have also
examined the January province reports from all 16 IV Corps provinces from 1967 through 1973
(78 reports, excluding reports from Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh). I coded for the
presence of HES content in this section. I did not code the HES content in the Territorial Security
section for any themes. Guidelines for this coding are in Appendix A. This content analysis
helped me explore the nature of the influences that warrants and individuals had in shaping the
content of the province reports.

Content Analysis of the Insurgent Forces Content in the Enemy Situation section
I also completed a content analysis of descriptions of insurgent forces from the IV Corps
province advisory teams in the Enemy Situation section of the province report. This analysis
351

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” February 14, 1970, Appendix 1 to
Inclosure 2, 1, General Records, 1967-1973, Box 1067, Folder 160-09A Misc -- 1971; Advisory Team 66
(Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973; Records of
MACV Subordinate Commands 1962-73, Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

111

supported my exploration of theme 1.3 Normalizing description to the familiar through warrants.
For this analysis I examined all IV Corps province reports produced during the month of January
from 1968 through 1973 (96 reports). I coded the content in this section for three concepts: 1)
Kinetic Engagements, 2) Insurgent Force Size, Organization, Movement, and 3) Political, Social,
Non-military Activities. I developed these categories during an initial review of the Enemy
Situation sections in a convenience sample of January province reports. These categories are
defined in Appendix A. These definitions are illustrated with coding examples.

Validity and Limits
Validity is a widely debated term in the qualitative research literature. 352 A broad range of
alternative concepts, such as authenticity and trustworthiness, has emerged as approaches that
reframe underlying notions of validity. 353 Because this dissertation is driven by a case study, I
use the definition of validity offered by educational psychologist Linda Mabry in her discussion
of case study research. She defined validity as “the accuracy of data, and the reasonableness and
warrantedness of data-based interpretations, to ‘the adequacy and appropriateness of
inferences.’” 354 Mabry’s definition highlights the concern that validity should be evaluated at a
methodological level, which can be seen as internal validity that focuses on the methods used to

352

John W. Creswell and Dana L. Miller, “Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry,” Theory Into
Practice 39, no. 3 (2000): 124; Yvonna S. Lincoln, Susan A. Lynham, and Egon G. Guba, “Paradigmatic
Controversies, Contradictions, and Emerging Confluences, Revisited,” in The SAGE Handbook of
Qualitative Research, 4th ed. (Los Angeles: SAGE Publications, 2011), 120; David L. Altheide and John
M. Johnson, “Reflections on Interpretive Adequacy in Qualitative Research,” in The SAGE Handbook of
Qualitative Research, 4th ed. (Los Angeles: SAGE Publications, 2011), 585.
353 Creswell and Miller, “Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry,” 124.
354 “Case Study in Social Research,” 221. In this definition Mabry quoted, in part, Samuel Messick,
“Validity,” in Educational Measurement, 3rd ed. (Phoenix, AZ: The Oryx Press, 1993), 13. In my content
analysis of HES scores, one of my coding categories is “Validity and Reliability.” The definitions I used
for these two terms as a coding category differ from the definitions I used for these same concepts as part
of the methodological underpinnings of this dissertation. I discussed the definitions of validity and
reliability as a coding category for my content analysis in Appendix A.

112

produce and analyze data, and at an interpretive level, which can be seen as external validity that
focuses on the interpretation of that data. 355
Education scholars John W. Creswell and Dana L. Miller suggest that validity in
qualitative research is framed by the viewpoint of either the researcher, the participants of a
study, or others who are external to the study. 356 Evaluating the validity of this study should be
primarily done through the lens of the researcher. I carried out this case study in order to make
claims about the intersection of recordkeeping and wicked problems. Thus, the adequacy and
appropriateness of the inferences that I made from the case study should be primarily evaluated
against the conceptualization of recordkeeping behavior and its relationship to wicked problems
that I have constructed.
Creswell and Miller also point out that the paradigm assumptions that researchers make
in their research also play a key role in determining the most appropriate ways to evaluate the
validity of that research. 357 This dissertation is generally, but not exclusively, informed by a
constructivist worldview that emphasizes “pluralistic, interpretive, open-ended, and
contextualized… perspectives towards reality.” 358 Education scholars Yvonna S. Lincoln and
Egon G. Guba articulate how this worldview shapes a naturalistic research paradigm. They
summarize this paradigm in five axioms about the nature of reality, the relationship of the
knower to known, generalization, causal linkages, and the role of values in inquiry. 359 The first
axiom about the nature of reality is of particular interest for this study. Lincoln and Guba stated
that, “There are multiple constructed realities that can be studied only holistically; inquiry into
355

Lincoln, Lynham, and Guba, “Paradigmatic Controversies, Contradictions, and Emerging
Confluences, Revisited,” 120.
356 “Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry,” 125.
357 “Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry,” 125–26.
358 Creswell and Miller, “Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry,” 125.
359 Naturalistic Inquiry, 37–38.

113

these multiple realities will inevitably diverge (each inquiry raises more questions than it
answers) so that prediction and control are unlikely outcomes although some level of
understanding (verstehen) can be achieved.” 360 As noted in Chapter One, this dissertation is
informed by the underlying concept of wicked problems, particularly the notions that “there is no
definitive formulation of a wicked problem [and]… [that] the existence of a discrepancy
representing a wicked problem can be explained in numerous ways. The choice of explanation
determines the nature of the problem’s resolution.” 361 US military and government officials held
differing concepts of the nature of the Vietnam War and these varied conceptualizations shaped
their conduct and influenced the outcome of war. Thus, as described by Lincoln and Guba, the
naturalistic paradigm gracefully accommodates a case study set in a highly confusing, dynamic,
multi-actor event that had enough complexity to support numerous interpretations and
understandings.
The goal of this dissertation is understanding institutional recordkeeping in a wicked
problems context and the ways in which that study of recordkeeping informs the concept of
wicked problems. Internal validity should be evaluated against the quality of my discernment of
the patterns of the content within the province reports and how those patterns reveal a particular
understanding and conceptualization of the war. Internal validity should also be evaluated
against my analysis of the rules and warrants that governed the reports and how those
recordkeeping requirements and the report creation process shaped the content of the reports.
External validity should be evaluated against the quality of my interpretation of the data that
360

Naturalistic Inquiry, 37. In exploring the first axiom of the naturalist paradigm about multiple realities
Lincoln and Guba noted that they subscribe to a notion of reality known as “constructed reality”
Naturalistic Inquiry, 83–85, 87. In this conception of reality the authors claimed, “Events, persons,
objects, are indeed tangible entities. The meanings and wholeness derived from or ascribed to these
tangible phenomena in order to make sense of them, organize them, or reorganize a belief system,
however, are constructed realities.” Naturalistic Inquiry, 84.
361 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161, 166.

114

emerges from my case study as I generalize my study to theoretical propositions about
recordkeeping behavior and the relationship between recordkeeping and wicked problems.
The goal of this study is not to explore the gap between what was reported in the
province reports and what actually happened in the provinces each month during the Vietnam
War. Determining what actually happened is an effort well beyond the scope of this dissertation
and would be an over-simplified singular understanding of an extremely complex, multifaceted
historical setting. This study is not focused on the variances between the report writing rules and
warrants and actual reporting practices. Nor is the central aim of this dissertation to describe the
US province advisors’ full understanding of the war.
Looking at the entire framework of this study, using triangulation is one of my central
strategies for guarding against threats to validity. Creswell noted that triangulating multiple
sources of data can add to the validity of studies. 362 As described earlier in this chapter, I
triangulated data, province reports from three provinces and all IV Corps provinces in the month
of January, the reports’ rules and warrants, and other contemporary discussions about the
province reports; and methods, historical analysis, modern diplomatic analysis, and content
analysis; to synthesize a story of the province report and the lessons that it can highlight about
recordkeeping behavior and wicked problems. Using multiple data sources and methods enabled
me to have a richer and more complete understanding of the province report.
One threat to the internal validity of this study is the possibility that I have coded the
province reports in an inconsistent or biased manner. I have tried to mitigate this in three ways.
First, I have created and used a set of content analysis coding guidelines, which are documented
in Appendix A. The guidelines gave me protocols that helped me to consistently and
362

Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches, 4th ed. (Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 2014), 201.

115

systematically code the province reports. 363 The guidelines resulted from a significant revision of
the detailed codebook I constructed for my pilot study. Lessons I drew from the pilot helped me
construct a lightweight coding scheme that kept my content analysis consistent as well as
relevant to my research questions. Finally, I assessed the internal validity of my content analysis
data with an intracoder assessment of my coding. 364 By recoding a portion of the data and
comparing it to earlier results, I made an effort to ensure consistency across the dataset.
One threat to my analysis of the province reports’ rules and warrants and the broader
context of creating these reports is the possibility that I did not examine a sufficiency broad and
rich set of historical documents. 365 There exists an overwhelming volume of archival records
documenting US activities during the war at NARA and other repositories. It is very possible that
I have missed some relevant documents. However, during my four research trips at NARA, I
reviewed documents from the records groups that I deemed most relevant for my research
questions. I also made the effort to examine documents created at the province, corps, and theater
level that provided evidence of how the province report was managed at all levels of command in
the US military. During my research at NARA I balanced speed against care, so I could review
as many records as possible, but not pass over relevant documents. Over the course of my four
research trips, I made the best choices that were possible within my time constraints.
My core strategy for managing threats to the external validity of this study was to
carefully manage the claims I made and to work within the limits of this study. The most
363

Yin noted that creating protocols is an important way to increase the reliability of case studies. Having
reliable data goes a long way to supporting the internal validity of a study. Case Study Research, 79. For
more details about content analysis protocols, see Krippendorff, Content Analysis, 84–87.
364 For a discussion of intracoder assessment, see Kirsty Williamson, Lisa M. Given, and Paul Scifleet,
“Qualitative Data Analysis,” in Research Methods: Information, Systems, and Contexts (Prahran,
Australia: Tilde Publishing, 2013), 429.
365 For example, Guenter Lewy discussed the importance of consulting a wide range of records and
conducting numerous interviews in order to develop an accurate account of the US involvement in the
Vietnam War. See America in Vietnam, viii–ix.

116

significant limit to my study is that I did not use direct observation to generate data about
recordkeeping behavior. This research project follows several dissertation studies that examined
case studies set in contemporary environments and gathered data using a variety of direct
observation and interview methods. 366 Direct observation afforded all of these researchers
opportunities to make thoughtful claims about the factors that influenced the recordkeeping
behavior, decisions, and actions of records creators. Without observational data that can provide
the evidential basis for thick descriptions of advisors creating province reports, there is a threat to
the validity of any claims I made about the factors and motivations that shape the recordkeeping
behavior of these province advisors. I guarded against these validity threats by carefully
managing the claims I made. For example, I discussed the role that the rules and warrants played
in shaping how the province reports were written and the context in which advisors wrote their
reports. I made my claims carefully, and attempted not to make assertions about the
recordkeeping and report writing behaviors and motivations of individual advisors that would
have been difficult to make without observational or interview data. Most of the claims of this
dissertation build off of data I could observe, such as the patterns of description that manifested
themselves in the text of the province reports.
Sole reliance on historical documents, of course, is common to many historical studies.
The challenge of navigating that limited set of data is that it can be difficult to make insightful
but supportable claims based on documentary traces that provide an incomplete picture of past
366

Elizabeth Yakel, “Recordkeeping in Radiology: The Relationships between Activities and Records in
Radiological Processes” (Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1997); Karen Gracy, “The Imperative to
Preserve: Competing Definitions of Value in the World of Film Preservation” (Dissertation, University of
California Los Angeles, 2001); Kalpana Shankar, “Scientists, Records, and the Practical Politics of
Infrastructure” (Dissertation, University of California Los Angeles, 2002); Ciaran Trace, “Documenting
School Life Formal and Informal Imprints of a Fifth Grade Classroom” (Dissertation, University of
California Los Angeles, 2004); Dharma Akmon, “The Role of Conceptions of Value in Data Practices: A
Multi-Case Study of Three Small Teams of Ecological Scientists” (Dissertation, University of Michigan,
2014).

117

events, places, cultures, and people. One challenge of studying historical recordkeeping is that
the process of creating records is rarely an activity that individuals and institutions seek to
document. Claims that researchers make about past institutional recordkeeping practices and
behaviors that they cannot observe must be pieced together from an institution’s explicit
recordkeeping rules and gleaned from the content, structure, and historical context of the records
themselves. This is necessarily incomplete. JoAnne Yates, who examined the records of three
nineteenth century companies to study “communication systems as an integrated whole,” 367
described how she drew evidence of recordkeeping practices and behavior from extant archival
records, noting that records are
only the skeletal remains of the communication systems that once controlled and
coordinated these companies; nevertheless, they provide both explicit and implicit
evidence of changes in these systems. Some documents contain explicit statements about
the evolution of communication as a managerial tool… In addition, all documents serve
as examples of communication genres. As such, they provide implicit clues about their
functions and physical evidence of the technologies used to create and handle them. From
the skeletal remains of the communication system, the muscle and flesh can be
deduced. 368
The challenge of this dissertation was to deduce the “muscle and flesh” of the history of US
advisors creating monthly province reports in order to draw meaningful lessons for the study of
recordkeeping behavior and wicked problems while ensuring that my claims are grounded and
defensible.

Conclusion
The chapter discusses the methodological approaches that I used for this dissertation. I placed
this study within the framework of a historical case study with the province report as the core
object of study. I examined, as embedded units of analysis, province reports from three

367
368

Control through Communication, xvi.
Control through Communication, xix.

118

purposefully selected IV Corps provinces—Phong Dinh, Dinh Tuong, and Kien Hoa—as well as
reports from the month of January starting in 1968 and ending in 1973 from all 16 IV Corps
provinces. I gathered the province reports, warrants and rules, and other supporting documents
from the National Archives in College Park, Maryland. I carried out my data analysis by
triangulating a historical evaluation of the political, military, and social context in which these
reports were written; an analysis in the tradition of the modern diplomatic of the province
report’s warrants and rules, and other contemporary documents about the reports; an analysis of
the structure of the province report; and a content analysis of the province reports for references
to HES programs and scores and descriptions of insurgent forces. Finally, in this chapter I
discussed the basis for evaluating the validity of this study and the limits of the methodologies
that I employed for this project.

119

Part Two
Findings

120

Chapter Four
Findings I: The Social, Political, and Military Context of the Province Report

Introduction
Part II: Findings presents three chapters of findings for this dissertation. Together, these chapters
tell the story of the historical case study of province reports written by US advisory teams during
the Vietnam War. Chapter Four, “The Social, Political, and Military Context of the Province
Report” presents the historical and organizational setting in which province advisors created the
monthly province report. Chapter Five, “The Recordkeeping Context and Structure of the
Province Report” evaluates the evolving structure of the province report along with the memos,
directives, and letters of instruction that provided the warrants and rules for its creation,
dissemination, and use. Chapter Six, “The Content of the Province Report” contains an analysis
of the content of province reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh province
advisory teams and the content of province reports of all 16 IV Corps advisory teams from
January of each year between 1967 and 1973.
In Chapter Four, I have explored the political and military context of the historical case
study of the province report. This contextual examination has three levels: 1) the entire war
across South Vietnam, 2) the war at the corps level, and 3) the war at the province level. At the
national level, I have situated the American involvement in the war as a wicked problem by
discussing the struggles within US military and government to generate a consensus
understanding of the Vietnam War. Following that, I have provided a summary of the conflict, a
short overview of the US advisory presence in Vietnam up to 1967, and an examination of
CORDS (Civilian Operations and Revolutionary Development Support) and the US advisory
program from 1967 to the end of direct American involvement in early 1973.

121

At the next layer, I have examined how CORDS operated at the Corps level with a focus
on the US advisory program within the IV Corps. The IV Corps covered the Mekong Delta and
was the southern-most of the four military and administrative regions that divided South
Vietnam. This examination is followed by an overview of the war in the Mekong Delta region
from 1967 through the American exit in 1973. As discussed in Chapter Three, I chose to focus
on the IV Corps because of the primacy of insurgency warfare in this region, particularly in
comparison to the large unit combat experienced in the I and II corps. With the exception of the
roughly two-year deployment of the 9th Infantry Division, the US did not have any major ground
combat units in the IV Corps. This left CORDS as the focal point of America’s war effort in the
Delta, rendering the conflict for the US in this region as primarily a counterinsurgency campaign.
At the third layer, I reviewed the organization and operations of province advisory teams
and then have described the advisors’ background, skills, professional motivations and pressures.
This is followed by a description of Dinh Tuong province, located in the IV Corps, during the
war. Later, in Chapter Six, I will describe my examination of the full available run of province
reports created by the Dinh Tuong advisory team. David W.P. Elliott’s The Vietnamese War:
Revolution and Social Change in the Mekong Delta, 1930-1975, a two-volume, 2003 exhaustive
study of the “revolutionary movement” in Dinh Tuong Province and the Mekong Delta affords
the opportunity to analyze reports from a particular province within the context of that province’s
political, military, and social history. 369 Elliott’s study is primarily based on 400 interviews of
insurgent defectors and prisoners, primarily from Dinh Tuong, conducted by the RAND
Corporation from 1965 through 1968 and in 1971. 370 This was part of a larger RAND project
that interviewed approximately 2,400 Vietnamese “who were familiar with activities of the Viet
369
370

The Vietnamese War, 2003, I: xvii.
The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1399.

122

Cong and the North Vietnamese Army.” 371 Elliott, a political science scholar, was a member of
this RAND study and served a tour in the war as a member of the US Army. 372

The War at the National Level
Conceptualizing the Vietnam War
The literature on the Vietnam War produced in the United States—to say nothing of the literature
produced in Vietnam and around the world—is vast. It is a highly contentious topic within the
US history, political science, and military scholarly communities. Broadly speaking, much of the
US literature on the war falls into two schools of historical interpretation. 373 The orthodox view
emerged quickly after the war and generally characterizes the conflict as misguided, unwinnable,
and a profound mistake in American foreign policy. The majority of the scholarship on the war
falls into this school of thought. A smaller counter-narrative began to emerge in the 1980s and
coalesced into what has been described as the revisionist view. 374 Authors using this revisionist
perspective generally see the war as having been necessary for the United States and winnable.
Historian Gary Hess, writing from an orthodox position, provided two extensive reviews of the
Vietnam War literature, describing the contours and topics of the literature produced by both
schools of thought. 375 Military historian Mark Moyer presented an assessment of the literature
from a revisionist perspective. 376 Historian Marc Jason Gilbert, political scientist Larry Berman,

371

W. Phillips Davison, “User’s Guide to the Rand Interviews in Vietnam” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, 1972), iii.
372 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, I: xii–xii.
373 Gary R. Hess, Vietnam: Explaining America’s Lost War (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publisher, 2009),
11–13.
374 Gary R. Hess, “The Unending Debate: Historians and the Vietnam War,” Diplomatic History 18, no. 2
(1994): 241–46; Marc Jason Gilbert, “Introduction,” in Why the North Won the Vietnam War (New York:
Palgrave, 2002), 21–29; Mark Moyar, Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954-1965 (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2006), xi–xiii.
375 Vietnam; “The Unending Debate: Historians and the Vietnam War.”
376 Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954-1965, xi–xxiii.

123

and political scientist Stephen R. Routh also contributed assessments of the literature on the
war. 377
While this dissertation is focused on recordkeeping behavior and, in particular, how
institutions use their recordkeeping practices as a tool to understand wicked problems, the case
study of this dissertation is set in the Vietnam War. I must situate my description of this
historical case study of US advisors’ creation of province reports within the contentious Vietnam
War literature. For this dissertation, I have avoided positioning myself within either the orthodox
or revisionist school. Rather, I make a claim about the nature of the American involvement in the
war. For the United States, I contend that the war was a wicked problem. The core struggle for
US military and civilian officials was to define the nature of the war and to be responsive to that
understanding of the conflict. Underlying the discussion on which strategies to pursue in
Vietnam was the ongoing debate among US leaders about the characteristics of the war, its GVN
allies, and the communist insurgency. As Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber noted, “the process of
formulating the problem and of conceiving a solution (or re-solution) are identical, since every
specification of the problem is a specification of the direction in which a treatment is
considered.” 378 The struggle to formulate a successful strategy in Vietnam was the struggle to
define the true nature of the war.
The US armed forces and government were not monolithic entities but networks of
complex communities with members that held a diverse and evolving set of views about the war.
Defining the war was a nearly fifteen-year political discourse carried out by the military, the
government, and the American public. This multi-faceted community debate is a key
377

Gilbert, “Introduction”; Larry Berman and Stephen R. Routh, “Why the United States Fought in
Vietnam,” in Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 6, Annual Review of Political Science, 2003, 181–
204.
378 “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161.

124

characteristic of wicked problems. Defining wicked problems “is a contingent, fraught, and
sometimes consensual process for which there is no authoritative set of rules, criteria, or
methods.” 379 One of the key debates within the US military and government was how to fight the
insurgency in the Vietnamese countryside. Addressing this challenge went to the heart of trying
to understand the nature of the insurgency, what the insurgency was trying to accomplish, and
why the insurgency was gaining support of the rural population. Douglas Pike, a leading scholar
on Southeast Asia and communist forces in Vietnam, indicated that there was a complex array of
perceptions about the war among American military and civilian leaders. 380 “One is struck,” Pike
noted, “by the self-contained, insular quality of perceptions of the war as held in Washington
among major governmental elements.” 381 These competing perceptions of the war prevented the
US from gaining a “unity of purpose and of consensus on war policy.” 382 Pike claimed that US
policy debate could never move past disputes over the size and strength of the insurgency, the
role and capabilities of North Vietnam, and nature of the war. 383
As will be discussed later in Chapter Five and Chapter Six, the province report was at the
nexus of the struggle to understand the insurgency and the underlying causes of the war in the
countryside. The position of the province report as a central document allows researchers to use
the province reports as historical evidence of US advisors struggling to understand and define the
war and to implement corresponding strategies. One can also read the reports through the lens of
recordkeeping behavior to understand the roles that the province report and its surrounding
recordkeeping infrastructure played in this effort to define the conflict.
379

Richard Coyne, “Wicked Problems Revisited,” Design Studies 26, no. 1 (January 2005): 6.
“Conduct of the Vietnam War: Strategic Factors, 1965-1968,” in The Second Indochina War (The
Second Indochina War Symposium, Airlie, VA: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1984),
99–106.
381 “Conduct of the Vietnam War: Strategic Factors, 1965-1968,” 105.
382 “Conduct of the Vietnam War: Strategic Factors, 1965-1968,” 100.
383 “Conduct of the Vietnam War: Strategic Factors, 1965-1968,” 105.
380

125

A number of historians across the orthodox and revisionist spectrum have claimed that
the world-view held by the US military and government greatly influenced how they understood
and approached the war. This perspective of people’s and institution’s world views is another
key characteristic of wicked problems as defined by Rittel and Webber. They noted, “People
choose those explanations which are most plausible to them… [A person’s] ‘world view’ is the
strongest determining factor in explaining a discrepancy and, therefore, in resolving a wicked
problem.” 384 For example, Andrew Krepinevich contended that the US and GVN lost the war in
large part because the US Army was constrained by its mid-twentieth century conceptualization
of warfare known as the Army Concept. This outlook was greatly influenced by America’s
combat experience in World War II and focused on traditional warfare and logistics for an
envisioned mid-level conflict against Soviet or Soviet-backed forces, short of all-out nuclear
warfare. 385 While in theory the Army Concept incorporated counterinsurgency warfare,
Krepinevich claimed that the Army’s predominant conceptualization of warfare consisted of
fighting large armor and infantry battles with Soviet forces in Europe. The Army’s attention on
counterinsurgency warfare was intermittent at best. 386
James William Gibson claimed that the American conduct of the war was driven by
conceptions of power and knowledge held by a wide of array of military officers, civilian
leaders, and bureaucrats at a “deep structural level of logic.” 387 US leaders, Gibson argued, saw
the war as a “high-technology, capital-intensive production process,” 388 framing the conflict and
insurgent forces within a technological, scientific, and capitalistic world-view. This view of the

384

“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 166.
The Army and Vietnam, xi–xii, 4-6, 27-29.
386 The Army and Vietnam, 29–49.
387 The Perfect War, 11.
388 The Perfect War, 26.
385

126

war led to a techno-centric approach that was dependent upon defeating the insurgency and
North Vietnamese forces through attrition. 389 Krepinevich’s assessment of the US Army’s
performance fits with the revisionist body of work on the Vietnam War, while Gibson’s work fits
squarely within the orthodox school. While Krepinevich, a defense policy analysis and retired
US Army officer, and Gibson, a sociologist, came to difference conclusions about why the US
lost the war and the merits of America’s engagement in the conflict, both authors framed their
theses within the notion that the world-views the US military and civilian leadership brought to
Vietnam caused them to profoundly mischaracterize the war. Without explicitly labeling the war
as such, the two researchers essentially characterized the conflict as a wicked problem defined by
the US government and military in ways that fit their understanding of the world.
In a series of works published during and after the war, Robert Komer, a key figure in
America’s engagement in Vietnam as a top advisor to President Johnson and the first director of
Civilian Operations and Revolutionary Development Support (CORDS), painted a complicated
picture of how well US officials understood the nature of the Vietnam War. 390 On one hand
Komer claimed that there was a “realistic grasp of the real nature of the problem of Vietnam
itself” among US officials and there was plenty of good advice and perceptive insights from
GVN and US civilian and military leaders, counterinsurgency experts, and academics. 391 Komer
hedged on this claim, however, because he also stated in the same report that the US
underestimated the strength of the enemy and the appeal of the insurgency and overestimated the
strength of the GVN and its military. While many uniformed and civilian US officials “perceived
the essential political and revolutionary nature of the Vietnam conflict,” Komer went on to note,
389

The Perfect War, 11–23.
For a full study of Komer, see Frank Leith Jones, Blowtorch: Robert Komer, Vietnam, and American
Cold War Strategy (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2013).
391 “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969” (Santa
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1970), 229.
390

127

“we grossly miscalculated its full implications and what coping with it required.” 392 Komer also
claimed that the American “pacification advisory effort suffered, like most other US efforts in
Vietnam, from inadequate appreciation of the realities of Vietnamese social structure, behavior
patterns, and motivations.” 393 This contradictory assessment by one of the key actors in the US
counterinsurgency effort in Vietnam provides evidence of the complexity of understanding the
war. Officials from the US military and government both understood and misunderstood the war.
Comprehension of the war varied across agencies and individuals. These conceptualizations of
the war changed over time. Additionally, the insurgency—the wicked problem the US was trying
to define—was itself a multi-faceted actor who changed over time in response to the perceptions
of the war and the actions of the enemy.
Komer pushed beyond this discussion of how well the US government understood the
war to point out that the US military and civilian agencies tried to conduct the war within the
boundaries of their regular bureaucratic practices. Whatever their grasp of the war, US military
and civilian officials faced significant institutional impediments to effectively implementing
strategies to meet policy objectives. 394 These impediments, according to Komer, came in the
form of institutional constraints in US military and civilian organizations. Komer noted that
institutional constraints were not unique to the US military in Vietnam and were common to
“large hierarchically organized institutions.” 395 When “organizations confront atypical situations
with which they are not designed or equipped to cope,” they are often hampered by their
“institutional behavior patterns.” 396 Komer claimed that, in Vietnam, US institutions “tended to

392

“Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 230.
“Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 252.
394 Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, v, 2-7.
395 Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 15.
396 Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 15–16.
393

128

make policy conform in practice to that with which it was most familiar—to play out its standard
organizational repertoire.” 397 These institutional constraints made the American response to the
war conventional, ill-suited, expensive, and unwieldy. 398 Institutions created programs that
generated their own internal, self-perpetuating logic, and programs became difficult to alter or
shut down once they became operational. Komer noted, “once large organizations become
committed to a course of action, the ponderous wheels set in motion, vast sums allotted, and
personnel selected and trained, it is difficult to alter course. Instead, programs tend to acquire a
built-in momentum of their own.” 399 While several of Komer’s studies pre-date Rittel and
Webber’s landmark work on wicked problems, Komer’s observations struck a similar note to
their claims that a person’s “‘world view’ is the strongest determining factor” in how he or she
characterizes and tries to address a wicked problem.” 400
Other scholars of the American involvement in Vietnam have made similar observations.
In a 1978 work that had extensive influence over the revisionist scholarship of the war, Guenter
Lewy echoed Komer’s claims that the US military hewed to the standard institutional response in
Vietnam. Lewy contended that, “the military, like all bureaucracies, encountering a new situation
for which they are not prepared and in which they do not know what to do, did what they knew
to do.” 401 Historian Marc Jason Gilbert pointed out that some officials properly understood and

397

Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 15–16.
Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,”
230–34.
399 Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 66.
400 Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 166.
401 America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 438. In his study Lewy emphasized
that the US Army conducted the war in Vietnam using operational strategies that emphasized combat and
the destruction of enemies. America in Vietnam, 86–89.
398

129

described the nature of the war but could not turn the institutional machinery of the US
government and military to bear on the conflict as they understood it. 402
Building on the theme of bureaucratic logic that Komer discussed, former US Army
officer and historian Richard Hunt contended that US leaders and advisors were susceptible to
seeing various counterinsurgency programs and initiatives as ends in and of themselves. Seeing
the war as being about the success of bureaucratic entities obscured fundamental socio-economic
and political questions about Vietnamese society. Americans in Saigon and Washington saw the
war as a management problem because US institutions were geared towards solving these types
of problems. This program- and management-centric view of the war bent the focus of
measurements and reports to tangible accomplishments that could be measured against
programmatic goals, which often facilitated misleading conclusions about the state of the war. It
also obscured fundamental socio-economic factors at the heart of the conflict. 403 Military
historian and former US Army officer Gregory Daddis echoed Hunt’s contention, noting that the
US Army often took measurements of organizational effectiveness as a metric that gave insight
into the state of the war. These misapplied metrics gave MACV a false sense of
accomplishment. 404
Komer felt that responsive creativity was crucial for success in Vietnam. He noted that
“atypical problems require unconventional solutions….Involved are not only a realistic
appreciation of the nature and dimensions of the problem, but balanced programs designed
specifically to meet them, and flexible machinery to carry them out effectively.” 405 Komer’s

402

“The Cost of Losing the ‘Other War’ in Vietnam,” in Why the North Won the Vietnam War (New
York: Palgrave, 2002), 186.
403 Hunt, Pacification, 81, 279.
404 No Sure Victory, 223–24.
405 “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 256.

130

statement encompasses two dimensions of dealing with a wicked problem: understanding a
problem and responding to a problem. Wicked problems that can be tamed by an existing
practice of a single institution are not wicked. Solutions to wicked problems require institutions
to not just properly recognize problems for what they are, but to also build partnerships and
create new practices in order to meet the challenges of those problems.
As will be discussed in Chapter Five, the province report reinforced the tendency to
conceptualize the war in the bureaucratic terms that government agencies were already adept at
understanding and measuring. By describing the war in terms of government programs in various
reports, including the province report, the US military and government agencies attempted to
normalize the war into understandable concepts whose notions of success were understandable
and measurable. This program-focused view of the war also served to preserve the status of elites
atop the GVN power structure because this view presented the war as a matter of effective
governance, rather than an economic and social revolution, which would threaten the power of
the South Vietnamese elite. The program-centric documentation of the war, therefore, reinforced,
rather than redressed, the fundamental social challenges of South Vietnam.
Several scholars of the war claimed that the US and GVN misdiagnosed the war and did
not recognize that the conflict was primarily a revolution to overturn the social and economic
order of South Vietnam. For example, Jeffery Race, a former US advisor in Long An Province,
contended that the insurgent forces ultimately prevailed because its leaders had a
“comprehensive view of revolution as a stage-by-stage social process” 406 whereas the GVN and
the US saw the insurgency as a merely a threat to overthrow the government regime rather than

406

War Comes to Long An: Revolutionary Conflict in a Vietnamese Province, Updated and Expanded
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2010), 141.

131

an attempt to overthrow “the existing social system itself.” 407 There was little upward mobility
for rural and poor South Vietnamese because secondary education, which was only available to
the urban elite, was essential for entry into the civil service or military officer corps. Many young
people in South Vietnam saw joining the insurgency as their only opportunity for economic
advancement. 408 US-supported aid programs that focused on infrastructure projects—the
construction of roads, schools, wells, and health care facilities—were perceived by large
segments of the population as maintaining the socio-economic order. 409 These aid programs
pumped large sums of money into South Vietnam, which exacerbated corruption and appeared to
many South Vietnamese to only benefit the ruling class. Most civilians felt that GVN officials
only had contempt for most of the population. 410 The GVN, with extensive support and
encouragement from the US, worked to address some of these grievances. Although the efforts
did affect chance, particularly concerning land ownership issues, they came too late to alter the
outcome of the war and did not fundamentally alter the social order of Vietnamese society. 411
This misunderstanding of the conflict and the reluctance to directly confront the underlying
issues of the war, Race claimed, put the GVN and US on the wrong side of the revolution and
doomed them to defeat. 412

407

Race, War Comes to Long An, 151.
Lewy, America in Vietnam, 95.
409 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 93.
410 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 90–94.
411 One of the underlying grievances of the rural population was the concentration of land ownership in
the hands of relatively few landlords who held significant political sway in the GVN. It was not until
1970 that the GVN enacted substantive land reform. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 186–89; Chester L.
Cooper et al., “The American Experience with Pacification in Vietnam Volume II Elements of
Pacification” (Institute for Defense Analyses International and Social Studies Division, March 1972),
251–63; Thayer, War without Fronts, 237–44.
412 Race, War Comes to Long An, 151–52.
408

132

John Paul Vann, a well-known, outspoken, and controversial American advisor, came to
similar conclusions about the war. 413 Vann served as an advisor in Vietnam for a total of eight
years from 1962 to 1972, first as a US Army officer and then as civilian. This included a turn as
the IV Corps’ Deputy for CORDS from 1969 to 1971. 414 As will be discussed in Chapter Five,
Vann wrote many memos to province advisors about the quality of their province reports and the
importance of their reporting to the US counterinsurgency campaign. During his time as a US
Army advisor in 1962 and 1963, he saw the corruption and political structures that led to the
GVN’s poor performance against the insurgency. When he returned to Vietnam in 1965 as a
civilian advisor, he came to the conclusion that the GVN and its military would need to be
fundamentally transformed in order to win the war. Even more fundamentally, Vann felt that
South Vietnam was undergoing a social revolution that called for radical socio-economic
changes. Vann believed that the communist insurgency was winning the war because it had
captured this social revolution and made this cause their own. 415
Still believing that the GVN and the US could win the war, Vann wrote, with the help of
a few like-minded advisors, “Harnessing the Revolution in South Vietnam” in 1965. Vann stated
413

Vann courted the press extensively, forging relationships with many prominent journalists, including
David Halberstam. The famous reporter featured Vann in a November 1964 Esquire article and in his
1965 book, The Making of a Quagmire. Neil Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and
America in Vietnam (New York: Random House, 1988), 317.
414 Vann was a US Army officer when he first came to Vietnam as an advisor to the ARVN 7th Division
in 1962. Vann retired from the Army shortly after he completed this post in 1963 but came back to
Vietnam in 1965 as a civilian official in USAID (United States Agency for International Development),
known as US Operations Mission at that time. When the White House created the Office of Civil
Operations, which consolidated all theater operations of US civilian agencies (with the exception of the
CIA), Vann became the OCO director for the III Corps in November 1966. With the establishment of
CORDS and elimination of the OCO, this position became the III Corps Deputy for CORDS in June
1967. He then served as the Deputy for CORDS in the IV Corps from February 1969 to May 1971.
Finally, Vann became the director of the Second Regional Assistance Group, essentially becoming the top
commander for all US military and civilian forces in the II Corps. Vann was killed in Vietnam in a
helicopter accident on June 9, 1972. Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 198, 331, 496–97, 502, 615, 732,
752, 785–86.
415 Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 512–14, 519–22.

133

that the US must capture the social revolution from the insurgency in order to gain the support of
the rural population. His goal was not to defeat the insurgency in order to maintain the existing
social order and keep the government in power with only minor reforms. His goal was to foster
the social revolution while steering it away from the communist insurgency and toward a
transformed South Vietnamese government responsive to its people—especially its rural
population—and sympathetic towards the West. 416 In 1966, the US Army commissioned a study,
PROVN: The Program for the Pacification and Long-term Development of South Vietnam. This
study echoed many of the same points that Vann made about the centrality of winning the sociocultural, economic, and political aspects of the war in the countryside. 417
The observations of Vann, Race, and the PROVN study demonstrate the complexity and
diversity of thought within the US military and government during the Vietnam War. These
institutions were complex communities where individuals struggled with themselves and each
other in their attempts to grasp the nature of the war and in turn, formulate strategies that could
achieve victory. This ongoing and dynamic debate was part of what made the Vietnam War a
wicked problem. The province report was part of that effort—part of that struggle—within the
community of military and government officials to understand the war. The province report
emerged from the establishment of CORDS, which arose from interagency power struggles in
Washington and Saigon. The province report reflected the visions of authorities such as Vann
and Komer, and was designed to allow CORDS a detailed understanding of the political, social,
and economic activities occurring in all of South Vietnam’s 44 provinces.

416

Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 535–38; Gilbert, “The Cost of Losing the ‘Other War’ in Vietnam,”
172–75.
417 Gilbert, “The Cost of Losing the ‘Other War’ in Vietnam,” 170–72; Lewy, America in Vietnam, 89;
Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 29.

134

Military historian Gregory Daddis later drew a connection between the US military and
civilian leadership’s confused and contentious understanding of the war and their efforts to
document and measure the conflict. Daddis claimed that the Johnson administration, the Joint
Chiefs, and the National Security Administration could not agree on the nature of the war or on
an overarching approach for fighting the insurgency and North Vietnamese forces. 418 Gathering
a large mass of data on many different aspects of the war, Daddis contended, became a substitute
for a fuller comprehension of the war. 419 Without knowing what was important to measure, the
US measured everything. Thomas C. Thayer, a prominent Pentagon analyst during the war in the
Office of Systems Analysis and primary editor of the Southeast Asia Analysis Report, noted that
the “Vietnam War was an unusually statisticized war, precisely because everyone was groping
for understanding.” 420 Without sufficient analysis, this data gathering remained divorced from
strategic decision-making. 421 Daddis’ historical work provided insights into how MACV created
and used a series of reporting and data gathering efforts to construct an understanding of the war.
The development of these recordkeeping and documentation strategies was a key part of the
struggle to comprehend the war and formulate an appropriate strategy. The province report was a
central part of that effort.
In addition to the struggle to construct an understanding of the war, Thayer also pointed
out the war’s mosaic nature, making clear that neither South Vietnam nor its war were a
homogenous black box. The conflict was primarily fought not in large battles, but in thousands
418

Daddis, No Sure Victory, 47.
Daddis, No Sure Victory, 40–41.
420 Thomas C. Thayer, “How to Analyze a War Without Fronts: Vietnam 1965-72,” Journal of Defense
Research, Series B: Tactical Warfare 7B, no. 3 (Fall 1975): 771, as cited in Daddis, No Sure Victory, 47.
The Southeast Asia Analysis Report was a 50-issue journal published by the Department of Defense
Systems Analysis Office from January 1967 through January 1972. The Southeast Asia Analysis Report
was a highly regarded but controversial publication disseminated research conducted by the Systems
Analysis Office. Thayer, War without Fronts, 259–261.
421 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 64.
419

135

of villages and hamlets while the GVN and the insurgency struggled for the control and support
of the population. Thayer noted,
Vietnam was a highly fragmented struggle to influence the population with few large
battles, and no decisive ones until the end. Instead, thousands of small actions took place
every day on the battlefields of 44 different provinces, 260 districts, and 11,000 hamlets;
each involved and playing its own part. The war had no fronts. This is why the war in
Vietnam was so difficult to grasp. 422
Each village and hamlet had its own rich set of complexities that were difficult for outsiders to
fully comprehend. Thus, they could not be grouped into simple opposing blocks. Understanding
and documenting the tangled military, political, and social strands of an individual hamlet
required careful, thick description. To conduct the war as a whole, each hamlet required a thick
description and these 11,000 descriptions needed to be linked to each other in ways that could
enable leaders to make sense of the patterns of the war across the entire country. Thus, the
Vietnam War presented itself as a wicked problem in two recordkeeping dimensions: as a
challenge to normalize accounts of the war into something understandable while yet retaining the
fidelity of the conflict’s unique circumstances, events, and actors; and as a challenge to richly
describe the war’s events and locations at scale.

Vietnam War Overview
The primary origins of the Vietnam War may be traced back to the end of the Second World
War. After Vietnam emerged from Japanese occupation, France reestablished colonial rule over
the country, clashing with the Viet Minh, who had fought against Japanese forces in Vietnam
during World War II. This conflict between the French and the Viet Minh, known as the First
Indochina War, lasted until 1954 when France relinquished its colonial rule over Vietnam with
its defeat at the Battle of Diem Bien Phu. In the resulting Geneva Conference, Vietnam was

422

War without Fronts, 4.

136

partitioned at the 17th parallel into North and South Vietnam with a plan for unified elections.
The partition left the communist-backed Viet Minh in control of the North and an American
backed regime in control of the South, led by Ngo Dinh Diem. The reunifying election never
occurred. 423
Since its establishment in 1955, the Government of (South) Vietnam (GVN) fought
against an ongoing insurgency that had its own dynamic history and relationship with North
Vietnam. 424 The GVN came close to crushing the insurgency in the late 1950s. From that nadir,
the insurgency made remarkable gains in rural areas throughout much of South Vietnam.
Pressure from the insurgency, endemic corruption in the GVN and the Republic of Vietnam
Armed Forces (RVNAF), the assignation of Diem in 1963, and a subsequent series of coups
brought the GVN to the brink of collapse in 1964 and 1965. This set of events prompted the
United States to send combat forces to Vietnam for the first time. Putting troops on the ground
changed the posture of the US military from primarily an advisory position to taking the lead
military role in combating insurgent and North Vietnamese forces. The US military presence in
Vietnam peaked in 1969 at roughly 540,000 personnel. After the Tet Offensive in early 1968, the
US began to gradually disengage from direct involvement in the war, culminating in the Paris
Treaty, which ended American’s military presence in Vietnam by March 1973.
Although it profoundly damaged the American public’s support for its country’s presence
in the war, the Tet Offensive was also a costly endeavor for the insurgency, decimating many of
423

Interpretations of all aspects of the Vietnam War, especially its origins, vary widely. A sample of
interpretations on the start of the war from the orthodox and revisionist perspectives include Moyar,
Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954-1965; Lewy, America in Vietnam; Stanley Karnow, Vietnam:
A History (New York: The Viking Press, 1983); Gibson, The Perfect War.
424 Significant American works about the insurgency in South Vietnam and its relationship to North
Vietnam include Douglas Pike, Viet Cong: The Organization and Techniques of the National Liberation
Front of South Vietnam. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966); Race, War Comes to Long An; Elliott, The
Vietnamese War, 2003; Robert K. Brigham, “Why the South Won the American War in Vietnam,” in Why
the North Won the Vietnam War (New York: Palgrave, 2002).

137

its ranks. 425 This enabled the US and South Vietnam to make tangible progress against
communist insurgent forces from 1968 to 1972. 426 At the same time, 1968 marked the beginning
of American withdrawal and disengagement from Vietnam, a policy that became known as
“Vietnamization,” pursued by the Nixon administration starting in 1969. The North Vietnamese
military took a more direct and leading role in the war in the early 1970s as the US withdrew
most of its ground presence from South Vietnam. North Vietnam launched a major offensive in
1972 against the GVN, the Easter Offensive, which the GVN managed to repulse with significant
air support from the United States. The US, North Vietnam, GVN, and insurgent South
Vietnamese forces signed the Paris Peace Accords in January 1973, which ended the direct
military involvement of the United States in Vietnam. Just over two years later, the North
launched another major invasion that the GVN could not withstand, and it fell on April 30,
1975. 427

The US Advisory Effort in Vietnam, 1955–1967
The United States had maintained an advisory presence in Vietnam since 1955, beginning with
the deployment of the Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG). This organization was
subsumed by MACV in 1962 and then disbanded in 1964. 428 The number of US advisors in
Vietnam was small throughout the 1950s, but increased notably in the early 1960s with the
strong support of President Kennedy. The US had 685 advisors in Vietnam in May 1960, which

425

Hunt, Pacification, 133–34, 141; Richard A Hunt, “The Challenge of Counterinsurgency,” in The
Second Indochina War (The Second Indochina War Symposium, Airlie, VA: Center of Military History,
United States Army, 1984), 136–137.
426 Hunt, Pacification, 140, 257.
427 For overarching histories of the war, see Karnow, Vietnam; John Prados, Vietnam: The History of an
Unwinnable War, 1945-1975 (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2009).
428 Shelby Stanton, Vietnam Order of Battle (Washington DC: U.S. News Books, 1981), 59–60; Jeffrey J.
Clarke, Advice and Support: The Final Years, 1965-1973, United States Army in Vietnam (Washington
DC: Center of Military History United States Army, 1988), 14.

138

increased to approximately 900 by November 1961. 429 There were 3,500 American advisors in
Vietnam by June 1965 and over 5,000 by June 1966. 430 While numerous advisors were assigned
to South Vietnamese military units, many others worked with GVN officials to support local
governments and programs. As early as 1960, the US Army assigned officers as advisors to
strategically significant districts. 431
Despite their growing presence in Vietnam, the American advisory effort through 1965,
when the US first deployed combat troops, was a poorly coordinated web of initiatives dispersed
across the military and a disparate range of American civilian agencies, with significant
programs being run by the CIA, the State Department, the US Information Service, and the US
Agency for International Development (USAID). In the absence of one entity coordinating these
efforts, competition among the agencies and military for control of the counterinsurgency
strategy grew. 432 With the arrival of combat troops in Vietnam, the ongoing counterinsurgency
efforts, and particularly the programs supported by civilian agencies, lost priority to a new
emphasis on conventional military operations. The American efforts to defeat the insurgency,
support the GVN, and encourage government reforms were probably at the lowest point in 1964
and 1965. 433
By late 1965, officials in MACV, the White House, and civilian agencies started to
express concerns that the counterinsurgency war, often called the “Other War,” was being

429

Lewy, America in Vietnam, 22.
Hunt, Pacification, 59.
431 Each province was composed of approximately four to eight districts. Hunt, Pacification, 60.
432 Hunt, Pacification, 64–69; Andrade and Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix: Counterinsurgency Lessons
from Vietnam for the Future,” 12; Lewy, America in Vietnam, 89–90; Scoville, Reorganizing for
Pacification Support, 6–11.
433 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 3–5; Hunt, Pacification, 29–36.
430

139

neglected in favor of conventional operations against enemy military units. 434 By 1966, these
concerns were coalescing in a desire, especially from the White House and MACV, for the
civilian agencies to produce a better coordinated and more effective counterinsurgency program
in Vietnam. 435 Many of the key discussions on the American counterinsurgency strategy in
Vietnam took place in a series of conferences sponsored by the White House in 1966 and
1967. 436
These discussions culminated in the White House creating the Office of Civil Operations
(OCO) in November 1966 to bring together the US civilian agencies involved in the war under a
single organization. 437 The OCO was not part of the MACV command. 438 The lack of integration
with the military disabled the unity of effort desired by President Johnson and other officials. In
March 1967, Johnson declared that the OCO was not working and reorganized it out of existence
to establish CORDS. 439

434

Peter Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity
of Implementing Organizational Change” (Dissertation, Princeton University, 1979), 30–32. At this time
the US military was taking over the fight against communist forces in the countryside while ARVN
(Army of the Republic of Vietnam) and South Vietnamese armed forces focused on local security.
Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 17.
435 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 17–30; Hunt, Pacification, 64–88.
436 The February 1966 White House conference held in Honolulu was a key turning point in the Johnson
administration’s insistence of a coordinated counterinsurgency campaign. Hunt, “The Challenge of
Counterinsurgency,” 129.
437 Graham A. Cosmas, MACV: The Joint Command in the Years of Withdrawal, 1968-1973, United
States Army in Vietnam (Washington DC: Center of Military History, United States Army, 2007), 357–
58; Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 39–47; Hunt, Pacification, 79.
438 Most senior officials in the White House and MACV wanted to unify the counterinsurgency effort
under MACV command by 1966. The civilian agencies, led by the State Department, wanted to keep the
civilian counterinsurgency programs separate from MACV. The OCO was a last chance for civilian
agencies to quickly coordinate and improve the effectiveness of their programs. Cosmas, MACV: The
Joint Command in the Years of Withdrawal, 1968-1973, 357–60.
439 Andrade and Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Vietnam for the
Future,” 12–14; Cosmas, MACV: The Joint Command in the Years of Withdrawal, 1968-1973, 360–364;
Hunt, Pacification, 88. In 1970, CORDS was renamed Civil Operations and Rural Development Support.
Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS, DMAC Information Bulletin No. 40-70,” January 26, 1970, General
Records, Box 51, Folder 227-01 CORDS Information Bulletins 4-150 1970; CORDS/MR4/Management

140

The US Advisory Effort in Vietnam and CORDS, 1967–1973
Unlike the OCO, the White House established CORDS as an integrated component of MACV,
which provided for a single entity to command the counterinsurgency campaign across the entire
spectrum of US civil and military organizations in Vietnam. 440 President Johnson appointed
Robert Komer to be the first head of CORDS with the civilian equivalent rank of a three-star
general and the position of Deputy for CORDS (DEPCORDS), the third ranking official in
MACV. Most critically, this position enabled Komer to report directly to GEN William
Westmoreland, Commander of MACV. 441 The bulk of CORDS headquarters staff in Saigon,
called MACCORDS, operated under the MACV chief of staff as a regular MACV staff section
and was led by the Assistant Chief of Staff for CORDS. 442
CORDS supervised all American advisors, except for US military tactical advisors
assigned to ARVN and other South Vietnamese combat units. 443 The scope of CORDS included
command of province and district advisory teams. By late 1968, CORDS had approximately
5,500 advisors. The organization reached its peak strength with 7,600 advisors by late 1969. The
CORDS advisor level declined to 7,200 advisors in 1970 and just under 3,400 advisors in
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
440 For a rich account of the creation and initial organization of CORDS, see Scoville, Reorganizing for
Pacification Support, 43–59. The document that provided the warrant for the establishment of CORDS is
Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Organizations and Functions:
Organizations and Functions for Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support MACV
Directive 10-12,” May 28, 1967, MACV AG Issuances, Box 8 MACV Directive No 10-8 thru MACV
Directive No 10-21, Folder Directive 10-12 20 Oct 1966; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of
the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command
Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
441 Andrade and Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Vietnam for the
Future,” 14; Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 656. Westmoreland was very support of the creation of
CORDS. Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 71.
442 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 66.
443 Clarke, Advice and Support: The Final Years, 1965-1973, 212.

141

January 1972. 444 Approximately three-quarters of CORDS advisors were military personnel—the
majority from the Army—while the remaining personnel were civilians from the Department of
Defense, State Department, USAID, and other government agencies. 445
CORDS managed the advising and American support of South Vietnamese militia forces,
the Regional Forces and Popular Forces; the effort to target and combat insurgents running
political and paramilitary operations in a controversial program known as Phung Hoang, or
PHOENIX; an effort to flip insurgents’ loyalties to the GVN, in a program known as Chieu Hoi;
and a variety of refugee, education, agriculture, and infrastructure programs. 446 CORDS
organized the support of these GVN programs into divisions within the MACCORDS office.
MACCORDS also contained four functional divisions: Management Support, Research and
Analysis, Plans and Programs, and Reports and Evaluation. 447

444

Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 187;
Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 123; Hunt, Pacification, 272.
445 Hunt, Pacification, 269.
446 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 78; Hunt, “The Challenge of Counterinsurgency,”
133.
447 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 59.

142

Illustration 4.1
Position of CORDS within MACV and US Mission, May 1967 448

This illustration describes CORDS’s placement within MACV and the relationship of MACV to
the US Embassy to South Vietnam at the time of CORDS’s creation in 1967. The commander of
MACV (COMUSMACV) was directly supported by his deputies for MACV, Air Operations,
and CORDS. Also supporting the COMUSMACV was the Chief of Staff who commanded
several assistant chiefs of staff (ACoS). These ACoSs were responsible for the functional areas
of MACV, J1 through J6. These ACoSs included the Assistant Chief of Staff for CORDS
(ACoS, CORDS), who was in charge of MACCORDS, under which most of CORDS
headquartered staff operated.

448

Reproduced from Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 58.

143

Illustration 4.2
CORDS Staff Organization 449

Illustration 4.2 shows the organization of MACCORDS at its creation in 1967 under the
direction of the ACoS, CORDS. MACCORDS included operational divisions, such as Chieu
Hoi, and functional divisions, such as Plans & Programs.

449

Reproduced from Military History Branch, Office of the Secretary, Joint Staff, Headquarters,
USMACV, “United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, Command History, Volume II, 1967”
(Saigon, Vietnam, 1968), 588.

144

Illustration 4.3
MACCORDS Staff Organization 450

Illustration 4.3 shows the organization of MACCORDS in October 1968. It shows additional
detail not shown in Illustration 4.2, highlighting offices within some divisions.

450

Reproduced from W. E. Colby, Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Office of Civil Operations and
Revolutionary Development Support, “Organizational Changes in MACCORDS Headquarters
MACCORDS Notice 68-362,” October 16, 1968, Box 19, Folder 1601-01 MACCORDS Notices 1968
(part 2 of 2); CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/General
Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions;
Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives
at College Park, College Park, MD.

145

The War at the Corps Level
CORDS at the Corps Level
Beneath DEPCORDS and MACCORDS were four CORDS corps commands, one for each of the
four corps that divided South Vietnam. These corps-level commands were also integrated with
MACV and were essentially mirror images of CORDS at the MACV headquarters level. 451
These regional CORDS offices had, for the most part, the same programmatic and functional
divisions as MACCORDS. Each of the four corps-level CORDS commands were led by the
deputy for CORDS (DEPCORDS) who reported to the US military senior advisor that
commanded US armed forces deployed in that corps. The corps Assistant Chief of Staff for
CORDS reported to the corps Chief of Staff.
The structure of CORDS and its relationship to MACV at the corps level, which was
known as a field force, resulted in the US having three components in each corps: military units
that directly engaged the enemy in combat, advisory elements supporting the South Vietnamese
military, and the advisory elements under CORDS supporting the GVN’s counterinsurgency and
government development efforts. 452 The DEPCORDS was a peer of the corps deputy senior
advisor, who was in charge of all advising to South Vietnamese military units. This arrangement
separated government and counterinsurgency advising from advising RVNAF forces, giving
CORDS considerable leeway in managing counterinsurgency operations.
This separation of advisory commands went all the way down to the province level, with
province advisory teams squarely under the command of their respective corps-level

451

Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 67–68; Hunt, Pacification, 94.
Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 67–68; Andrade and Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix:
Counterinsurgency Lessons from Vietnam for the Future,” 15.
452

146

DEPCORDS and ACoS for CORDS. 453 Province advisory teams were responsible for advising
and supporting the South Vietnamese province chief, who was usually an Army or Marine
colonel in command of the provincial Rural Forces/Popular Forces (RF/PF) and other militia
elements, as well as leading the provincial government. 454 MACV Directive 10-12, which
authorized CORDS, also authorized the appointment of a senior province advisor to each
province. 455 By the end of 1967, a province advisory team had been established in all of the 44
provinces across South Vietnam. 456 MACV Directive 10-12 and CORDS gave province senior
advisors the autonomy to act as the single authority to coordinate and manage the American
support of counterinsurgency and government development activities in each province. The
relationship between the US military forces, advisors to ARVN, CORDS, province advisory
teams, and province advisory teams is captured in Illustration 4.4.

453

Hunt, Pacification, 90; George S. Eckhardt, Command and Control, 1950-1969, Vietnam Studies
(Washington DC: Department of the Army, 1991), 71–73; Hunt, “The Challenge of Counterinsurgency,”
133.
454 Andrade and Willbanks, “CORDS/Phoenix: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Vietnam for the
Future,” 15.
455 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Organizations and Functions:
Organizations and Functions for Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support MACV
Directive 10-12,” 4.
456 Komer, Bureaucracy at War, 119.

147

Illustration 4.4
Organization for CORDS at Corps Level 457

CORDS at the corps level largely mirrored MACCORDS with a similar arrangement of
programmatic and functional divisions. This illustration, from MACV Directive 10-12
authorizing CORDS, also shows the corps-level CORDS relationship with province advisory
teams, district advisory teams, and ARVN and US military units in the corps.

457

Reproduced from Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam,
“Organizations and Functions: Organizations and Functions for Civil Operations and Revolutionary
Development Support MACV Directive 10-12.”

148

CORDS in the IV CORPS
The IV Corps was the southernmost of the four regions in South Vietnam and comprised all but
the northern reaches of the low-lying Mekong Delta. The region was the predominant
agricultural center of South Vietnam, producing 80% of the country’s rice, vegetables, poultry,
pork, and beef in the 1960s and early 1970s. 458 The IV Corps was a highly populated,
agricultural area with approximately 6,000,000 people in 1970, which composed just over onethird of the country’s population. 459 After administrative reorganizations in the early 1960s, the
IV Corps was divided into 16 provinces, which remained in place for the duration of the war.
The climate in the region is tropical, with the dry season running from January to March and the
rainy season reaching its peak in August and September. This is important to note because
military operations were influenced by the delta’s climate and weather, as large unit operations
were frequently constrained by flooding during the rainy season. 460
The United States did not have an extensive military presence in the Delta region during
the Vietnam War. The 9th Infantry Division was the only major US ground unit stationed in the
IV Corps, deploying there in January 1967—almost two years after combat troops arrived in
Vietnam in 1965—and leaving in July 1969. 461 The initial focus of American combat operations

458

Office of Civil Operations and Rural Development Support, “DMAC Fact Book,” July 1970, 7,
General Records, 1967-1973, Box 1041, Folder 1601-09A CORDS DMAC Fact Book -- 1970; Advisory
Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
459 Office of Civil Operations and Rural Development Support, “DMAC Fact Book,” 1, 4.
460 Thayer, ed., “The Situation in Southeast Asia,” 88; Thayer, War without Fronts, 12–13.
461 Hunt, Pacification, 188, 191; Nick Turse, Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in
Vietnam (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2013), 205; Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 854. The
9th Infantry Division and its commanding officer, Major General Julian Ewell, had a notorious reputation
for focusing on search and destroy missions and being quick to use overwhelming and sometimes
indiscriminant force. Ewell and his 9th Division officers placed a heavy emphasis on body counts, kill
ratios, and other statistics that emphasized the measurement of combat actions. CORDS advisors felt that
the leaders of the 9th Infantry Division did not understand counterinsurgency strategy and their actions

149

in 1965 and 1966 was in the central highlands, the region just to the south of North Vietnam, and
areas to the north and west of Saigon. This meant that, unlike the other three corps, MACV only
had two command channels in the IV Corps—one for military advisors for RVNAF units and the
other for CORDS advisors. 462 Conversely, by 1967 the IV Corps had the largest presence of US
civilian agency personnel of the four regions in South Vietnam. 463 Shortly after the 1968 Tet
Offensive, American officials in the White House and MACV decided to refocus the war
effort—and in particular the counterinsurgency campaign—on the Mekong Delta. The region
became a priority for CORDS, who lavished weapons on local GVN forces in the region and
assigned John Paul Vann, widely acknowledged as one of the most capable American advisors
and counterinsurgency expert, to be the DEPCORDS for the IV Corps. 464
Shortly after the establishment of CORDS, the headquarters of the IV Corps Advisory
Group issued a July 20, 1967 memo outlining the establishment of CORDS in the IV Corps. The
IV Corps Advisory group was the US field command in the IV Corps and led by the senior
advisor for the IV Corps, to whom the IV Corps Deputy for CORDS reported. The memo parsed
out responsibilities and reporting channels among CORDS and MACV advisory staff. 465 This
arrangement in the IV Corps Office of CORDS remained largely the same throughout the
deployment of American forces in Vietnam. Table One reproduces a table of CORDS personnel
strength in the IV Corps. Illustration 4.5 reproduces an organization chart outlining the
were often counterproductive. Hunt, Pacification, 189; Turse, Kill Anything That Moves, 204–21; Daddis,
No Sure Victory, 164–66.
462 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 73.
463 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 70, 73.
464 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1135–1136.
465 Earl W. Fletcher, Chief of Staff, IV Corps Advisory Group, “Reorganization for Civil Operations and
Revolutionary Development Support (CORDS) within the IV Corps Tactical Zone,” July 20, 1967,
Container 1, Folder Kien Phong Province Civil Affairs Reports 1967 (part 1 of 2); CORDS MR4, MR
4/Deputy for CORDS General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

150

placement of CORDS within the IV Corps US military command, referred to as Delta Military
Assistance Command. 466

466

Additional documents describing the responsibilities of Delta Military Command and CORDS within
the IV Corps include Delta Military Assistance Command, “Delta Military Assistance Command:
Organization and Functions Manual,” March 1, 1971, Box 64, Folder 227-01 DRAC Organization and
Functions Manual March 1971; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch/General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS)
military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472;
National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional
Assistance Command, “CORDS MR-4,” October 25, 1972, Box 45, Folder 1601-07 CORDS
Organization--1971; CORDS MR 4, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, General Records 1966-1973;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD; Paul E. Hinkin, Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, “Memo,” October 16, 1969, Container 15,
Folder Chron - Oct 1969; CORDS MR4, MR4/Dep for CORDS General Records; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD; Delta Regional Assistance Command Vietnam, “Delta Regional Assistance Command
Vietnam: Organization and Functions Manual,” July 1972, Box 87, Folder DRAC Organization and
Functions Manual July 1972; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch/General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS)
military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472;
National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Office of Civil Operations and Rural Development
Support, “DMAC Fact Book”; Office of Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support,
“Delta Fact Book,” January 1969, Box 1026, Folder 160-09A Reading File -- 1969; Advisory Team 66
(Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973: General
Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; USAID Region IV, “The Delta Fact Sheet,” March 1966,
Box 866, Folder 1601-10A Incoming Correspondence, 1967; Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province
Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973: General Records, 1967-1973;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support, “CORDS Status
Report,” November 30, 1971, General Records, 1967-1973, Box 1551, Folder 1601-10A Pacification &
Development 1971; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team) Administrative and
Operational Record, 1968-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS)
military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472;
National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

151

Table 4.1
Personnel Strength IV Corps Office of CORDS, 1968–1970 467
1968
1969 1970
US civilians
276
255
217
US military
1779
2138 1869
2393 2086
Americans total 2055
Third country
161
133
39
Vietnamese
1714
2105 2293
3930
4631 4418
Total
In 1971, the withdrawal of Americans from CORDS in the IV Corps continued, as their numbers
dropped to approximately 1,300 civilian and military personnel. 468
Illustration 4.5
Organizational Chart, Delta Military Assistance Command 469

467

Office of Civil Operations and Rural Development Support, “DMAC Fact Book.”
This includes province and district team members. Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development
Support, “CORDS Status Report,” 1.
469 Reproduced from Delta Military Assistance Command, “Delta Military Assistance Command:
Organization and Functions Manual.”
468

152

The 1968 Tet Offensive was a turning point for the IV Corps and shaped the nature and
conduct of the war in that region through the Paris Peace Accords, signed in January 1973. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, while the offensive had a deep political impact on America’s
engagement with the war, it had a devastating military impact on the insurgency across South
Vietnam. This held true for the insurgency in the IV Corps. Momentum began to turn against the
insurgency by mid-1968. 470 The insurgency did not respond well to an intensified
counterinsurgency campaign started in 1968 (the Accelerated Pacification Campaign, or APC)
by the GVN with US support. Until mid-1969, insurgency leaders tried to directly resist the
counterinsurgency campaign with their best units and continued their focus on attacking cities, as
they had done in the 1968 Tet Offensive. The result was that insurgent forces were rendered
nearly inoperative toward the end of 1969. 471 1970 and 1971 were low points for the insurgency
in the Mekong Delta, as it focused on mere survival, with the Delta under “predominant GVN
control by 1970.” 472 Although the GVN made extensive gains in the territory and people it
controlled over those years, it was never able to fully destroy the communist insurgency. The
1972 Easter Offensive and the 1975 Spring Offensive were primarily led by North Vietnamese
elements that had infiltrated South Vietnam.
The Accelerated Pacification Campaign (APC) highlighted the 1968 refocus on the
counterinsurgency campaign in the IV Corps. The effectiveness of the APC was largely
attributed to a stepped-up aggressive military campaign that made life for insurgents and
civilians in communist-controlled villages extremely difficult. 473 Elliott noted, “The greatest
problems for the revolution were not being created by clever pacification tactics or revolutionary
470

Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1141.
Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1140–1141, 1152–1153.
472 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1126, 1130.
473 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 859–860.
471

153

development cadres, but by bombing, shelling, and military ops that made it nearly impossible to
stay in the hamlets being fought over.” 474 Shelling and bombing forced many civilians to
evacuate the contested and insurgent-held hamlets and villages. This robbed the insurgency of a
population base from which to draw support, taxes, and personnel, causing a significant jump in
the population under GVN control. This change was not the result of a commensurate gain in
territorial control or a surge in loyalty for the government but was rather a reflection of citizenry
escaping sustained shelling and bombing. 475 To employ a metaphor commonly used in
counterinsurgency studies, rather than fish for insurgents in a pond of civilians, the GVN drained
the pond—with civilians paying a heavy price for this strategy. 476
The US 9th Infantry Division, as mentioned above, was the only major US combat
element deployed in the IV Corps. It earned a reputation for using massive amounts of firepower,
especially artillery and aerial bombardments, during their two-year tour in the Delta. 477 These
actions resulted in a depopulation of numerous areas in the countryside and significant civilian
casualties. This strategy was brutally effective in isolating the insurgency from the population on
whose support it depended, and in pushing communist forces back on their heels. 478 The US 9th
Infantry Division also essentially engaged in a “drain the pond” strategy. This kinetic tactic
pursed by the GVN and US also introduced a significant refugee challenge. 479 The strategy was
effective because it forced civilians into areas—often urban areas—under GVN control, shifting

474

The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 911.
Thayer, War without Fronts, 141; Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 860, 870–878, 889.
476 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1133–1134, 1137–1138.
477 Turse, Kill Anything That Moves, 206–208; Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1131–1132; 1160–
1161.
478 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1126–1127, 1133.
479 For an overview of civilians being displaced from theirs homes, see Thayer, War without Fronts, 221–
35.
475

154

the available pool of manpower from the insurgency to the government. 480 Use of this approach
did not, however, necessarily win the loyalty of the South Vietnamese people.
US advisors created province reports from November 1967 through February 1973.
Notable events in the IV Corps during this period included the January and February 1968 Tet
Offensive, the July 1969 departure of the US 9th Infantry Division, the April through September
1972 Easter Offensive, the January 1973 Paris Peace Accounts, and the February and March
1973 final withdrawal of US combat troops and virtually all advisory elements. Starting soon
after the 1968 Tet Offensive, the strength of the insurgency fell to a low point in 1971. During
this five-year period, the population of the Mekong Delta became more urban as a significant
number of people moved from the countryside to city areas, due in no small part to aggressive
shelling and bombing of hamlets by GVN and US forces. 481 Starting in 1968, the US began to
slowly disengage from the war, working to shift the burden of fighting back to the GVN and
RVNAF. Ironically this course of action resulted in the US intensifying its war effort, both on the
battlefield and in pressing the GVN to purse an aggressive and effective counterinsurgency
campaign. The goal of the US was to create the space and stability needed to enable the GVN
and RVNAF to survive a full American withdrawal. 482

The War at the Province Level
Province Advisory Teams
Although there were province advisory teams in 39 provinces by 1961 and in all 44 provinces by
1966, the establishment of CORDS created a new framework for the composition,
responsibilities, and organizational and reporting structure of province advisor teams across

480

Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1139.
Thayer, War without Fronts, 222.
482 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1129–1132.
481

155

South Vietnam. 483 As noted earlier, province advisory teams were under the CORDS chain of
command which was separate from the advisors supporting RVNAF combat units. The province
senior advisor (PSA) reported to the corps DEPCORDS. 484 PSAs were roughly split between US
military officers and civilian officials. Each PSA had a deputy PSA who was his counterpart—
military PSAs having a civilian deputy and civilian PSAs having a military deputy. 485
Although the organization of all 44 province advisor teams were relatively consistent,
their size varied depending on the priority that the GVN and US gave each province. In
September 1970, near the peak level of CORDS personnel in Vietnam, province teams averaged
180 CORDS personnel per province (this included district advisor teams). This declined to 40
CORDS personnel by June 1972. 486 District advisory teams were usually composed of three to
six Army officers and enlisted personnel. 487
The province advisor teams, along with their district advisory teams, were the mechanism
through which the US carried out its support of the GVN’s counterinsurgency campaign. In a
February 1969 directive on the “principles and procedures for the deployment of US advisory
teams to provinces and districts,” MACV Headquarters declared, “the advisory teams at the
483

Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 392.
484 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 68; Hunt, Pacification, 94.
485 Scoville, Reorganizing for Pacification Support, 70.
486 Pacification Studies Group, Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, US Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “The Vietnamization of MACCORDS,” April 19, 1971, 8, Box 22, Folder 160111A VN; Plans, Policy, and Programs Directorate, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for
Rural Development Support (CORDS); Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 19501975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
487 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 129; Hunt, Pacification, 95; John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS,
Delta Military Assistance Command, “Guidance and Policy Matters DEP/CORDS’ Policy Statement No.
7,” October 2, 1969, 5, Box 1054, Folder 1601-09A Misc Cords -- 1970; Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong
Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973: General Records, 19671973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of
the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.

156

province and district level extend US influence, advice, and assistance directly to those officials
of the Government of Vietnam (GVN) closest to the people. This advisory effort is, therefore,
one of the most important elements in the US effort to assist the GVN in extending its control
over the population.” 488 The province and district were the smallest government entities in which
the US had embedded advisors. These were the US advisory teams that had the most direct effect
on the countless contests for control of villages and hamlets across South Vietnam.
Province advisory teams were responsible for supporting and advising the full range of
counterinsurgency and development programs, along with coordinating some military operations
and advising militia and territorial forces within a province. 489 This included supporting security
operations undertaken by South Vietnamese military forces based in the province, usually
Regional Forces and Popular Forces, as well as civilian development projects and areas of
government administration including infrastructure, education, agriculture, and health. The
mission statement for the Kien Hoa Province advisory team gave a sense of the dual advisory
responsibility that teams had in providing advice to the GVN and supervising the US programs
and resources deployed within their province. The statement noted that the province advisory
team was to,
provide comprehensive advice and assistance to the Kein Hoa Province military and civil
government agencies in accomplishment of GVN civil and military objectives related to
pacification and Rural Development. Provide close supervision over the management of
US country assistance programs and expenditure of US assets directed toward support of
the GVN pacification and rural development efforts. 490
488

“Military Operations: Principles and Procedure for the Deployment of US Advisory Teams to
Provinces and Districts, MACV Directive 525-15,” February 15, 1969, 1, MACV AG Issuances, Box 39
MACV Directive No 525-6 thru MACV Directive No 525-15; MACV Adjutant General Issuances;
Records of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance
Command Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 19501975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
489 Hunt, Pacification, 94.
490 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance Command, “Organization and
Functions Manual,” November 23, 1970, 2, attached to Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta

157

The November 1968 Function Manual for the Phong Dinh Province advisory team described
each of the “advisory elements” on the team. 491 These advisory elements provided a good picture of
the advisory personnel on the team and the responsibilities of each. The advisors were listed in the
manual’s table of contents, which is presented here in Table 4.2 in a modified form.
Table 4.2
Advisory Roles, Phong Dinh Advisory Team 492

Province Senior Advisor
Province Deputy Senior Advisor
Adjutant
Assistant Sector Advisor
S-1 Advisor
S-2 Advisor
RF/PF Advisor
S-4 Advisor
A&DSL Advisor
New Life Development Advisor
Public Administrator Advisor
Self Help Advisor
Logistics Advisor
Refugee Advisor
Engineer Advisor
Civic Action Advisor
Agriculture Advisor
Chieu Hoi Advisor
Nurse Educator Advisor
Public Safety Advisor
Information and Psychological Operations Advisor
Revolutionary Development Cadre Advisor

Public Health Advisor
Air Force Surgical Team
Hospital Administrator Advisor
Nurse Advisor
Rural Health Advisor
District Senior Advisor
Assistant District Senior Advisor
Deputy District Senior Advisor
District Intelligence Advisor
Light and Heavy Weapons Infantry Advisors
Medical Advisor
Radio Telephone Operator
Phoenix Coordinator

Military Assistance Command, “Change 1 to Advisory Team 88 Organization and Functions Manual,”
December 3, 1970, Box 1533, Folder 207-01 Organization Planning File; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa
Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record; 1968-1973: General Records, 19671973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of
the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
491 Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province), IV CTZ, “Function Manual,” November 19, 1968, 1, Box
871, Folder 1601-10A Education, 1968; Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team)
Administrative and Operational Record; 1968-1973: General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
492 Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province), IV CTZ, “Function Manual,” 1–2.

158

The December 1970 Organization and Functions Manual for the Kien Hoa province team
includes an organization chart (Illustration 4.6). Although there were differences between the
organization of the Phong Dinh and Kien Hoa advisory teams, their responsibilities and structure
were similar. The two province teams gave a sense of the reporting structure and activities of all
44 province advisory teams.
Illustration 4.6
Organization Chart Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province) 493

493

Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance Command, “Organization and
Functions Manual,” 1, attached to Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance
Command, “Change 1 to Advisory Team 88 Organization and Functions Manual.”

159

In a June 1969 letter of instruction to the newly appointed province senior advisor for
Phong Dinh province, John Paul Vann outlined the provincial government’s counterinsurgency
goals for 1969. At this junction of the war, the US worked closely with GVN officials to
formulate annual counterinsurgency plans throughout the national, regional, and provincial levels
of government. Provincial level goals, therefore, reflected the responsibilities and goals of
province advisory teams. Phong Dinh’s 1969 goals included bringing security to 98% of the
population, removing 960 people from the VCI (Viet Cong Infrastructure—local organized
support of communist forces that often ran shadow governments in villages and hamlets),
holding local elections in at least 32 villages and 173 hamlets, training almost 35,000 members
of the People’s Self Defense Forces (PSDF), and inducing at least 1,600 communist supporters to
switch their allegiance to the government. In addition, goals included drastically reducing the
number of refugees in the province, increasing psychological operations, and strengthening the
local economy by increasing agricultural production and supporting and enforcing land
reform. 494 Vann’s letter gives a glimpse of how the range of tasks for each province team
required diverse expertise. This set of goals also indicates the heterogeneous and complex array
of measurements and evaluations that US personnel needed to generate for the purpose of
understanding the status of these efforts. Advisory work was complex, as was the labor of
measuring and documenting this work. These documentary efforts are discussed further in
Chapter Five and Chapter Six.
494

John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, “Letter of Instruction,” June 16,
1969, Container 15, Folder Chron - June 1969; CORDS MR4. MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD. Another letter of instruction with similar goals is John P Vann, Deputy for
CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, “Letter of Instruction,” May 27, 1969, Container 15, Folder
Chron - May 1969; CORDS MR4. MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil Operations
for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

160

Province Advisors
The province advisors were a combination of US military officers (the majority of whom came
from the Army) and civilians working for such agencies as USAID. Civilian advisors frequently
were retired Army officers. 495 Serving as a province advisor, and particularly as a province
senior advisor, was a challenging job. PSAs needed to have a wide range of expertise and skills,
including experience in military and police operations, intelligence, training, logistics, and civil
affairs. 496 In addition to these, a province advisor also needed to have detailed local knowledge
of his province. In a policy memo issued while he was the DEPCORDS for the IV Corps, John
Paul Vann stated that
I will expect each Assistant Director, Province Senior Advisor or District Senior Advisor,
within 30 days of arriving on such an assignment, to be the world’s leading expert in his
area of responsibility… A District Senior Advisor, as an example, should know all of the
physical characteristics of his district; the population and production statistics; the HES
status of each hamlet; prices of food and other standard necessities; strength and numbers
of friendly and enemy forces and their locations, and past and present trends of all of
these. Additional, he should know the place of birth, family connections, religion, and
political connections of the counterpart and the counterpart’s wife. 497
The broad scope of information that Vann demanded his advisors to master indicated the range
of responsibilities demanded of PSAs.
The November 1970 Organization and Functions Manual for the Kien Hoa Province
advisory team outlined the mission, responsibilities, and functions of the PSA. His mission was

495

Most Army officers who served as PSAs were colonels or lieutenant colonels. Dawkins, “The United
States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of Implementing Organizational
Change,” 54–55, 169.
496 Hunt, Pacification, 60; Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study
of the Complexity of Implementing Organizational Change,” 22, 248–49.
497 “DEPCORDS’ Policy Statement No. 3,” September 9, 1970, 2, Box 1054, Folder 1601-09A Misc
Cords -- 1970; Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team) Administrative and
Operational Record; 1968-1973: General Records, 1967-1973: Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

161

to “provide expert and timely advice and assistance to the Kien Hoa Province Chief…in the
pacification and Rural Development of the province. Command the integrated military and
civilian advisory team and supervise the implementation of advisory and US assistance programs
within the province.” 498 The manual indicated that the PSA was responsible for advising and
assisting
“GVN control and influence over the province population by:
(1) Providing security for the population.
(2) Neutralizing of the Viet Cong Infrastructure (VCI)
(3) Establishing village and hamlet governments.
(4) Organizing, training, and expanding the Peoples’ Self Defense Forces (PSDF)
(5) Effective implementation of the Chieu Hoi Program.
(6) Refugee/war victim resettlement.
(7) Increase the information and propaganda (PSYOPS) effort.
(8) Encourage and support rural development.” 499
The manual then outlined three advisory functions for the PSA, (1) “represent the Military
Region Senior Advisor at province level.” (2) “Serve as principal US advisor to the Province
Chief.” (3) “Coordinate the civil developmental activities of the advisory team, other FWMAF
units, volunteer agencies, and other organizations operating in the province.” It also outlined a
supervisory function: “supervise the province advisory team in development and implementation
of US military and civil plans, policies, programs, and activities in support of GVN provincial
programs.” 500 The leadership role of the PSA included directing a staff of advisors who were
assigned to various programs and sections of the province advisor team. The PSA had district
advisory teams under his purview as well. The other core responsibility of the PSA was advising
498

Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance Command, “Organization and
Functions Manual,” 4, attached to Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance
Command, “Change 1 to Advisory Team 88 Organization and Functions Manual,” 1.
499 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance Command, “Organization and
Functions Manual,” 4, attached to Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance
Command, “Change 1 to Advisory Team 88 Organization and Functions Manual.”
500 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance Command, “Organization and
Functions Manual,” 4, attached to Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province), Delta Military Assistance
Command, “Change 1 to Advisory Team 88 Organization and Functions Manual.”

162

GVN province chiefs on a wide variety of governance, economic development, security, and
counterinsurgency issues.
In a dissertation study of the US Army’s involvement in the province and district advisor
programs from 1962 through 1970, Peter Dawkins organized the work of province and district
senior advisors into seven categories arranged from traditional military activities to civilian
activities:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

Security/Combat affairs
Logistical matters
Intelligence matters and police affairs
Chieu Hoi, refugees, psychological operations
Hamel development Cadres and civilian medical services
Civilian construction and public works, and community development
Civilian governmental programs (including agriculture programs) 501

While security efforts were a primary concern for PSAs, supporting civilian programs were
important, non-trivial activities for PSAs as well. 502 In a survey of Army province advisors,
Dawkins found that 46% of Army province advisors said they spent at least 50% of their time on
security matters. In this survey, 70% of the advisors said they spent between 25% and 75% of
their time on security matters. 28% of advisors surveyed spent between 11% and 50% of their
time on civilian governmental programs. 503

501

Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 214–21.
502 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 229.
503 “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 223–225. Dawkins acknowledged that this survey
underrepresented the amount of work civilian programs took for province advisor team leaders. When a
PSA was a civilian, the deputy PSA was a military officer. The PSA and deputy normally spilt their
responsibilities informally, with the civilians tending to focus on civilian and political affairs and the
officer tending to focus on security and military activities. Because the questionnaire surveyed Army
officer PSAs and deputy PSAs but not civilian PSAs or deputy PSAs, the data skews towards time spend
on military activities. “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the
Complexity of Implementing Organizational Change,” 226.

163

How each PSA focused his time depended greatly on the circumstances of the province
he was supporting. An active insurgency in the province could demand that a PSA spend
considerable energy on military operations and training local militias. The province could be
taking in a large influx of refugees, forcing a PSA to support the creation of camps and to find
solutions for the dislocated. Sometimes PSAs were located in provinces where combat and
insurgency operations were less prevalent and civic work—such as building public works,
improving agricultural production, setting up markings, and supervising elections—came to the
fore. 504
One of the most important aspects of the PSA’s job was his relationship with the
province chief he advised. The PSA served as an essential link between the American
commander of the corps and the South Vietnamese province chief. One responsibility of the PSA
was encouraging the province chief to use American funds effectively while also keeping
corruption, in the face of this large influx of money, in check. PSAs were also responsible for
pushing province chiefs to cooperate with American officials and to aggressively pursue
insurgent forces. The PSA-province chief relationship was often fraught and complex. Both
people in the relationship were frequently trying to manipulate each other and their interests
often did not align. 505 The PSAs had to strike a delicate balance between gaining the trust of the
province chief and pushing him to take actions that he resisted. 506
Because PSAs did not have formal authority over province chiefs, their written
evaluations served as one of their few leverage tools. However, concerns over preserving
carefully curated relationships with province chiefs sometimes muted the PSAs’ criticism in their
504

Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 214–16.
505 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 168.
506 Hunt, Pacification, 59–60.

164

reports. 507 In addition some advisors were concerned that criticism of a province chief or other
GVN official they advised would be a poor reflection on their own performance. 508 Report
writing was, therefore, influenced by the intricacies of the PSA–province chief relationship.
This complex relationship and its effect on advisor reporting were not limited to PSAs
and province chiefs. This phenomenon was experienced by all types of advisors and stretched
back to the earliest American advisory presence in Vietnam. Throughout the war, a wide range
of US advisors found themselves under pressure to report positive results about the performance
of their GVN or RVNAF counterpart. Like PSAs, other advisors were also concerned that
negative evaluations would damage their delicate relationships with South Vietnamese officials.
Many GVN and RVNAF officials, in addition to province chiefs, felt pressure from their local
and Saigon superiors to report good results. Positive reports were important for GVN and
RVNAF officials’ careers and their families’ livelihoods. 509 Some US advisors felt pressure from
their own command to deliver good news and feared that giving their Vietnamese counterpart a
low rating would reflect poorly on their own performance. 510 The calculation for some advisors
was that it was easier and better for their own career to write positive rather than fully honest
evaluations. 511 In the early 1960s, there was also a pervasive sense that negative reports were not
generally appreciated at MACV senior command. In particular, Paul Harkin, the first commander
of MACV, gained a reputation for not liking negative reports. 512

507

Lewy, America in Vietnam, 168.
Lewy, America in Vietnam, 168–69.
509 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 57.
510 Cooper et al., “The American Experience with Pacification in Vietnam Volume II Elements of
Pacification,” 207–8.
511 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 120.
512 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 57.
508

165

Advising was difficult work. This job required a diverse knowledgebase, patience,
creativity, independence, quick thinking, and an inclination to learn new skills and cultures.
PSAs had wide latitude to carry out their jobs as they saw fit and did their work in comparative
isolation, compared to other Army officers. 513 One advisor in Dawkins’ survey noted that, “the
military/political advisor cannot rely on US solutions to problems that are learned by leading US
units…He is at best an amateur anthropologist.” 514
This job included a steep cultural and language learning curve. 515 Although the Army
selected officers for PSA assignments that had knowledge of Vietnamese or an aptitude for
learning the language, many other advisors on province or other advisory teams did not know
Vietnamese and depended on interpreters. 516 Many of these interpreters had limited command of
English and all of them, of course, had their own motivations to craft communication in a
manner that was beneficial to them and their families. Additionally, the PSAs and other advisors
were thrown into highly complex political situations with little background knowledge of the
local politics and culture and limited mastery of the language, making them susceptible to
manipulation by local leaders. 517
These challenges were compounded by short duration of advisor tours, which were
usually 12 months—certainly not a long time to learn the intricacies of province- and local-level
politics in South Vietnam. 518 The short tour length had the influence of foreshortening the

513

Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 109–10.
514 “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 259.
515 Hunt, Pacification, 59–60.
516 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 168; Clarke, Advice and Support: The Final Years, 1965-1973, 510.
517 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 118, 168; Daddis, No Sure Victory, 120.
518 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 118. The US Army did offer an 18-month advisor tour option, which
some officers took. Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the
Complexity of Implementing Organizational Change,” 87–93.

166

perspective of province advisors and provided incentives to shy away from long-term projects. 519
John Paul Vann artfully summarized the situation in a widely-cite quote, “We don’t have twelve
years’ experience in Vietnam. We have one year’s experience twelve times over.” 520 The 12month tour also affected how officers with military advisory and command assignments
approached and measured the war. The short tour was a factor in dissuading officers from
engaging in counterinsurgency initiatives that focused on long term civic, political, and
economic improvements. This was work requiring patience and relationship building, where
payoffs were slow and difficult to discern. These kinds of dividends often did not benefit
individual officers because they would only mature after his tour was complete. Officers were
under stringent career pressure to demonstrate quick results—and killing or capturing insurgents
was the quickest way to get, and easiest way to demonstrate, results that could help an officer
gain a promotion. 521
The US Army had difficulty getting well-qualified officers to serve as PSAs and deputy
PSAs. Commanding a unit in a combat zone was the quickest road to promotion, and advising
was outside of the mainstream Army career path. 522 In an organization where one either
continued to get promoted or got pushed out of the service, understandably many US Army
officers felt that serving as an advisor was detrimental to their careers. 523 With the introduction
of US combat units in 1965, command of one of those units became the prized assignment for a

519

Lewy, America in Vietnam, 119.
Lewy, America in Vietnam, 118.
521 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 84, 100–101.
522 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 144–47; Hunt, Pacification, 59, 108.
523 Hunt, Pacification, 59; Lewy, America in Vietnam, 168. Ambitious officers, the very people the Army
was trying to recruit as PSAs and deputy PSAs, were often very mindful of the pace of their promotions,
making them unlikely to pursue assignments, like being an advisor, that they perceived as slowing their
climb up the Army latter. Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study
of the Complexity of Implementing Organizational Change,” 59.
520

167

US Army officer in Vietnam. 524 Negative perceptions about the potential career value of a
province advisor assignment grew worse as the war progressed through the 1960s. 525 However,
the vast majority of Army officers who served as province advisors felt that their work was
essential to the war effort and professionally satisfying. 526 Despite this perception of the job
itself, some US military officers did not see the value of deeply investing in their advisor role
because of their concern that advising would be an impediment to their career. Some officers
even sought opportunities to leave their advisor jobs early in favor of gaining a combat command
assignment. 527
The US Army implemented a number of measures and incentives to address the concerns
of officers about taking province advisor assignments. 528 These efforts yielded some results, and
the Army began to attract more qualified advisors by 1970. The perception of the career impact
of a province advisor assignment had improved by the end of the 1960s. 529 Nevertheless,
attracting the best candidates for advisor assignments and changing the widespread negative
perception of these assignments were challenges that the US Army had to combat throughout the
war, with many Army officers still resisting advisory tours. 530

524

Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 41; Hunt, Pacification, 107, 271.
525 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 63–66, 68–69.
526 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 234, 246–47.
527 Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam, 207–9; Daddis, No Sure Victory, 101.
528 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 32, 76–78, 87–93; Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 67–70;
Hunt, Pacification, 107, 270.
529 Dawkins, “The United States Army and the ‘Other’ War in Vietnam: A Study of the Complexity of
Implementing Organizational Change,” 74.
530 Hunt, Pacification, 270–71.

168

Dinh Tuong Province
Dinh Tuong sits on the north side of the Mekong River and contains flat lowlands crisscrossed
with canals and dikes. During most of the war, approximately 90% of the land was under
cultivation and it had three main routes: Highway 4, the Cho-Gao Canal, and the My Tho River.
The wartime boundaries of Dinh Tuong were established by the government in 1963 and the
province encompassed just over 560 square miles, about half the size of Rhode Island. It was
composed of seven districts. Its population was over 530,000 in 1966 and just under 600,000 in
1969, which made it, like much of the Mekong Delta, a heavily populated agricultural area. 531 It
harvested a significant rice crop and was among the leading provinces in hog production of
South Vietnam. 532
Dinh Tuong was the site of considerable insurgent activity throughout the war, with the
Viet Minh gaining a foothold in the province in 1945. 533 It was one of the richest provinces in
South Vietnam with a sizable insurgent presence. 534 The province was also the site of significant
combat during the war, with 5% of combat deaths among GVN, US, and allied troops from 1967
through 1972, tied for fourth most among the 44 provinces. 535 Dinh Tuong and its neighbor,
Kien Hoa, were strategically located between Saigon and the Mekong Delta. 536 CORDS
recognized the importance of Dinh Tuong, designating it a top-priority province among 16 IV

531

Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1138.
Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “Dinh Tuong Province Briefing Folder,”
nd, 3–4, 7–9, Box 19, Folder 1601-01 Province Briefing Folder -- 1968 (part 1 of 2); CORDS
MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of
Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
533 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “Dinh Tuong Province Briefing Folder,”
1.
534 Hunt, Pacification, 190.
535 Thayer, War without Fronts, 14–15.
536 Thayer, War without Fronts, 15.
532

169

Corps provinces in 1969. 537 However, significant numbers of US troops did not arrive in Dinh
Tuong until 1967 with the deployment of the 9th Infantry Division to the Mekong Delta. 538
The fortunes of the insurgency in Dinh Tuong roughly followed the broader fortunes of
the insurgency across the Mekong Delta. The communists, who had developed predominant
control over the province’s countryside by the mid-1960s, had met significant difficulties by
1966, with provincial and national forces impinging on their freedom of movement and their
ability to recruit from the rural population. 539 Despite these difficulties, in 1967 the insurgency
continued to hold a strong position in the rural areas of the province. Along with the insurgency
across the Delta, insurgents in Dinh Tuong began to focus military operations on urban attacks, a
strategy which led to the 1968 Tet Offensive. 540 Although the insurgency in Dinh Tuong had
broad rural support for its attacks on cities and towns, particularly the provincial capital, My
Tho, the swell of additional popular support quickly faltered as Tet and subsequent attacks over
the first half of 1968 wilted against GVN and US forces. The fight quickly turned against the
insurgency in Dinh Tuong as it had across the Mekong Delta and South Vietnam, and communist
forces in the province suffered heavy losses through 1969. 541 By 1970 the GVN had predominant
control over the Dinh Tuong countryside and the insurgency had reverted to survival mode. 542
Most of the large insurgent military units had been pushed out of the province by 1969 and it did

537

Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, “ABCD JTD,” February 12, 1969, Container 15,
Folder Chron - Feb 1969; CORDS MR4. MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
538 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 852.
539 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 968–970.
540 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 970–971.
541 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1044.
542 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1050, 1126.

170

not have large-scale combat operations in Ding Tuong until the Easter Offensive in 1972. 543
Units had to be supplemented with North Vietnamese elements by 1969. 544
As with the rest of the IV Corps, the GVN and US intensified their combat operations
after the Tet Offensive in Dinh Tuong, which resulted in increased civilian casualties. This
included a depopulation of the countryside as people fled artillery and aerial bombardments for
the relative safety of larger towns and cities. 545 Although the insurgency lost their broad backing,
in large part because of this urbanization, it retained a core of support, especially among the
poorest peasants, through 1970 and 1971. 546 From this low point, insurgent forces in Dinh Tuong
recovered during the 1972 Easter Offensive, led by the North Vietnamese Army, which
significantly hampered the GVN’s counterinsurgency efforts. 547 In Dinh Tuong, the Easter
Offensive stretched into a series of attacks running from May through September 1972. 548 Dinh
Tuong followed a broader pattern in the Mekong Delta of the insurgency’s decline after the 1968
Tet Offensive to the point of near total collapse by 1971. The insurgency held on to a core of
support and was resuscitated by 1972 Easter Offensive, which preceded the January 1973 Paris
Peace Accords and the final exit of US forces and advisors. As will be noted in Chapter Six, the
province reports from the Dinh Tuong advisory team captured this broad pattern of the war in the
province.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I explored the historical context of the creation of the province report. This
exploration was presented in three layers: 1) the war at the national level, 2) the war at the corps
543

Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1131.
Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1150.
545 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1119, 1158–1159, 1162–1163, 1211.
546 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1214, 1219–1222, 1228–1234.
547 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1291.
548 Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003, II: 1309.
544

171

level, and 3) the war at the province level. I framed how the war could be understood as a wicked
problem, as US officials struggled to conceptualize and define the war. Next, I discussed US
counterinsurgency efforts with a particular focus on the establishment and development of
CORDS and how it operated from top theater-level headquarters down to the province teams.
This review provides the organizational context for the Chapter Five discussion of MACV. It
also contextualizes attempts by CORDS to document the war, as well as the GVN
counterinsurgency campaign. This chapter also gives an overview of the war in Dinh Tuong
province and across the IV Corps. This provides the historical context for the Chapter Five
discussion of CORDS in the IV Corps and the Chapter Six examination of province reports from
the Dinh Tuong province advisory team, as well as selected reports from other IV Corps
province advisory teams.

172

Chapter Five
Findings II: The Recordkeeping Context and Structure of the Province Report

Introduction
Chapter Five contains a detailed examination of the province report’s structure and form, its
evolution over time, and the report creation process. In this chapter, I will drill down from the
political, social, and military context of the province report described in Chapter Four to examine
the recordkeeping context of the province report, as well as the structure of the report as a record.
First, I will place the province report in the broader context of MACV (Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam) and CORDS (Civil Operations and Rural Development Support), which
produced a vast array of statistical and narrative reports. Then, I will examine the province
report’s structure and elements, its use and purpose, and the directives, letters of instruction, and
memos that provided the warrants and rules for the creation and distribution of the report. This is
followed by a review of several memos and other documents that contain critiques of the
province reports’ quality, including suggestions from CORDS officials to the province advisory
teams on how to improve their reports. These memos, along with the warrants and rules, touch
on the importance of province senior advisors (PSAs) taking the time to produce thoughtful,
concise reports about the state of the war and the performance of their Government of (South)
Vietnam (GVN) counterparts. These critiques underscored the importance of brevity and
timeliness when creating reports. In their memos, CORDS officials also pointed out the burdens
that the report requirements placed on advisors.
The findings that I will present in this chapter are primarily based on my review of
MACV and CORDS documents housed at the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) that are about the creation, dissemination, and structure of province reports and the
quality of reports written by province advisory teams. Findings from a review of the contents of

173

the providence reports are presented in Chapter Six. As with Chapter Four, I have paid particular
attention to the creation and management of the province report in the IV Corps in South
Vietnam. Many of the memos and documents outlining the warrants and rules governing the
province report were issued by the Office of CORDS in the IV Corps. While the directives that
provided the underlying warrants for province reports’ creation were issued by MACV at the
theater level, the IV Corps Office of CORDS also contributed several directives, memos, and
letters of instruction that provided additional rules for the creation and management of province
reports produced in the IV Corps. This examination of rules and warrants also reviews a small
selection of documents disseminated by IV Corps province advisory teams.
I used Joanne Yates’ concept of business communication in which instructions flowed
downward and reports traveled upward within organizations to frame my examination of
province reports and illustrate their functions, creation, and use. In Yates’ framework, used in her
study of the recordkeeping practices of nineteenth century American railroad and manufacturing
companies, an organization sent a variety of documents downward through its internal ranks to
issue rules, procedures, and quotas; shaped worker’s practices; set expectations; and defined the
work that needed to be completed. In turn, various reports were sent up through the hierarchy of
the organization to inform multiple layers of management of the work being done and related
activities. 549 Yates used this framework to explain how companies employed new recordkeeping
and communication technologies and practices to manage their burgeoning and sometimes farflung workforce, which could no longer be handled by in-person, one-on-one communication. 550
Yates’ model works particularly well for framing the internal upward and downward flow
of documents within large, hierarchical organizations. At its core, MACV, although highly
549
550

Control through Communication, xvi–xvii, 5-19, 66-79.
Control through Communication, xvi–xvii, 5-19.

174

complex, was a large and hierarchical organization. Therefore, the Yates model proves to be
useful for understanding the creation and use of the province report within MACV and CORDS.
Most of the rules governing the creation and distribution of the province report were issued by
headquarters at the theater and corps level and sent downward to the lower echelons of
command. Conversely, the province reports, which contained information about events and the
performance of GVN programs and individual officials, were reported upward to higher levels of
command within MACV and CORDS.

Counterinsurgency Evaluation in the Vietnam War
The establishment of CORDS brought with it a renewed attempt to measure and document the
counterinsurgency campaign. Since the early 1960s the US had been trying to measure the GVN
and American effort to defeat the communist insurgents. These measurements were
unsystematic, unfocused, and not well defined. With the onset of US combat operations in 1965,
attempts at measuring the counterinsurgency war were overtaken by a focus on measuring more
readily countable accomplishments on the battlefield. The efforts to measure the performance of
GVN officials and RVNAF officers and the effectiveness of their programs and operations until
the establishment of CORDS were beset by several challenges. 551 As discussed in Chapter Four,
because US military and civilian leaders had difficulty in coming to a consensus on the nature of
the war, MACV had problems focusing their documentation efforts. There was a tendency within
the organization to focus on easily measurable actions, which often gave a misleading sense of
the war. Officials within MACV and at Pentagon and White House were aware of the
measurement shortcomings. An overhaul of data gathering and assessments processes was part
551

The most extensive study of these assessment efforts during the war is Gregory A. Daddis, No Sure
Victory: Measuring U.S. Army Effectiveness and Progress in the Vietnam War (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2011). Also see Thomas C. Thayer, War Without Fronts: The American Experience in
Vietnam (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985), 137–138.

175

of the refocus on the counterinsurgency campaign and the GVN’s governance of the rural
population that lead to the establishment of CORDS in 1967. The province report was one of the
outcomes of the renewed effort to gain a more meaningful understanding of the war.
By 1964, as the GVN teetered on the brink of collapse, US officials grew increasingly
distrustful of reports written by GVN and RVNAF leaders, which American leaders began to see
as overoptimistic assessments of the war. At that point, the US had its own reporting framework
in place to monitor the progress and state of the GVN’s fight against the insurgency. 552 This
reporting framework required US advisors to create a variety of narrative and statistical reports
every month. These reports included the MACV Monthly Report of Revolutionary Development
Program, Population, and Area Control. 553 This report was followed by the Special Joint Report
on Revolutionary Development, established March 1966, which was superseded by the Special
Joint Narrative Report on Revolutionary Development, established in January 1967. 554 These
three reports were the predecessors of the monthly province report.
Because US military and civilian leadership failed to coalesce around a prevailing
understanding of the war and a corresponding strategy, they did not arrive at a clear set of

552

Hunt, Pacification, 26; Cooper et al., “The American Experience with Pacification in Vietnam
Volume II Elements of Pacification,” 199, 207–8.
553 Cooper et al., “The American Experience with Pacification in Vietnam Volume II Elements of
Pacification,” 209–10.
554 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Preparation of
Revolutionary Development Reports, Joint Directive 1-66,” March 18, 1966, Joint Directive No 1-66
THRU Joint Directive No. 4-70, Box 63; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the Adjutant
General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV)
1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472;
National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam and Office of Civil Operations, “Special Joint Report on Revolutionary
Development, Joint OCO/MACV Directive 2-67,” January 16, 1967, Joint Directive No 1-66 THRU Joint
Directive No. 4-70, Box 63; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the Adjutant General’s
Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) 19581973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

176

priorities for determining the most important aspects of the war and Vietnamese society to
document. In lieu of a unified conceptual understanding, MACV measured everything, collecting
a wide array and an overwhelming quantity of data. Data gathering became an end in itself. 555
The number of reports produced by MACV grew markedly in 1963 and that trend continued
through the arrival of US combat troops in 1965. 556 The voluminous data gathering did not come
with a corresponding level of analytic vigor or scale. 557 In his analysis of the American war
effort, Robert Komer, a senior White House advisor to President Johnson and the first director of
CORDS, stated that MACV, the Defense Department, and the White House did not “do a good
enough job of analyzing the data we did collect.” 558 The effort to analyze data was small in
comparison to the effort to gather the data, even with Robert McNamara’s bringing the
Department of Defense systems analysis office to bear on conduct of the war. 559 McNamara
originally installed this office in 1961, early in his tenure as Secretary of Defense, to manage
military spending and evaluate weapons systems. McNamara did not involve this office in
evaluating the war until the mid-1960s, when he grew frustrated with MACV’s inability to
produce, to his mind, coherent analysis of the conflict. 560
Lacking an overarching evaluation strategy, data gathering efforts within MACV often
centered on measuring combat operations and activities—measurements the US military could
readily gather and understand because these data fit neatly within their primary conceptualization
of warfare. 561 This search for metrics that were measurable and professionally comfortable led to

555

Daddis, No Sure Victory, 9–10, 53, 224.
Daddis, No Sure Victory, 51, 64.
557 Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 70; Thayer, War without Fronts, 5.
558 “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 255.
559 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 35, 49–50, 53, 223.
560 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 37–38.
561 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 53.
556

177

a significant reliance on body counts and the exchange ratio—the rate of enemy casualties to US
and allied causalities. The kill ratio conceptually produced a self-fulfilling reassurance that the
Vietnam War was primarily a traditional conflict of armed units clashing on the battlefield. 562
These metrics were part of a complex relationship that encapsulated how officers understood the
war, how they measured it, and what they perceived as the best way to advance their career. The
fixation for some command officers on body counts were closely tied to their understanding of
traditional military career advancement and how they framed their notions of success in
Vietnam. 563 Officers, for example, had plenty of incentives and few penalties to over-count
enemies killed in action. 564
Many individuals within the military and government and at think tanks throughout the
early and mid-1960s pointed out these shortcomings with the American reporting infrastructure.
In addition to analysts at the RAND Corporation, these critics included Edward Landsdale,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Special Operations in the Department of Defense in the early
1960s and a prominent figure in several post-World War II US counterinsurgency operations;
William Colby, the CIA’s Saigon Station Chief in the early 1960s and later the director of
CORDS in the late 1960s and then the CIA Director in the 1970s; and Thomas Thayer, a
prominent Pentagon data analyst during the war. They claimed that MACV measurements were
too focused on short-term goals, were overoptimistic, did not connect to any meaningful
measures of the war, and that data gathering had become an end in itself. 565 These critiques of
how MACV undertook its measurement and evaluation of the war—particularly the campaign

562

Daddis, No Sure Victory, 65, 82–84.
Daddis, No Sure Victory, 99–100.
564 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 96.
565 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 39, 48–51, 106, 154; Cooper et al., “The American Experience with
Pacification in Vietnam Volume II Elements of Pacification,” 208–9.
563

178

against South Vietnamese insurgents—were part of a larger call to reform how the US military
carried out the entire conduct of the war, and especially the fight against the insurgents. This
broader call for change made by various officials within the US government and military was
part of the high-level conversation that led to the creation of CORDS. In fact, CORDS staff made
a concerted effort to improve the counterinsurgency analysis beyond what was done before the
establishment of CORDS in 1967. 566
Senior advisors in the White House, along with those at the CIA and in the military, were
interested in receiving more informative and systematic data about the counterinsurgency
campaign. 567 In late 1966, Robert McNamara ordered the CIA to develop a method that provided
systematic data on what was happening in the war at a granular level. The CIA responded to this
in partnership with MACV by developing and implementing the Hamlet Evaluation System
(HES) in 1967, a few months before the establishment of CORDS. 568 HES was one of several
statistical reporting systems deployed in 1967. Most of these reporting systems were codified
under the MACCORDS Field Reporting System, which is discussed later in this chapter. The
HES is discussed more extensively in Chapter Six. The HES became the most widely known and
controversial of these statistical reports. 569 The HES provided a framework for district advisors
to rate the level of political and security control GVN officials held over hamlets, which were the
smallest administrative entity in South Vietnam. 570

566

Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing, 72; Enthoven and Smith, How Much Is Enough?, 301–2, 307.
Daddis, No Sure Victory, 63–74.
568 Daddis, No Sure Victory, 118.
569 Stathis N. Kalyvas and Matthew Adam Kocher, “The Dynamics of Violence in Vietnam: An Analysis
of the Hamlet Evaluation System (HES),” Journal of Peace Research 46, no. 3 (2009): 335–355; Philip
Verwimp, Patricia Justino, and Tilman Brück, “The Analysis of Conflict: A Micro-Level Perspective,”
Journal of Peace Research 46, no. 3 (May 2009); Gayvert, “Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the
Hamlet Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in Afghanistan?”
570 The administrative hierarchy in South Vietnam usually progressed from province to district to village
to hamlet.
567

179

There was widespread criticism of HES. Some claimed that HES numbers were
misleading and that they provided a false sense of the US and GVN making progress towards
victory. 571 Robert Komer and other officials associated with the system defended the validly of
the HES data and countered that much of the criticism directed at the system were raising
concerns that were the result of how some US officials used the data to make claims of getting
closer to victory in Vietnam. 572 Komer noted that HES data needed to be used carefully and
claims based on the data needed to be made cautiously. He described the HES as one of several
management tools rather than just a delivery system for conveying results. 573 Komer saw the role
of HES and other MACCORDS field reporting datasets as giving US and GVN leaders a
systematic understanding of who controlled the countryside and the state of the
counterinsurgency war. 574 Komer stressed the importance of systematic analysis that could scale
to meet the challenges the GVN and US faced. He noted, “It is impossible to manage a multifaceted pacification program effectively in thousands of villages and hamlets without such
reports and measurement systems.” 575 While he conceded that these systems were coarse tools
that approximated reality, he insisted that “gross quantitative measurements were much better
than the previous subjective evaluations or impressionistic reporting.” 576

571 Lewy, America in Vietnam, 192; Gibson, The Perfect War, 307; Gabriel Kolko, Anatomy of a War:
Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical Experience (New York: Pantheon Books, 1985),
240; Mark Moyar, Phoenix and the Birds of Prey: Counterinsurgency and Counterterrorism in Vietnam,
Bison Books ed. (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2007), 259; Elliott, The Vietnamese War, 2003,
II:857; Race, War Comes to Long An, 223; Daddis, No Sure Victory, 51.
572 Robert Komer, “Impact of Pacification on Insurgency in South Vietnam” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, August 1970), 8–10; Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’
Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 199–202.
573 “Impact of Pacification on Insurgency in South Vietnam,” 9.
574 “Impact of Pacification on Insurgency in South Vietnam,” 8.
575 “Impact of Pacification on Insurgency in South Vietnam,” 9.
576 “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 243.

180

In a May 1969 memo to all IV Corps province senior advisors, John Paul Vann, IV Corps
Deputy for CORDS (DepCORDS), echoed Komer’s emphasis on the importance of systematic
data gathering and goal-setting to support the proper management of the war. He noted,
As all of you are aware, much of what goes on in pacification is not subject to a finite
measurement. Nevertheless, it is important, from a management standpoint, to compare
performance in each province both against the established goals and objectives and then
with each other province within this CTZ [Combat Tactical Zone]. Of necessity, a
number of arbitrary rules and judgments must be applied in order to make such a
comparative analysis. 577
The HES, along with other statistically driven reports, were designed to enable officials to see a
systematic picture of the war. CIA, White House, CORDS, and MACV leaders envisioned that
these reporting systems would help reduce dependency on what were perceived to be
impressionistic and subjective reports. 578 This new generation of reports was part of the effort to
normalize the war into systematic, comprehensive, and regularized datasets that could be
analyzed. The primary thrust of this effort was to normalize accounts of the war so that these
views could be scaled up to a country-wide level.
The province report was part of the larger framework of counterinsurgency reports that
existed under the umbrella MACCORDS Field Reporting System. The majority of the reports in
this system had a quantitative focus. The province report stood out as one of the few reports in
the system that was qualitative in nature. Therefore, the report was meant to serve as a qualitative
counterbalance to a large set of quantitative reports in which data, aggregated, reformulated, and
analyzed, were reported up the chain of command. In contrast, CORDS intended for the province

577

“Comparative Analysis of Provincial Accomplishments on 1969 Pacification Plan,” May 28, 1969, 1,
Container 15, Folder Chron - May 1969; CORDS MR4. MR4/Dep for CORDS General Records; Records
of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United
States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park,
College Park, MD.
578 Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,”
198–200.

181

report to provide senior decision makers with descriptive narratives that supplemented their
quantitative understanding with qualitative insights into very complex social and political
situations. The province report was not intended for aggregation, but for telling the story of the
war in each province. Komer’s Assistant DepCORDS described the reports as impressionistic
and asked, “How do you put those together in a single report to Washington? We just sent them
the whole set.” 579 John Paul Vann pointed out the importance of the province report by noting
that they “are sent, in part, directly to Washington…They are neither edited nor corrected either
at Corps or Saigon.” 580 A January 1971 letter of instruction to IV Corps province advisors noted
that the province reports were distributed to higher levels of command, all the way to the
Pentagon and the White House, “exactly as submitted by the provinces.” 581 Those instructions
were reproduced in the monthly guidance sent to province teams by the IV Corps Office of
CORDS for the preparation of province reports, starting in February 1970 through January
1973. 582 The phrase “exactly as submitted” suggested that MACV and CORDS did not design
the province reports to be aggregated, but to instead stand alone as indivisible narratives. As
579

Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 207.
“CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” May 14, 1969, Container 15, Folder Chron - May 1969;
CORDS MR4/MR4/Dep for CORDS General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
581 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71,” January 11, 1971, 1, Box 33, Folder 227-01 DRAC Letter of Instructions--1971;
CORDS MR 4/Office of the Deputy for Cords, General Records 1966-1973; Records of Civil Operations
for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
582 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70”; Robert C. Payette, Acting Deputy
for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command,
“Monthly Recurring Reports Submissions Instructions, CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin 9-73,”
January 9, 1973, Container 5, Folder 227-01 CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin # 08-73 thru 38-72;
CORDS MR4/Management Support Division, CORDS/Delta Region Assistance Command Information
Bulletins 1971-1973, CORDS/DRAC Info Bulletin #361-72 to #430-72; Records of Civil Operations for
Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast
Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
580

182

discussed in Chapter One, the purpose of the province report was to provide complex, nuanced,
thick description which consequently did not lend itself to aggregation.
Komer, Vann, and others within MACV and in Washington recognized the complexities
and perils of creating an aggregated data reporting system. However, they also had a strong need
to gain a better understanding of the war across South Vietnam. As the 1960s progressed,
American officials grew increasingly distrustful of GVN reporting, and American leaders wanted
to produce their own comprehensive picture of the war. Along with the new wave of reports that
emerged in 1966 and 1967 came the goal of gathering an approximate understanding of what
was happening in South Vietnam. Komer claimed that this regularized reporting system was an
essential tool in managing a large-scale, “countrywide” campaign as it helped to support basic
management techniques such as performance goals and metrics, and evaluated criteria. He stated,
To help generate consistent forward movement by such widely dispersed Vietnamese
assets, we stressed a well-known management technique that has often been criticized—
setting concrete performance goals and time-phased quotas. Generalized exhortation and
policy guidance only takes you so far… True, this sort of thing creates pressures toward
fudging, which we sought to monitor against via the US advisors and GVN inspectors.
True, it also creates a bias toward quantitative “statistical” progress that can be
misleading unless management keeps its head. But the critics ignore the managerial facts
of life. A countrywide program like pacification simply could not be managed effectively
without such performance and measurement-oriented techniques. 583
Komer acknowledged that quantitative reporting carried the risk of manipulating data and or
being misunderstood, but contended that these were necessary risks in order to successfully
prosecute a war on the scale of the Vietnam conflict. The risk of misunderstanding data that
Komer identified, or more generally the challenge of properly conceptualizing data, its limits,
and its relationship to the realities it represents, is further explored in this chapter, Chapter Six,
and Chapter Seven.

583

“Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 189.

183

Province Report Introduction
As described briefly in Chapter One, from November 1967 through February 1973, province
senior advisors produced province reports each month in order to give a qualitative, narrative
performance assessment of their respective provincial-level GVN government and armed forces.
This included writing about South Vietnamese civilian and military officials, as well as a wide
array of GVN programs, the provincial economy, refugees, the local population, and insurgent
activities. In this report, PSAs were also expected to provide overall assessments of the state of
the war in their respective provinces. MACV officials described the province report, along with
the CORDS field overview—a corps-level equivalent of a province report written monthly by the
corps-level commander or the director of CORDS—as “the primary documents upon which the
periodic theater-wide assessment of overall progress in the pacification effort is based.
Additionally, they are most valuable in identifying problems and the reasons for success or
failure.” 584 In further instructions, MACV declared that the purpose of the province report was
“to provide a current and general evaluation of the various activities which constitute the
pacification/nation building effort.” 585 In summary, the purpose of the province report was to 1)
present a general, narrative, and qualitative description of the GVN counterinsurgency campaign,
state of security, and the accomplishments of government programs in each province; 2) provide
material to serve as the basis for the corps-level CORDS field report; and 3) elicit responses to
problems from higher headquarters, captured in a section of the province report called “Required
Actions.”

584

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 1.
585 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

184

Province Report Structure and Elements
For most of its existence, the province report had a four-part structure: 1) An overview section,
which gave each senior province advisor the space to highlight events, trends, and activities that
he felt were the most important issues to bring to the attention of CORDS and MACV
leadership; 2) a section reporting on a range of GVN programs as well enemy activities, which
was longest section of the report; 3) a section for the PSA to share his projections for his
province over the upcoming months and identify anticipated problems; and 4) a section for the
PSA to request CORDS at the corps or theater level to address unresolved issues in the PSA’s
province. This section on unresolved issues is analyzed later in the Province Report Use and
Purpose section of this chapter.
The province report evolved over time in both its structure and length, with most
significant changes occurring in 1968 and 1969. Originally running 15 to 20 single-spaced,
single-sided, typewritten pages; by 1970 most province reports were only five pages long. At the
theater and corps level, MACV and CORDS set the structure and length of the province report
through an array of directives, bulletins, and letters of instruction. These were issued by MACV
and the Office of CORDS in the IV Corps and included province report templates, which
outlined the sections of the report and provided guidance on how to write entries for each
section.
MACV and the Office of CORDS in the IV Corps issued province report templates at
least nine times from 1967 through 1972. The three main warrants for the province reports,
MACV joint directives 4-67, 2-69, and 4-70 all included templates. These directives are
discussed in further detail in the Province Report Warrants and Rules section of this chapter.
MACV issued another report template in a 1968 memo. The Office of CORDS, IV Corps

185

published five report templates. 586 The following nine documents with province reports
templates serve as the basis for my analysis of the structure of the province report.
Table 5.1
Documents with Province Report Templates
Document
Joint Directive 4-67
Memorandum
Joint Directive 2-69
Information Bulletin 78-70
Joint Directive 4-70
Letter of Instruction 3-71
Letter of Instruction 10-71
Letter of Instruction 40-71
Letter of Instruction 11-72

Issuing Entity
MACV
MACV
MACV
Office of CORDS, IV Corps
MACV
Office of CORDS, IV Corps
Office of CORDS, IV Corps
Office of CORDS, IV Corps
Office of CORDS, IV Corps

Date
October 30, 1967
August 26, 1968
July 1, 1969
February 2, 1970
December 1, 1970
January 11, 1971
March 12, 1971
August 4, 1971
April 20, 1972

The four-part structure was not present in the first version of the province report
described in MACV Joint Directive 4-67, the initial warrant for the report issued in October
1967. The structure of this first version had nine top level sections: 1) Status of the
Revolutionary Development Plan, 2) Project TAKEOFF, 3) Political/Psychological, 4) Security,
5) Economics, 6) Provincial Resources in Support of Pacification, 7) Provincial Administrative
Personnel and Organization, 8) USAID/JUSPAO Section, and 9) Required Actions.
Additionally, the reports also required appended comments from the province senior deputy
advisor and reports from all of the province advisory team’s district senior advisors. 587
The inclusion of these sections made the early province reports remarkably long, often
running 15 to 20 pages of single-space typed text. CORDS and MACV officials were concerned
about the length of the reports. In an August 1968 memo, the acting Assistant Chief of Staff for
CORDS noted that over time CORDS has “allowed the Province Report to become too long and

586

I found references to two additional templates issued by MACV and one issued by IV Corps Office of
CORDS that I could not locate at NARA.
587 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1-4.

186

repetitive.” 588 He noted that the province report should not be filled with statistical data and
routine reports on all programs because there were several other field program reports that
delivered this kind of regular information. In order to meet the goal of having more effective
reports of no more than five pages long, CORDS issued a new template structure. 589
These changes were further codified in MACV Joint Directive 2-69, issued on July 1, 1969,
the second of the three joint directives that provided the formal warrants for creation of the province
report. The template for the province report in this joint directive articulated the top-level fourparagraph structure—1) Overall Status of the Pacification Effort, 2) Priority Pacification Programs,
3) Future Problems and Projections, 4) Required Actions—that were in place for the remainder of
the report’s use by province advisory teams. MACV and CORDS also eliminated the enclosure of
district reports within the province report. 590 The changes in 1969 significantly reduced the length
of the province report. The third joint directive, MACV Joint Directive 4-70, did not produce

588

Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” August 26, 1968 attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office
of CORDS, IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview,” September 2,
1968, Container 168, Folder 101-01 Province Report 1968 (1); CORDS/Advisory Team 20 (Bac Lieu
Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records, general records; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
589 See the outlined structure in Table 5.2. Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of
Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province
Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overviews” attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy
for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps
Pacification Overview.”
590 Most South Vietnamese provinces during the war had four to eight districts. The US assigned small
advisory teams to districts, which consisted of approximately five people and were led by a district senior
advisor. These teams reported to their respective US province advisory team. District senior advisors were
responsible for producing one-page monthly district reports that gave an assessment of GVN programs
and the state of the insurgency in each district. From November 1967 through May 1969, province senior
advisors were responsible for adding these district reports to their province reports. MACV Joint
Directive 2-69 rescinded the inclusion of these district reports in the province report starting in June 1969.
Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Annex A, 1.

187

significant changes to the structure of the province report. The IV Corps, Office of CORDS
articulated the final meaningful modification to the province report in that region in a March 1971
Letter of Instruction. These modifications changed the title of “Priority Pacification Programs”
section to “Situation, Problems, and Analysis” and simplified the sub-sections within this section.591
A description of the evolution of the province report sections can be seen in Table 5.2.

591

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” March 12, 1971, 10–71, Box 63,
Folder 227-01 DRAC/CORDS Letter of Instruction 1971 (part 1 of 2); CORDS/MR4/Management
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/General Records; Records of Civil Operations for
Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast
Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

188

Table 5.2
Key Province Report Templates
MACV
Joint Directive 4-67
October 30, 1967
1) Status of the Revolutionary
Development Plan
2) Project TAKEOFF
3) Political/Psychological
a) General
b) VIS
c) Election activities
d) Minorities, Political, and
Religious Groups
4) Security
a) General
b) Enemy Situation
c) Infrastructure
d) Friendly Situation
5) Economics
a) General
b) Material Resources and
Transport
6) Provincial Resources in
Support of Pacification
a) RD Cadre Teams,
Truong Son Cadre and
other RD Teams
b) Static Census-Grievance
c) Self-Defense Forces
d) Technical Cadre
e) Police
7) Provincial Administrative
Personnel and Organization
8) USAID/JUSPAO Section
9) Required Actions
Inclusions
1. Comments of Province
Deputy Senior Advisor
2. District Senior Advisor’s
Reports
592

MACV
Memorandum
August 26, 1968
1) Overall Status of the
Pacification Effort
2a) Territorial Security
a) Enemy Situation
b) Friendly Situation
c) Status of RF and PF
2b) Phoenix/Phung Hoang
2c) Improved Local
Government
2d) Self Defense
2e) Revolutionary
Development and SelfHelp
2f) Economic Revival
2g) Resettlement and Care
of Refugees
2h) National Reconciliation
and Chieu Hoi
4) Required Actions. 592

MACV
Joint Directive 2-69

MACV
Joint Directive 4-70

July 1, 1969

December 1, 1970

1)

1)

2)

3)
4)

Overall Status of the
Pacification Effort
Priority Pacification
Programs
a) Territorial Security
b) PHOENIX/Phung
Hoang
c) Improved Local
Government
d) Self-Defense
e) Self-Development
f) Rural Economic
Development
g) Resettlement and
Care of Refugees
h) National Reconciliation
and Chieu Hoi
i) Information and Psyop
Future Problems and
Projections
Required Actions

It is not clear why section number 3 was skipped in this template.

2)

3)
4)

Overall Status of the
Pacification Effort
Priority Pacification
Programs
a) Territorial Security
b) Protection from
Terrorism
c) Peoples Self Defense
d) Local Administration
e) Greater National Unity
f) Brighter Life for War
Victims
g) People’s Information
h) Prosperity for All
Future Problems and
Projections
Required Actions

Office of CORDS, IV Corps
Letter of Instruction 10-71
March 12, 1971
1) Overall Status of the
Community Defense and
Local Development Effort
2) Situation, Problem, and
Analysis
a) Self Defense
b) Self Government
c) Self Development
d) Special Programs
3) Future Planning
4) Higher Headquarters
Action Requested

189

The structure of the province reports, as articulated in the templates and guidelines,
echoed and reinforced certain conceptualizations of the war, the provincial governments, the
civilian population, and the insurgency. Specifically, much of the province report was structured
to focus on GVN counterinsurgency and local development programs. For example, in the initial
version of the province report described in Joint Directive 4-67, paragraphs two through seven
instructed province advisory teams to report on a variety of government programs, offices, and
local defense force units, such as Rural Forces/Popular Forces (RF and PF), Phoenix/Phung
Hoang, Revolutionary Development People’s Groups and People’s Self Defense Groups,
Revolutionary Development Cadre Groups, and Chieu Hoi. In general, the instructions
encouraged the advisory teams to focus on the operational effectiveness of these programs and
GVN entities. For example, in a sub-section on Revolutionary Development Cadre Teams within
the section Provincial Resources in Support of Pacification, the template instructed authors to
“provide an evaluation of the effectiveness of cadre teams including significant accomplishments
during the reporting period.” 593 Starting with the March 1971 Letter of Instruction 10-71, the
Office of CORDS in the IV Corps reduced the instructions for a subsection on “Self
Development” to a list, without additional commentary, of GVN programs. It was implicit in
these instructions that province advisers understood that they were to highlight significant
program problems or accomplishments in these report sections. The streamlined instructions,
with its mere listing of programs, emphasized these programs’ centrality to the advisory teams’
analysis in their monthly province reports.
As discussed in Chapter Four and noted by Robert Komer and former US Army officer
and historian Richard Hunt, among others, the focus on operational effectiveness played to the
593

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 3.

190

US military and civilian agencies’ experience and proclivity towards measuring the performance
of bureaucratic offices and military units. Many of the instructions for the province report reveal
an apparent acceptance of the underlying logic of these GVN counterinsurgency programs at
face value. The instructions did not prompt PSAs to step back and interrogate the role of the
program within the full context and complexity of the war. Instead, the instructions asked
advisory teams to evaluate program effectiveness against the programs’ own internal logic, not
against the broader context of the war. For example, in asking advisory teams to write about
Chieu Hoi, instructions from the 1968 MACV memo suggested writing about the “quality of the
local inducement program; reception, processing and housing of Hoi Chanh [people who left the
insurgency to support the GVN]; resettlement and effective use of Hoi Chanh; and use of Hoi
Chanh in the attack against the VC infrastructure.” 594 The template for a later version of the
province report instructed province advisors to “briefly note status of and changes to the [Chieu
Hoi] program, to include (1) follow-up; (2) vocational training; (3) employment of returnees to
include GVN military employment.” 595 These instructions focused on evaluating the efficiency
of the Chieu Hoi program as it was constructed, but did not explicitly encourage PSAs to ask
broader questions, such as why did people leave the insurgency or what the unintended
consequences of the program were. 596

594

Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 3; Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps,
“Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
595 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” 2 of Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2.
596 For a brief overview of the Chieu Hoi program, see Thomas C. Thayer, War Without Fronts: The
American Experience in Vietnam (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985), 195–203. For a detailed study of
the program, see J. A. Koch, “The Chieu Hoi Program in South Vietnam, 1963-1971” (Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, 1973).

191

In the section about refugees, CORDS asked PSAs to focus on the effectiveness of
managing refugees, but did not ask them to describe what caused civilians to abandon their
houses. CORDS also did not ask PSAs to describe the effect of refugees on the war or how
becoming refugees affected people’s disposition towards the GVN and the insurgency. 597 As
discussed in Chapter Four, David Elliott pointed out the critical role that shelling by GVN forces
played in generating refugees. He noted that the GVN and US sometimes forced people to
abandon their homes through calculated political and military decisions. In Chapter Six, I have
noted that none of the province reports from the Dinh Tuong advisory team discussed the reasons
people fled their homes. None mention the shelling of civilians by GVN forces. None of the
myriad of province report instructions explicitly eliminated the option of discussing of GVN
officials generally mistreating civilians by shelling or other actions. In fact, as discussed later in
this chapter, many CORDS officials such as John Vann did urge advisors to provide critical and
honest analysis in their reports. Report instructions left province advisors with leeway to probe
the reasons families fled their homes, becoming refugees. For example, Joint Directive 2-69,
asked province advisors to “identify major changes and obstacles to achievement of provincial
goals” for the “resettlement and care of refugees.” 598 “Major changes and obstacles” certainly
gave advisors the flexibility to discuss refugees in any manner they choose. However, even this
open-ended language was framed in terms of managing a refugee crisis once it has occurred, not
in causal terms. Subsequent instructions in Joint Directive 4-70 for describing refugees in the

597

Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 3. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
598 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269.”

192

province report asked advisors to focus on the effectiveness of programs for aiding refugees,
again, not on the causes of the refugee problem. 599
In addition to framing the province report around government and military programs,
CORDS also focused the province report on GVN counterinsurgency plans. In the initial version
of the province report, the opening section was called “The Status of the Revolutionary
Development Plan.” This section served as an introductory overview of the report and focused
on the province’s annual revolutionary development plan. These documents were formal,
detailed plans for combating insurgent forces, developing government services, and supporting
the economy and the public. These were typically annual plans produced for each province, the
four regions, and the entire country. GVN officials produced the plans in close collaboration with
US officials. The report template within Directive 4-67 asks PSAs to consider if “the 1967
Province RD [Revolutionary Development] plan, including security aspects, [is] progressing as
scheduled.” 600 The focus on these GVN counterinsurgency plans was echoed in subsequent
province report templates and were manifested in the content of the province reports. This
framing helped to reinforce a conceptualization that clearly equated success in the war with
meeting the GVN counterinsurgency plan goals.
The instructions for the province report also shaped a particular view of insurgent forces.
The report template in Joint Directive 4-67 gave instructions to “include details and an
evaluation of significant enemy actions, both by Main Force and guerrilla elements, affecting

599 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “MACCORDS Field
Reporting System, Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/MC Directive 4-70,” December 1, 1970, Joint
Directive No 1-66 THRU Joint Directive No. 4-70, Box 63; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records
of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command
Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
600 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

193

pacification activities. Comment on indications of apparent enemy intentions to disrupt the
province pacification effort.” 601 These instructions steered the advisory teams towards describing
actions of insurgent combat units and their supporters. As will be discussed in Chapter Six,
discussions of insurgent forces in province reports focused almost exclusively on military
operations. There were no specific instructions in the initial province report template or
subsequent templates to explore underlying reasons for people joining or supporting the
insurgency, or even to describe the social or economic programs of insurgent forces. The
province report centered and reinforced the framing of the insurgency as a military problem. 602
While the province report reaffirmed the notion of the insurgency as a military challenge
in these report rules, MACV and CORDS also acknowledged the importance of the political and
economic aspects of the war. As stated in Joint Directive 4-67, for example, “the military effort
is the means, not the end.” 603 The first province report template from 1967 did include
opportunities for advisory teams to make multifaceted, thoughtful insights about the war. For
example, instructions for the Political/Psychological section in the same directive instructed

601

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 2.
602 This is not to claim that there were no in-depth analysis of the insurgency as a political force and
social phenomena. This analysis was, however, almost never present in the province reports I examined.
For examples of detailed studies of the insurgency produced by Americans during the war, see David W.
P. Elliott and W. A. Stewart, “Pacification and the Viet Cong System in Dinh Tuong: 1966-1967,”
Memorandum (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1969); Douglas Pike, Viet Cong: The
Organization and Techniques of the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam. (Cambridge, MA:
M.I.T. Press, 1966). For a list and discussion of reports produced by the RAND Corporation during the
war about the insurgency, see David W. P. Davison, “User’s Guide to the Rand Interviews in Vietnam”
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1972).
603 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467.”

194

advisory teams to “pay particular attention and report on any significant trends that you feel may
affect the pacification effort.” 604
Similar to the instructions in Joint Directive 4-67, guidance in the 1968 MACV memo
framed the description of the insurgent forces in terms of their military activities, asking advisory
teams to document only “significant enemy actions that affect pacification activities; indications
of apparent enemy intentions to disrupt the province pacification effort; and the degree of threat
[insurgents posed] to important GVN population and economic centers.” 605 These instructions
focused on actions that disrupted and threated government programs, people, and commerce.
Although not stated explicitly, the instructions conveyed an assumption that these actions were
kinetic acts—hit-and-run attacks, assignations, mortar attacks, roadside bombs, and booby-traps.
This kinetic framing of the insurgency remained throughout the entire lifespan of the province
report. MACV joint directives 2-69 and 4-70 and CORDS IV Corps Information Bulletin 78-70
and Letter of Instruction 3-71 all instructed advisors to document in the province report only
“significant enemy actions that affect pacification activities and indications of apparent enemy
intentions to disrupt the province pacification effort.” 606 These instructions continued to frame

604

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467.”
605 Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 1. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
606 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Tab A of Appendix 1 to Annex A, 14-704-70; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Tab A to Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1; Wilbur
Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military Assistance
Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2, 1; Wilbur Wilson,
Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military Assistance Command,
“DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 3-71,” January 11, 1971, Incl 1, 1, DRAC/CORDS Letter of
Instruction 1971 (part 1 of 2), Box 63, Folder 227-01; CORDS/MR4/Management Support
Division/Communications and Records Branch/General Records; Records of MACV Subordinate
Commands 1962-73, Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military

195

the insurgency solely as a disruptive force. In the streamlined instructions of Office of CORDS,
IV CORPS letters of instructions 10-71, 40-71, and 11-72, the “enemy situation” is characterized
as an element of territorial security under the subsection of “Self Defense.” 607 The province
report templates and accompanying instructions framed the enemy as a military force, not a
social movement, and the format did not ask PSAs to describe the social or economic programs
of the insurgency, or for the reasoning behind citizen support for the insurgents. The instructions
certainly did not directly ask PSAs and their advisory teams to consider insurgent forces as a
manifestation of a fundamental social revolution, as was suggested by some American advisors
and observers such as Jeffrey Race, John Paul Vann, and David Elliott.
The structure of the province report also framed the documentation of the war in terms of
progress. In Joint Directive 4-67, the province report template instructions for the Status of the
Revolutionary Development Plan section noted that PSAs’ should frame their analysis of this
plan as a statement of progress “either on schedule, ahead, or behind.” 608 In a 1968 memo
describing a revised province report template, CORDS broadened the focus in the province
report’s opening section beyond revolutionary development plans but still retained progress as a
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
607 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” Incl 1, 1; Wilbur Wilson, Deputy
for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command,
“Instruction for Preparation of Province Report, CORDS, DRAC Letter of Instruction (LOI) 40-71,”
August 4, 1971, Incl 1, 1, Box 63, Folder 227-01 DRAC/CORDS Letter of Instruction 1971 (part 1 of 2);
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta
Regional Assistance Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 11-72,” April 20, 1972, Incl 1, 1,
Container 1497, Folder Province Report ’72; Advisory Team 85 (Kien Tuong Province Advisory Team)
Administrative and Operational Records; general records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
608 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

196

focal point, noting that the section “should provide an overall evaluation of progress, lack
thereof, or regression in the pacification effort within the province.” 609 This progress framework
was repeated in instructions for the Territorial Security section of the province report, with the
guidance, “the province security situation has either improved, deteriorated, or remained the
same.” 610 In 1968, this progress construct was repeated down the chain of command. In a memo
from that year, Eugene Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS for the IV Corps, wrote that the province
report “should amount to ‘progress reports’ and not restatements of objectives or plans. If there
has been no progress in a given area, it should be so stated with a short discussion of the reasons
for lack of progress.” 611 In the province report template within Joint Directive 2-69, the first
sentence of the instructions for the Overall Status section directed that this section “should
provide an overall evaluation of the progress, lack of progress, or regression in the pacification
effort within the province.” 612 This sentence was repeated with the “progress, lack of progress, or
regression” phrase in MACV Joint Directive 4-70, as well as in an informational bulletin and
four letters of instruction issued by the Office of CORDS, IV Corps in 1970, 1971, and 1972.
The progress framework was not new to the American campaign in Vietnam. During the early

609 Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 1. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
610 Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 1. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
611 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Project TAKEOFF
Reporting - July 1968,” July 22, 1968, 1, Container 168, Folder 101-01 Province Report 1968 (1);
CORDS/Advisory Team 20 (Bac Lieu Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational
Records, general records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
612 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Tab A of Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

197

and mid-1960s, before the establishment of CORDS, MACV submitted Headway reports, a
combined intelligence report and operations summary, to the Pentagon. 613 The report’s title,
“Headway,” betrayed the unrealistically positive conflict assessment held by MACV’s first
commander, Paul Harkin. 614
Many province report sections were framed in the report templates using positive terms.
In that same 1968 memo, sections had headings such as “Improved Local Government” and
“Economic Revival.” Instructions for the latter section asked advisors to highlight crop
production, transportation as it affected commerce, local prices, local trade volume, and
“bottleneck[s] that impair free movement” of goods in and out of the province. An underlying
assumption that local trade and capitalist practices were reviving the economy appeared to be
embedded in the instructions and paragraph headers. IV Corps CORDS Information Bulletin 7870 had the section headers “Improve Territorial Security” and “Improve Local
Administration.” 615 These examples, embedded in the structure of the province report, implicitly
asserted that the situation in South Vietnam was bound to improve.
Several paragraph headings in the province reports reflected the names of programs, such
as “National Reconciliation and Chieu Hoi” and “Revolutionary Development and Self-Help,”
which were crafted by the GVN to convey particular messages. 616 For example, “National
Reconciliation and Chieu Hoi” suggested that insurgents’ laying down of arms and supporting

613 Cooper et al., “The American Experience with Pacification in Vietnam Volume II Elements of
Pacification,” 200; Elliott, The Vietnamese War, II: 857.
614 David Halberstam, The Best and the Brightest, Twentieth Anniversary (New York: Ballantine Books,
1992), 183–87.
615 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” 1–2 Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2.
616 Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 3. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”

198

the government was part of reconciling the nation’s conflict. As discussed earlier, the
instructions for addressing refugees steered the advisory teams towards writing about the
management of refugees, not to discussing the underlying causes or repercussions of creating
large refugee populations. The section header, “Resettlement and Care of Refugees,” reflected
this incomplete assessment of the refugee challenge. 617 Resettlement and care suggested a focus
on the management of people who were refugees, not on the causes of their refugee status or the
consequences of their predicament. Other GVN programs with particularly positive names
included “Protect the People From Terrorism,” “Greater National Unity,” “Brighter Life for War
Victims,” and “Prosperity For All.” 618

Province Report Creation and Dissemination
Province Senior Advisors, who led US province advisory teams and were responsible for
advising their GVN province chief counterpart, were responsible for producing province reports
every month. Although every province report was written under the signature of the PSA, these
were not authored by the PSA on his own. Advisors on a province advisory team who were
assigned to helping and observing a GVN program were responsible for drafting the
corresponding section of the province report. A Chieu Hoi section advisor, for example, would
write the Chieu Hoi section of the monthly province report for his PSA. Often PSAs, deputy
PSAs, or other officers would send memos to their advisory teams with writing assignments for
the upcoming province report. For example, the adjutant officer for the Kien Hoa province
advisory team issued a directive on May 3, 1971 with detailed instructions on who should
617

Earl F Cole, Brigadier General, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification
Overviews,” 3. Attached to Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS,
IV Corps, “Province Pacification Reports and Corps Pacification Overview.”
618 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” 2 Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2.

199

contribute entries to province reports and how those contributions should be prepared. The
adjutant instructed, “Annex A provides a detailed breakdown of subjects to be covered. Each Div
[Division] Chief will insure that all data submitted is in the proper format, is correct as to
context, and has been edited for grammar, punctuation, and spelling.” 619 The directive continued
with instructions on formatting, delivery, and deadlines for the report entries. Later in the same
directive, the adjutant assigned the responsibilities for writing different portions of the province
report to various advisors. Assignments for the pacification programs sections of the province
report were distributed with these instructions:
(a) Paragraph 2a(1) thur (6) is prepared by S2, S3 & RF/PF, NLD, PSD, Phung Hoang and
Chieu Hoi advisors respectively.
(b) Paragraphs 2b(1), (3) and (4) is prepared by NDL and 2b(2) by PSYOPS.
(c) Paragraphs 2c and 2d are prepared by NLD. 620
It appears that officers on the Kien Hoa advisory team, in the IV Corps, issued these types of
writing assignments for their province reports on a monthly basis during at least 1970 and
1971. 621 Officers on the Sadec and Dinh Tuong advisory teams, both of the IV Corps, also issued
similar province report writing assignments for advisory team members. 622

619

R O Brown, CPT, AGC, Adjutant, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team),
“Preparation of Province/District Report, Kien Hoa Directive 381-21,” May 3, 1971, 2, Box 1541, Folder
227-01 Directive 1971; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team) Administrative and
Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
620 R O Brown, CPT, AGC, Adjutant, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team),
“Preparation of Province/District Report, Kien Hoa Directive 381-21,” 3.
621 David M Andrews, LTC, IN, Staff Coordinator, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory
Team), “Province Report, Information Bulletin 26-70,” March 24, 1970, 26–70, Box 1534, Folder 160101 Information Bulletins #3 1970; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team)
Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD; David M Andrews, LTC, IN, Chief of Staff, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory
Team), “Province Report for August 1970, Information Bulletin 190-70,” August 22, 1970, 190–70, Box
1534, Folder 1601-01 Information Bulletins #2 1970 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory
Team) Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of

200

Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD; R O Brown, CPT, AGC, Adjutant, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team),
“Preparation of Province/District Report, Kien Hoa Directive 381-21”; Amil J. Eckhart, LTC, FA, Deputy
Province Senior Advisor, Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “Interim Instructions
for Preparation of Province Report,” March 25, 1971, Box 1543, Folder 160-01 Kien Hoa Directives
1971; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records
1968-1973: General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; R O Brown, CPT, AGC, Adjutant,
Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “Preparation of Province/District Report, Kien
Hoa Directive 381-21,” 381–21.
622 F. David James, Province Senior Advisor, Advisory Team 65 (Sadec Province), “Input to the Province
Monthly Report for August 1968,” August 28, 1968, Container 953, Folder 1601-09A Province Report
1968; CORDS/Advisory Team 65 (Sadec Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records,
general records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions;
Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives
at College Park, College Park, MD; W H Stafford, CPT, AG, Admin Officer, Advisory Team 66 (Dinh
Tuong Province Advisory Team), “Province and Field Program Reports for November,” November 21,
1969, Box 1027, Folder 160-09A Input Field Reports -- 1969; Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province
Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Victor A. Warnicky, Maj, MI, Phung Hoang Advisor, Advisory Team 56
(Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team), “Province Monthly Report, Protect the People for Terrorism,”
November 25, 1970, Box 892, Folder 1601-10A PSA Monthly Report -- 1970; Advisory Team 56 (Phong
Dinh Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records,
1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions;
Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives
at College Park, College Park, MD; Victor A. Warnicky, Maj, MI, Phung Hoang Advisor, Advisory Team
56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team), “Province Monthly Report, Protect the People from
Terrorism,” October 25, 1970, Box 892, Folder 1601-10A PSA Monthly Report -- 1970; Advisory Team
56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General
Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Victor A. Warnicky, Maj, MI, Phung Hoang Advisor,
Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team), “Province Monthly Report, Protect the People
from Terrorism,” September 25, 1970, Box 892, Folder 1601-10A PSA Monthly Report -- 1970;
Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records
1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa
Province Advisory Team), “Input to Province Monthly,” October 27, 1969, Box 1529, Folder 1601-03
Input to Province Monthly Report 1969; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team)
Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “Input to Monthly Report,”
September 28, 1970, Box 1536, Folder 1601-09A Input to Province Monthly Report; Advisory Team 88
(Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records 1968-1973 General

201

When an advisory team, led by the PSA, had assembled and finalized a province report,
the team was responsible for forwarding several copies to its respective CORDS office at the
corps level, which in turn sent copies of province reports to the corps field command and MACV
headquarters in Saigon. MACV headquarters would distribute the province reports widely,
including to various civilian agencies under the CORDS umbrella, various CORDS offices, the
Deputy Commander for CORDS and his office, the US Ambassador to South Vietnam, US
Pacific Command in Hawaii, and the Office of the President in Washington DC. 623 Illustration
5.1 reproduces a diagram issued by MACV in 1967 that described the distribution of province
and other reports.

Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team),
“Input to Monthly Report,” October 28, 1970, Box 1536, Folder 1601-09A Input to Province Monthly
Report; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records
1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Louis P. Ariff, CPT MI, Phung Hoang
Advisor, Vinh Long Province, Advisory Team 68 (Vinh Long Province Advisory Team), “Input for
Monthly Report,” December 28, 1971, Container 36, Folder Input to Province Profiles/Province Monthly
Reports Vinh Long - 1971; CORDS MR4/MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
623 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 2.

202

Illustration 5.1
Annex Q: Reports Flow Chart 624
MACV/JUSPAO/AID/OSA Joint Directive 4-67
MACCORDS Field Reporting System

624

Reproduced from Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 4-67,” Annex Q.

203

Over time, corps headquarters issued additional instructions on the mechanics of
collecting and disseminating the province reports, resulting in distribution changes and variations
across the four corps of South Vietnam. 625 Despite these variations, officers at the MACV and
corps level consistently emphasized that the reports were widely distributed and read and could
be sent to the highest reaches of the US military and government. 626 When first describing the
province report in 1967, MACV indicated that the report would be distributed to headquarters in
Saigon, Hawaii, and Washington DC. 627 The IV Corps CORDS headquarters indicated in an
August 1968 memo that the province report was “the PSA’s most direct means of addressing the
DEPCORDS, IV CTZ on matters pertaining to pacification.” 628 In 1972, the IV Corp Deputy for
CORDS noted that the province report was “widely disseminated to interested offices and

625

For example, in the IV Corps, arrangements for the delivery of province reports were coordinated by
the IV Corp headquarters, which provided an air courier service. Robert C. Payette, Assistant
DEPCORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports Pick-Up
Instructions, CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin 367-72,” November 3, 1972, 367–72, Container 5,
Folder 227-01 CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin # 361-72 thru 390-72; CORDS MR4/Management
Support Division, CORDS/Delta Region Assistance Command Information Bulletins 1971-1973,
CORDS/DRAC Info Bulletin #361-72 to #430-72; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development
Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975,
Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
626 This wide distribution was, however, carefully managed. In a directive noting that province advisors
had been forwarding province reports to people outside of the approved reporting chain of command, the
Deputy for CORDS in the IV Corps, noted that only the IV Corps headquarters “had the authority and
responsibility for distribution of the monthly Province Pacification Reports externally from the province.
MACCORDS, Saigon only has the authority and responsibility for distribution of these reports externally
from the IV Corps Tactical Zone.” Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV
CTZ, “Distribution of Monthly Province Pacifications Reports, CORDS IV Corps Directive 33-69,”
November 12, 1968, 33–69, Box 18, Folder 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Directives -- 1968;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
627 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 2.
628 F. David James, Province Senior Advisor, Advisory Team 65 (Sadec Province), “Input to the Province
Monthly Report for August 1968.”

204

agencies in Vietnam and in the United States.” 629 A year earlier, the same officer, as Assistant
Deputy for CORDS in the IV Corp, used the wide distribution of the reports to emphasize the
importance of writing clearly and accurately. He reminded province senior advisors that the
Preparation of the Province Report should be conducted bearing in mind that they are
distributed, exactly as submitted by the provinces, to higher headquarters, i.e.
DEPCORDS, MACORDS, COMUSMACV, and the Office of the President in
Washington. Accordingly, great care should be exercised to ensure the accuracy and
readability by persons removed from the actual situation. 630
By pointing out the wide and far-reaching distribution of the province reports, officials at
MACCORDS and the IV Corp emphasized the importance of the province report to the province
advisors and their teams. Robert Komer also indicated the important value the report had for
higher levels of command, as he noted that the report was “used primarily to identify matters
needing attention by higher echelons.” 631 As discussed later in this chapter, officials from the IV
Corps Office of CORDS repeatedly emphasized the importance of the reports and the need for
clarity, conciseness, and precision. Suggesting that province reports may travel as far as the
White House was one way to make that case.
The number of copies of province reports that province advisory teams were responsible
for producing changed over the course of the war. Initially, MACV headquarters required that it
receive 10 copies of every province report. 632 By July 1969 it required 25 copies. 633 The IV
Corps headquarters demanded more copies of the report from each province—25 copies starting
with the first province reports in November 1967, 40 copies by August 1968, 45 copies by
629

Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance
Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 11-72,” 11–72.
630 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” 2.
631 “Impact of Pacification on Insurgency in South Vietnam,” 9.
632 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 2.
633 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Annex A, 1.

205

November 1968, 70 copies by January 1970, 80 copies by November 1970, and down to 75
copies by August 1971, a level which lasted through the end of the province advisory teams’
existence in February 1973. 634 The growing number of reports that province teams in the IV
Corps were required to produce—going from 25 to 70 copies in just over two years—provides

634

Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “New
Reporting Procedures,” November 20, 1967, Box 39, Folder 227-01 DRAC/CORDS Memos -- 1969;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Eugene P. Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps,
“Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports (RCS MACCORDS
01.67) and Field Program Reports (RCS MACCORDS 02-67),” August 27, 1968, Container 168, Folder
101-01 Province Report 1968 (1); CORDS/Advisory Team 20 (Bac Lieu Province Advisory Team)
Administrative and Operational Records, general records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Eugene P. Bable,
Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV Corps Information
Bulletin 91-68,” November 15, 1968, 91–68, Box 18, Folder 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Directives -1968, 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Information Bulletins -- 1968 (Part 2 of 2); CORDS/MR4/Management
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations
for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD;
John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS,
Headquarters, DMAC, “Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports
(RCS MACCORDS 31.01), Field Program Reports and Other Associated Reports for January 1970,
CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 16-70,” January 12, 1970, Box 48, Folder 227-01 CORDS/DMAC
Information Bulletins 1-70 -- 60-70; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch, General Records; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command
Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS,
Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports
Instructions, CORDS, DMAC Information Bulletin No. 509-70,” November 13, 1970, 509–70, Box 50,
Folder 227-01 CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 481-70 -- 515-70; CORDS/MR4/Management
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations
for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD;
Robert C. Payette, Asst. DEPCORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly
Reports Pick-Up Instructions, CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 329-71,” August 17, 1971, 329–71,
Box 65, Folder 227-01 CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 301-71 -- 398-71;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Robert C. Payette, Acting Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Recurring Reports Submissions
Instructions, CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin 9-73.”

206

evidence of the growing distribution that the province reports enjoyed over the course of its
production. This also provides some evidence that at least some officials in CORDS and MACV
found value in the province reports.

Province Report Use and Purpose
MACV and CORDS primarily used the province report as a means for province senior advisors
and their teams to send descriptions and assessments of GVN officials, programs, and insurgent
activity to higher echelons for review. The province report was an important document for
briefing officials on the state of the war and the performance of the GVN at the province level.
However, it is difficult to discern the precise use of the reports. Although many memos and
directives spoke of province reports being read by officials at various levels of command,
including the Office of the President, these documents rarely specified precisely how the
province report was used.
The CORDS field overview report was the only one MACV and CORDS specifically
designed to reuse information from the province report. The monthly field overview report was
essentially a corps-level equivalent of the province report, providing a narrative account of the
counterinsurgency campaign and GVN programs across the entire corps. The corps senior
advisor was responsible for producing these reports, although in practice sometimes the Corps
DEPCORDS would sign, and presumably produce, the reports. MACV Joint Directives 4-67, 269, and 4-70 all stated that the senior advisor would use “the Province Report as a basis” for
creating field overview report. 635

635

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 2; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 2-69,” Annex A, 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command,
Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Annex A, 1.

207

Only the Actions Requested section of the province report was designed to elicit specific
responses from higher levels of command, particularly at the corps-level. These sections were
not extensively used in many province reports and often only had cursory entries. 636 Instructions
in MACV Joint Directive 4-67 for the Actions Requested section indicated that PSAs were to use
the section to “indicate what additional support or resources are required from outside the
province to overcome specific obstacles encountered or to exploit a successful effort already
underway.” 637 MACV framed this section as a kind of last resort to get the support or actions
desired by the PSA. The Joint Directive 4-67 instructions noted, “Every effort should have been
made to resolve these requirements through established channels.” 638 The instructions went on to
note that the section should only be used “when a problem cannot be resolved at province level,
and then only after normal procedures have proved fruitless.” 639 When it was used, CORDS
expected that the section would contain enough specific detail to enable a response to resolve the
problem. 640 In a July 1968 memo to province advisors, the Office of CORDS, IV Corps
suggested that PSAs break the section down into three subsections: statement of problem, actions

636 In fact, The Office of CORDS, IV Corps depreciated the use of this section of the province report by
April 1972. Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional
Assistance Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 11-72,” 3.
637 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, Appendix 1, 4. Instructions for the Actions Requested section were repeated in MACV
joint directives 2-69 and 4-70. Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al.,
“Joint MACV Directive 2-69,” Annex A, Appendix 1, Tab A, 2; Headquarters, United States Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Annex A, Appendix 1, Tab A, 3.
638 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, Appendix 1, 42-69.
639 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, Appendix 1, 4.
640 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, Appendix 1, 4.

208

taken to date, and action requested. 641 A subsequent directive from the same office detailed the
actions that a PSA should take to resolve problems and how he should document persistent
problems in the province report. 642 In addition, the proper construction of the Required Action
section was reiterated in memos offering corrective advice. In a December 1967 memo, for
example, the IV Corps DEPCORDS, noted that “a large number of required actions [in the
November 1967 province reports] were requests with little or no indication as to what previous
attempts were made to resolve the problems.” 643 The DEPCORDS then went on to reiterate the
Joint Directive 4-67 instructions on how to complete the section. In another example, the IV
Corps Office of CORDS issued a set of instructions reiterating the spirit of the joint directives’
guidance, reminding province teams that the section should only be used “when a problem
cannot be resolved at province level, and then only after normal procedures have proved
fruitless.” 644 These rules were repeated each month from December 1968 to January 1973 in a

641

Eugene P. Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Administrative
Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports (RCS MACCORDS 01.67) and Field
Program Reports (RCS MACCORDS 02-67).”
642 Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Province Report - Required Actions, CORDS IV Corps Directive 2469,” February 13, 1969, Box 39, Folder 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Directives -- CY 1969 (Part 2 of 2);
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
643 Eugene P. Bable, Acting Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, Office of CORDS, “Required Action,”
December 21, 1967, Box 39, Folder 227-01 DRAC/CORDS Memos -- 1969; CORDS/MR4/Management
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations
for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
644 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 145-68,” December 19, 1968, Box 18, Folder 227-01 CORDS IV Corps
Directives -- 1968, 227-01 CORDS IV Corps Information Bulletins -- 1968 (Part 2 of 2);
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD to Robert C. Payette, Acting Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Recurring Reports Submissions
Instructions, CORDS/DRAC Information Bulletin 9-73.” This set of instructions was repeated in other

209

set of procedures concerning province teams’ preparation of monthly reports, including the
province report.
MACV Joint Directive 4-67 and the two succeeding joint directives required that the
CORDS field overview reports include a response to any required actions documented in
province reports. The joint directives noted, “each Corps will comment with special attention to
corrective action taken at the Corps level on the “required actions” contained in the Province
Reports.” 645 Although the required actions section was not always completed in the province
report, PSAs documented problems in the section with sufficient regularity to prompt the IV
Corps Office of CORDS to create a form to facilitate a response and to document it in the field
overview report. The form included a copy of the required actions from the province report, a
form identifying which official within the IV Corps Office of CORDS should address the issue,
which province the issue came from, a reiteration of the purpose of the required actions section,
and instructions on how to respond to the issue. Finally, the form included the written response
by the CORDS official. This written response became part of the field overview reports as an
attachment. 646

instructions, such as Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters,
Delta Military Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS
Letter of Instruction (LOI) 3-71.”
645 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 2; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 2-69,” Annex A, 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command,
Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Annex A, 1.
646 Paul K. McNamara, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS,
DMAC, “Required Action on Monthly Province Report,” August 5, 1969, Container 15, Folder Chron Aug 1969; CORDS MR4/MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Paul K.
McNamara, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, DMAC,
“Required Action on Monthly Province Report,” August 6, 1969, Container 15, Folder Chron - Aug 1969;
CORDS MR4/MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

210

Returning to earlier discussion in this chapter of Joanne Yates’ communication
framework, the province report was an upwardly reported document containing qualitative
descriptions of programs, actions, and incidents in each province. The main purpose of the report
was to inform and shape actions generally, not to document specific transactions, or to affect
certain actions—with the exception of the required action section. A January 1971 letter of
instruction from the IV Corps Office of the DEPCORDS noted, for example, that the content of
the province report should “contribute directly and significantly to an overall evaluation of
pacification within the province.” 647 The emphasis on contributing to an overall evaluation
stressed the holistic value of the province report. It was designed to tell a story that could stand
on its own. It was not intended to be a report that served as a vessel of data for subsequent
aggregation. The province report was intended to serve as a narrative hedge against the broader
trend of quantitative reporting that emerged in 1967, as described earlier in this chapter.

Province Report Warrants and Rules
The province report was initially authorized by Joint MACV/JUSPAO/AID/OSA Directive
Number 4-67, “MACCORDS Field Reporting System,” on October 30, 1967. 648 The directive
established the framework for the central reporting system of CORDS with the purpose of
establishing “an effective field reporting system that provides a basis for management and
evaluation of…CORDS activities.” 649 The system was also designed to “assure effective

647

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71.”
648 MACV referred to Military Assistance Command, Vietnam; JUSPAO referred to Joint United States
Public Affairs Office; USAID referred to United States Agency for International Development; OSA
referred to Office of the Special Assistant to the Ambassador. Headquarters, United States Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-67.”
649 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” 1.

211

coordination of all reporting requirements within the CORDS area of interest.” 650 MACV Joint
Directive 4-67 superseded Joint OCO/MACV Directive 2-67, issued on January 16, 1967, which
provided the warrant for the Special Joint Narrative Report on Revolutionary Development (the
immediate predecessor of the province report), an annex of statistical reports, and the Hamlet
Evaluation System. 651 Directive 2-67 superseded Joint MACV/JUSPAO/AID/OSA Directive
Number 1-66, issued on March 18, 1966, which provided the warrant for the Special Joint Report
on Revolutionary Development and several monthly agency reports. 652
MACV and several civilian agencies reissued the MACCORDS Field Reporting System
directive two more times in 1969 (Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/MC Directive 2-69) and 1970
(Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/MC Directive 4-70). 653 These subsequent directives included
substantive changes to the province report and the field reporting system, although many
components of the report and larger system remained the same throughout all three directives.
The MACCORDS Field Reporting System directive sat within a network of other memos and
directives that governed MACV recordkeeping practices, such as MACV Directive 335-27,
Report Control Procedures, which defined the process for creating and defining new types of
reports. 654

650 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” 1.
651 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam and Office of Civil Operations,
“Joint MACV Directive 2-67,” 1.
652 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 166,” 1.
653 MC referred to Mission Coordinator, US Embassy, Vietnam. Headquarters, United States Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 2-69”; Headquarters, United States
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70.”
654 Dennis J. Dorsey, LTC, Asst AG, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command,
Vietnam, “MACCORDS Reports Control System (RCS),” September 24, 1969, Box 41, Folder 227-01
CORDS IV Corps Info Bulletins -- 401-69 to 499-69; CORDS/MR4/Management Support
Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,

212

The MACCORDS Field Reporting System was not a data system, but a collection of
policy statements that provided the warrant for creating a series of reports—some narrative,
some statistical—along with sample report forms prescribing the elements and structure of each
report. Joint Directive 4-67 described 33 reports that comprised the field reporting system. The
number of reports grew to 56 with Joint Directive 2-69 and then fell to 44 with Joint Directive 470. 655 According to all three directives, the reports were divided into two groups. The first group
in the reporting system was the province report and the CORDS Field Overview. The second
group was “civil and military CORDS field program reports” that focused on counterinsurgency
programs run by the GVN and closely monitored by US advisors. 656 Many of the field program
reports had significant statistical components.
The degree to which instructions were stated as mandates or suggestions varied among
the three joint directives. For example, MACV presented the format of the province report in
Joint Directive 4-67 prescriptively, noting that “the report will be prepared in the format”
given. 657 In directives 2-69 and 4-70, MACV offered the formats as recommendations, as both
directives noted that the templates provided “should be considered as indicating the subjects of
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD; Elias C.
Townsend, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Reports
and Statistics: Reports Control Procedures, Change 2, Directive 335-27,” August 7, 1969, Box 29 MACV
Directive 335-15 THRU MACV Directive 335-32, Folder MACV directive 335-27 (Change 2) Reports
control system 7 Aug 1969; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the Adjutant General’s
Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) 19581973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
655 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 1 to Annex S, 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et
al., “Joint MACV Directive 2-69,” Annex Z, 1–4; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Annex Z, 1–3.
656 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” 2; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV
Directive 2-69,” 2; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 4-70,” 1.
657 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

213

primary interest to this headquarters [MACV]. There is no intent to require inclusion of specific
subject matter.” 658 This flexibility provided corps-level headquarters the policy space to specify
their own requirements and recommendations for the province report. This flexibility was echoed
at the corps level. For example, an August 1968 memo from the IV Corps Office of CORDS
provided a suggested outline for province reports but noted that the outline should “not be
regarded as a rigid format” but as a “suggested form which can be modified depending on the
unique requirements of the specific province.” 659
The Office of CORDS at IV Corps headquarters issued a wide array of directives,
memos, and letters of instruction about the province report throughout the report’s five-year
existence. On November 20, 1967, less than a month after the issuance of Joint Directive 4-67,
The CORDS IV Corps office issued a memo that reiterated the establishment of the CORDS
field reporting, highlighting some sections of Joint Directive 4-67, and also providing additional
instruction on where and how the corps’ province advisory teams should submit reports,
including copy count. 660 This memo provided an example of how corps-level orders and
instructions emphasized and restated theater-level directives. They also provided further
clarification for detailed instructions that were found in policy frameworks established at the
theater level. In another example, the same office issued a similar directive in May 1968 that
included supplemental instructions to Joint Directive 4-67. 661 A July 1968 memo from the IV

658

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et
al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.
659 F. David James, Province Senior Advisor, Advisory Team 65 (Sadec Province), “Input to the Province
Monthly Report for August 1968,” 1.
660 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “New
Reporting Procedures.”
661 Earl W. Fletcher, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, US Army Advisory Group, IV CTZ, “CORDS
Reporting System, Directive 335-6,” May 9, 1968, Box 866, 1601-10A NLD Monthly Reports, 1967;
Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records

214

Corps Office of CORDS provided instructions that reached down to very detailed levels,
including instructions for how to reproduce and staple reports. 662 These two memos filled out the
details within the scope articulated by the MACV joint directives. This reiteration of province
report procedures cascaded all the way down to the province level. For example, in August 1968,
the PSA for Sadec Province wrote a memo to his section leaders and district senior advisors
which enclosed a memo from the IV Corps CORDS office. In this situation, the PSA had made
the decision to have the memo retyped for further distribution by a member of his province
team. 663 Downward communication articulating the rules governing the creation of province
reports were repackaged and repeated down the command echelons.
Each month, the IV Corps Office of CORDS issued memos and letters of instruction to
the province advisory teams, providing guidance for creating the province and field program
reports. Although the instructions changed over time, much of the same guidance was repeated
from month to month. It appears the IV Corps Office of CORDS sent out these monthly
instructions from December 1967 until the province advisory program concluded in February
1973. 664 Through at least August 1968 these monthly instructions were in the form of a memo
from the Assistant DEPCORDS for the IV Corps that listed the number of copies required for
1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
662 Reports were to be mimeographed rather than dittoed, and stapled, when necessary, in the upper left
corner. Eugene P. Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Administrative
Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports (RCS MACCORDS 01.67) and Field
Program Reports (RCS MACCORDS 02-67).”
663 F. David James, Province Senior Advisor, Advisory Team 65 (Sadec Province), “Input to the Province
Monthly Report for August 1968.”
664 I was not able to find at NARA IV Corps monthly instructions for province reports and field reports
for the following months: November 1967, January through April 1968, September through October
1968, April through December 1969, April 1970, June 1971, and February 1973. I presume that the IV
Corps produced these monthly instructions during all the months that the province report was produced,
and certainly since November 1968. I suspect that either these monthly instructions were at NARA and I
did not find them or that they were lost before being transferred to NARA.

215

each field program report and the province report, instructions on the size of paper and how to
reproduce the province report, as well as stapling and other instructions for field program
reports. 665 By November 1968, the monthly instructions contained a memo from the corps
Assistant DEPCORDS, which included pick-up instructions and deadlines for the monthly
reports, along with three enclosures. 666 The first of these enclosures was a list of all reports the
province teams were responsible for producing and the numbers of copies for each report. The
second enclosure provided instructions for the province report, and the third provided
instructions for the field program reports. 667 The Province report instructions contained eight
rules:
1. Number of copies to be delivered.
2. Paper size and reproduction method.
3. Address the poor use of Regional Force/Popular Force units in the Upgrade
Territorial Security paragraph.
4. The topics to be addressed in the province report as outlined by MACCORDS at
MACV headquarters in an August 26, 1968 memo.
5. A reminder that province teams cannot deviate from this outlined format.
6. Instructions on the Required Actions field.
7. Instructions on the district senior advisors’ reports, which were attached to the
province reports.
8. Instructions that the PSAs will add their “concurrence or nonconcurrence” on each of
the district reports. 668

665

Eugene P. Bable, Assistant DEPCORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “Administrative
Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports (RCS MACCORDS 01.67) and Field
Program Reports (RCS MACCORDS 02-67).”
666 Because I was not able to find September and October 1968 monthly instructions at NARA, it may be
possible that instructions changed during one of these two months instead of November 1968.
667 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 91-68.”
668 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 91-68.”

216

The structure of the monthly instructions—a cover memo and three enclosures—stayed
the same throughout the remainder of the province advisory program. As discussed earlier in this
chapter, the province report instructions in the second enclosure changed over time. For example,
the December 1968 instructions added commentary to the Required Actions instructions and
additional details about completing the Upgrade Territorial Security paragraph. 669 The February
1969 instructions modified the province report with additional information on the Future
Problems and Projections section. This was detailed in a February 10, 1969 memo from MACV
headquarters. 670 By January 1970, the monthly instructions were reduced to five rules:
1. Number of copies to be delivered.
2. Paper size and reproduction method.
3. Reference to MACV Joint Directive 2-69 for the report’s format.
4. Alternative instructions for the Required Actions section.
5. Additional instructions for the Required Actions section. 671
In February 1970, there were significant changes to the monthly province report
instructions, although the instruction format was unchanged. The updated instructions enclosed a

669

Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 145-68.”
670 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV Corps, Office of CORDS, IV Corps,
“Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province Reports (RCS MACCORDS 0167), Field Program Reports (RCS MACCORDS 33.02) and Other Associated Reports for February 1969,
CORDS IV Corps Directive 28-69,” February 21, 1969, Container 168, Folder 101-01 Province Report
1968 (1); CORDS/Advisory Team 20 (Bac Lieu Province Advisory Team) Administrative and
Operational Records, general records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
671 John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Headquarters, DMAC, “Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province
Reports (RCS MACCORDS 31.01), Field Program Reports and Other Associated Reports for January
1970, CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 16-70,” Inclosure 2. I was not able to locate the monthly
instructions from April 1969 through December 1969. The instruction changes may have occurred during
one of those missing months.

217

new province report formatting template that was geared toward reporting on the progress of
GVN programs described in the 1970 Pacification and Development Plan. The new instructions
highlighted three additional rules: 1) that some province reports are read by the highest levels of
command, so the printing quality must be high; 2) the paper size, length limit, one-sided printing
only, and number of copies to produce; 3) instructions on the Required Actions section. 672
Although some details changed, these instructions remained essentially the same through April
1971. 673 The May 1971 instructions added more details on the Required Actions section. 674
Some additional minor modifications withstanding, these instructions remained basically
unchanged through the end of the province advisory program. 675

Province Report Critiques
In addition to documents providing warrants and mandates for creating the province reports, and
the rules providing guidance on how to write and disseminate the reports, there were additional
memos, directives, and letters of instructions sent down the chain of command in order to
provide feedback on the quality of province reports submitted by advisory teams. Many of these
672

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70.”
673 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports Pick-Up Instructions CORDS, DMAC Information Bulletin
136-71,” April 21, 1971, Box 64, Folder 227-01 CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 131-71 -- 153-71;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
674 Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional
Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports Pick-Up Instructions CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 18671,” May 17, 1971, Box 64, Folder 227-01 CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 20-71 -- 200-71;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
675 Robert C. Payette, Acting Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta
Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Recurring Reports Submissions Instructions, CORDS/DRAC
Information Bulletin 9-73.”

218

critiques, which noted a pattern of shortcomings in the composition of reports, were not
addressed to individual province senior advisors, but to all PSAs, either country-wide or within a
corps. These reviews often included suggestions for improving the reports, as well as further
guidance on their proper completion. For example, a division director in the IV Corps CORDS
office highlighted several shortcomings with recent province reports in a December 1972 memo
to PSAs. He pointed out the misuse of program terminology, typographic errors, excessive
length, sections with blank entries, too small margins, and poor reproduction quality. 676 In a May
1969 memo, John Paul Vann, DEPCORDS for the IV Corps at the time, expressed his concern
over the quality of province reports in unambiguous terms: “in reading the Province Reports this
month I again note the poor grammar, the poor spelling, the verbosity and the lack of
proofreading.” 677 He also suggested that province teams “select one member of the team who has
some ability as a writer. Submit drafts to this person and allow him to write a meaningful and
short report.” 678 Vann’s memo is a remarkable evaluation that encapsulates several key
challenges with the province report. I will return to this memo several times in the remainder of
this chapter and in Chapter Seven. Vann’s memo is reproduced at the end of this section.
Beyond production quality and editorial issues, three areas of concern repeatedly arose in
the reviews of province reports and other reports written by advisory teams. These concerns
restated issues discussed by province report warrants, rules, and other memos concerning report
676

Wendell P Knowles, Director, Plans, Programs and Reports Division, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Province Monthly Reports,” December 14, 1972,
Container 976, Folder 1601-09A Province Monthly Report Guidelines--1972; Advisory Team 65 (Sadec
Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Records, general records; Records of Civil
Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States
Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College
Park, MD.
677 John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Military Assistance
Command, “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
678 John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Military Assistance
Command, “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.

219

writing in CORDS. The first area was the importance of thoughtful, careful analysis in the
reports. The second area of concern was the importance of writing concise, efficient, and timely
reports. Finally, many CORDS and MACV officials were concerned about minimizing the
report-writing burden on advisory teams.
Within the framework of the warrants, rules, and report templates, CORDS officials at
the theater and corps level encouraged PSAs to use their judgment to determine the which topics
to highlight in the province report. More than once, the IV Corps Office of CORDS noted that
“there is no intent to require inclusion of specific subject matter” in the province report. 679 They
also pointed out that the content of the reports were, to a great extent, at “the discretion of the
province senior advisor.” 680 In a 1971 Letter of Instruction, the same office noted that, “specific
subject matter is left to the discretion of the PSA within these guidelines.” 681 With this leeway
came the expectation that province seniors and their teams would put careful, analytical thought
into the province reports and not just repeat statistical data found in other reports. The original
warrant for the province report, Joint Directive 4-67, contained the instructions that “the material
provided should be interpretive in nature and contribute directly and significantly to an overall
evaluation of pacification within the province.” 682 This guidance was repeated at the corps level
as well. In a March 1971 letter of instruction, the Assistant DEPCORDS for the IV Corps
declared that the “Province Report should be an informal, informative, and analytical (as
679

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71,” 1; Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS,
Headquarters, Delta Military Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” 1.
680 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71,” 1.
681 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” 1.
682 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

220

contrasted with purely statistical) commentary.” 683 In a January 1971 letter of instruction, the
same Assistant DEPCORDS noted that the content of the province report “should be interpretive
in nature and contribute directly and significantly to an overall evaluation of pacification within
the province.” 684 Reading this within the context of MACV trying to smooth individual biases
out of reporting systems such as the Hamlet Evaluation System, these instructions cut against
that grain. The instructions directly encouraged PSAs to infuse their province reports with their
own analysis and interpretations. These instructions provide evidence of the intended role of the
province report as a qualitative counterbalance to the predominantly quantitative and regularized
CORDS and MACV reporting infrastructure.
CORDS Officials at the theater and corps level also emphasized the importance of high
quality content in the province report. In Joint Directive 4-67, MACV pointed out the important
role that the province report was designed to play in identifying problems and supporting
“theater-wide assessments” of the counterinsurgency campaign, noting that “the essentiality of
timely, accurate reporting cannot be over-emphasized.” 685 In 1971, the Office of CORDS, IV
Corps told PSAs to “establish procedures to insure that the Province Report is a document which
is factual, readable, and of high editorial quality.” 686 The following year, in another letter of
instruction, the same office noted that, “the Province Report must be a concise, analytical

683

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” 1.
684 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71,” 1.
685 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 1.
686 Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional
Assistance Command, “Instruction for Preparation of Province Report, CORDS, DRAC Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 40-71,” 1. This instruction is repeated in Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of
the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 1172,” 1.

221

commentary on significant development within the reporting period. It should be carefully
edited. The value of the report is directly proportional to the degree of effort given to its
presentation. PSAs must concentrate on reporting significant events and on the analysis of their
meaning.” 687 CORDS at the IV Corps claimed that the value of a province report was derived
from its quality of analysis and tight focus on relevant and significant matters. This in turn, the
office claimed, came from attention to detail and effort on the part of the PSA. This was,
essentially, a call to PSAs to take the province report seriously and put real effort and careful
thought into the process. Sometimes, however, advisory team members expressed an ironic tone
about the province report and their creation. The administrative officer of the Dinh Tuong
advisory team began his memo of instructions for the preparation of the province report and field
program reports for the month of August 1969 by stating, “It’s goody time again and all those
nice neat forms are ready for your fun and enjoyment.” 688
The concern over producing well written, thoughtful, accurate reports extended to the top
of CORDS leadership. In discussing the reporting infrastructure within CORDS, Robert Komer
noted,
My chief comment on all the regular reporting channels is that we made an all-out effort
to stress accurate reporting. We made it a fetish, and I personally did this. I kept saying to
all advisors in all my meetings: ‘What I want to hear from you is what’s going wrong
rather than what’s going right. If it’s going right, we can be happy and don’t have to do
much about it. If it’s going wrong, that’s where we want to apply the muscle. So I don’t
want anybody to cook figures; nobody’s efficiency rating is going to be based on what

687 Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance
Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 11-72,” 1.
688 K E Turnquist, CPT, AG, Admin Officer, Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team),
“Province and Field Program Reports for August,” August 22, 1969, 1, Box 1027, Folder 160-09A Input
Field Reports -- 1969; Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team) Administrative and
Operational Records 1968-1973, General Records, 1967-1973; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

222

he’s reporting about GVN performance. You’re not evaluating your own performance;
you’re evaluating the Vietnamese.’ 689
Komer’s comments touched on two of the most controversial recordkeeping issues of the war:
skewing the content of reports to give a positive account of the war and skewing reports to give a
favorable gloss to one’s own performance. Certainly, as discussed in Chapter Four, there were
issues with individual advisors carefully curating what they wrote in their reports to support their
own careers or to preserve a delicate relationship with a GVN counterpart. This was enough of
an issue to prompt Komer to explicitly discuss the importance of honest, accurate reporting.
Komer emphasized that an advisor’s reports were about GVN officials, not a reflection of that
advisors’ own performance. The fact that Komer emphasized this issue illustrates that it was a
concern among US advisors.
John Paul Vann discussed the quality of province reports several times. In a May 1969
staff memorandum, he emphasized the importance of writing reports with specific, precise
details. He complained, “a tendency has been noted to include generalities and approximations in
the various reports being submitted to this and higher headquarters… [Generalities] lend
themselves to varying interpretations depending upon the knowledge of the subject being
reported and an understanding of the optimism or pessimism of the writer.” 690 He then went on
to note that because of the scale of US operations in Vietnam and rapid personnel turnover, it
was almost certain that vague reports would draw divergent conclusions from its readers. He
urged precision in report writing and declared that reports needed to be “specific in their content

689

Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,”
194–95.
690 “CORDS IV Corps Staff Memorandum 47-69,” May 21, 1969, 1, Box 38, Folder 227-01 Staff Memos
-- 1969; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General
Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions;
Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives
at College Park, College Park, MD.

223

so as to minimize the interpretations that may be placed upon the information being
submitted.” 691 Vann’s comments highlighted the importance of documenting specificity in
qualitative descriptions of wicked problems and their facets. Because of the multifaceted,
dynamic, expansive, and political nature of wicked problems, detailed descriptions of such
problems are going to be read and interpreted by constituencies with divergent viewpoints and
agendas. Vann pointed out that diverse audiences will interpret generalities, clichés, and pat
descriptions to suit their own needs and assumptions, regardless of the author’s intent. 692
For Vann, poor report writing indicated poor advising. In his 1969 memo, mentioned at
start of this section and reproduced below, he urged PSAs to “make an effort during the month to
list problem areas and spell them out in the monthly report.” As an admonition to the PSAs of
the IV Corps, he observed, “it appears often that the provinces with the worst situations have the
least problems. Rather than a successful program, the lack of problems [described in province
reports] indicates to me either a lack of interest and involvement by the Province Senior Advisor
in the reporting process, or a lack of comprehension of the problems that you are all facing.” 693
He also detected that PSAs wrote province reports in a self-serving manner, noting in the same
memo that “in many instances they [province reports] appear to be justifications for the existence
of the advisory team rather than an information document of the entire effort.” 694
As discussed later in this chapter, there was a concern within CORDS that report writing
was seen by PSAs as a burdensome task separate from the “real” work of advising. Vann did not
appear to see reporting and advising in such simple, bifurcated terms. While Vann did not appear
to state it directly, he clearly understood the power of reports and wrote them to shape US and
691

“CORDS IV Corps Staff Memorandum 47-69,” 1.
“CORDS IV Corps Staff Memorandum 47-69.”
693 “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
694 “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
692

224

GVN strategy throughout his time in Vietnam, which started in 1962. As US advisor to the
ARVN (Army of the Republic of Vietnam) 7th Division, he wrote a devastating after-action
review of ARVN’s performance at the January 1963 Battle of Ap Bac in an effort to reform the
GVN’s persecution of the war and the US military’s understanding of ARVN’s poor
performance. 695 Shortly before retiring from the US Army later in 1963, Vann prepared a
briefing for the Joint Chiefs of Staff in an attempt to get the Chiefs to understand what he saw as
the precarious state of the war and the GVN. 696 Within six months of returning to Vietnam as a
civilian advisor in 1965, Vann wrote “Harnessing the Revolution in South Vietnam” in an effort
to get US officials to see the war in Vietnam as a social revolution and to realize how they could
use that understanding of the conflict to turn the war in their favor. 697 Throughout his time in
Vietnam, Vann used his reports as a weapon to affect change and to reform the practices of
civilian organizations and military units throughout his career. His careful report writing helped
him garner notice as a young officer. While stationed in Europe in the Logistical Management
Section after a tour in the Korean War, Vann burnished his reputation as a rising star by writing
reports analyzing the Army supply system in Europe. His biographer described these reports as
“simple and incisive in their reasoning, full of facts that were surprising because no one else had
thought to look for them, and illustrated with statistical tables that complemented his logic
instead of cluttering it.” 698 While independently assessing the quality of those reports is outside
the scope of this dissertation, it is clear that Vann took report writing seriously and viewed
reports as important and potentially powerful tools. It is therefore not surprising to find that Vann
had strong opinions, which he shared in unambiguous terms, about the quality of the reports
695

Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 280–83.
Vann was denied the opportunity to present this briefing. Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 336–42.
697 Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 535–38.
698 Sheehan, A Bright Shining Lie, 484–85.
696

225

created by the advisory teams under his command. Vann’s report writing also provides evidence
of the centrality of records in large organizations and how records perform a key role in
institutions attempting to understand the nature of wicked problems.
Vann also highlighted the importance of brevity to his PSAs. In the same memo
reproduced below, he instructed PSAs to “shorten the reports whenever possible. They are too
wordy. The contain irrelevant and redundant information.” 699 In another 1969 memo, Vann
declared, “There appears to be a belief that additional verbiage adds to the importance of a
report. Quite the contrary! Personnel who are in decision and policymaking positions are, of
necessity, limited in the amount of time they may spend reading reports, and, therefore, are more
apt to read completely those reports which are concise, factual and to the point.” 700 With his
typical cutting language, Vann reminded advisors that one of the core functions of reports, such
as the province report, was to inform the higher echelons of command—fulfilling Yates’ role of
upward communication. Because each level of command had a wider scope of responsibility
than lower levels, they inevitably had a wider range of reports and data to digest. Placing a
premium on brevity and maintaining a tight focus on the most relevant facts increases in
importance as information travels up the ranks in hierarchical organizations such as the US
Armed Forces.
Vann’s emphasis on brevity was echoed many times at the theater and corps level. In
Joint Directive 4-67 MACV noted that the province report “should be concise and cover only
areas in which significant developments have occurred since the last reporting period. If there is

699
700

“CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
“CORDS IV Corps Staff Memorandum 47-69,” 1.

226

no change, do not rehash old information. This report will be most valuable if it is short.” 701 In a
1971 letter of instruction, the Office of CORDS, IV Corps echoed many of these same words. 702
In another 1971 letter of instruction, the same office noted that the province report “should be
concise and cover only areas in which significant developments have occurred since the previous
reporting period. The value of the report is directly proportional to the degree of concentration on
significant events, trends, progress, and problems, and analysis and interpretation thereof.” 703
CORDS saw concise report writing as a critical element of effective information management,
and as an important part of its monitoring and evaluation of the GVN’s performance in the war.
CORDS repeated this point to its province advisory teams many times.
CORDS’ leadership also found the timely creation and submission of reports to be an
important factor in the effectiveness of its reporting infrastructure. Joint Directive 4-67 pointed
out that “the essentiality of timely, accurate reporting cannot be over-emphasized.” 704 Late
reports earned a rebuke in the IV Corps. For example, on May 21, 1969, Vann, as DEPCORDS
for the IV Corps, sent a memo to two PSAs asking why, for the second straight week, his
headquarters did not receive a particular weekly report from their advisory teams. 705 In April
1969, Vann issued an information bulletin with a score-sheet of late reports over the previous
four months from all 16 IV Corps province advisory teams. He noted that “provinces continue to
701

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1. This advice was repeated in MACV joint directives 2-69 and 4-70.
702 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Instructions and Format for the Province Report, DMAC, CORDS Letter of
Instruction (LOI) 3-71.”
703 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” 1.
704 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Annex A, 1.
705 “Non-Submission of Weekly Attitude Report,” May 21, 1969, Container 15, Folder Chron - May
1969; CORDS MR4/MR4/Dep for CORDS, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

227

submit reports late, using improper formats, wrong reports control symbols, and misrouting
reports to CORDS, IV CTZ.” 706 He suggested, “let everyone make every effort to improve the
scorecard for the next three months.” 707 In the instructions for the preparation of monthly reports
from at least January 1970 through November 1971, the Office of CORDS, IV Corps included a
list of late report submissions from the previous month. 708 This concern over timely submission
of province and other reports provides a window into the extensive infrastructure required to
produce, manage, and analyze the vast array of reports and data that CORDS was creating and
handling during the war.
Many officers in CORDS and MACV at the theater and corps level were very concerned
about the large number of reports that advisors were required to produce and the amount of time
it took them to fulfill these responsibilities. Every new required report represented more time
committed to report writing for US advisors. This concern about reporting efforts was reflected
in all three joint directives for the MACCORDS Field Reporting System, as MACV claimed in
the directives that the reporting system ensured “an adequate, but minimal flow of meaningful

706

“CORDS IV Corps Information Bulletin 147-69,” April 22, 1969, 1, Box 40, Folder 227-01 CORDS
IV Corps Info Bulletins -- 120-69 to 199-69; CORDS/MR4/Management Support
Division/Communications and Records Branch/General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
707 “CORDS IV Corps Information Bulletin 147-69,” 1.
708 John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Headquarters, DMAC, “Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province
Reports (RCS MACCORDS 31.01), Field Program Reports and Other Associated Reports for January
1970, CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 16-70” to Robert C. Payatte, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of
the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports Pick-Up
Instructions, CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 495-71,” November 22, 1971, Box 65, Folder 227-01
CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 451-71 -- 500-71; CORDS/MR4/Management Support
Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD. Because I was not
able to locate the monthly instructions from April through December 1969, this late reports list may have
started as early as April 1969.

228

information from the field, in a manner most easily handled by the field.” 709 The directives also
claimed that the efficiency of the field reporting system would “permit US advisors to
concentrate more of their time on advising.” 710 A 1970 MACV memo from its Chief of Staff
claimed that “the administrative burden required to complete these reports detracts from the
primary mission of the advisor—advising.” 711 MACV reinforced an understanding of report
creation as a necessary but burdensome exercise that was not a core advising activity. In other
words, data gathering was widely understood within MACV and CORDS as an essential activity,
yet still perceived as not a core component of advisory work. For example, in the November
1968 province report, the Kien Hoa PSA wrote that one GVN program was “at an almost
complete standstill with respect to operational planning and exploitation. Entirely too much
effort is devoted to fancy charts and briefings, detracting from more substantial work.” 712 These
concerns reached the highest levels of CORDS command. After his service as the first director of
CORDS, Robert Komer noted, “the guys in the field were complaining about too many reports
(especially John Vann) and the guys in Washington were complaining about too few reports. So
709

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV
Directive 2-69,” 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 4-70,” 1.
710 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV
Directive 2-69,” 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint
MACV Directive 4-70,” 1.
711 Donald H. Cowles, Major General, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “Reduction of Reports, Chief of Staff Action Memo 72-03,” January 19, 1971, 1,
Box 59 Chief of Staff Action Memorandum No. 70-74 THRU Chief of Staff Action Memorandum No.
72-50, Folder CSAM 72-2 thru 72-50; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the Adjutant
General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV)
1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472;
National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
712 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “November 1968 Province Report,”
December 2, 1968, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records
Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

229

we cut down the reports from the field and increased the reports to Washington, but you can’t
satisfy everybody.” 713
The number of reports that province advisory teams were responsible for producing
reached an apex in 1968 and 1969. Measures of how many reports province advisory teams were
responsible for producing varied, but it is reasonable to say that teams were responsible for
producing approximately 50 reports a month during the late 1960s. For example, a district
advisor—considered part of the province advisory teams—in Bien Hoa province filed 63
recurring monthly reports at the end of his tour in 1968. 714 A November 1968 IV Corps
information bulletin identified 29 required reports that province advisory teams were required to
create. 715
As reporting demands reached their peak, MACV and CORDS made a concerted effort to
reduce these reporting obligations made on advisory teams. A February 1971 MACV Office of
the Inspector General report appears to indicate some success with this effort. The office claimed
that the Office of CORDS in the IV Corps had “substantially reduced the number of recurring
reports… Through a concerted program of combining requirements, and elimination of marginal
reporting requirements.” Required reports demanded from a variety of headquarters for CORDS
advisory teams within the IV Corps dropped from 56 to 38 each month. 716 It appears that the IV

713

“Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 195.
Daddis, No Sure Victory, 151.
715 Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 91-68.”
716 Robert M Cook, Colonel, USA, Inspector General, Office of the Inspector General, Headquarters,
United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, “Special Inspection of Delta Military Assistance
Command, Advis [Illegible], Advisory Team 96,” February 1, 1971, 2, Box 88, Folder 227-01 Cords/drac
info bulletins 265-72 -- 342-72; CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
714

230

Corps Office of CORDS demanded from each advisory team 29 reports in November 1968, 717 23
in January 1970, 718 15 in January 1971, 719 9 in January 1972, 720 and 8 in January 1973. 721 In an
example of the reduced reporting burden on province advisory teams, the IV Corps CORDS
office’s January and February 1972 monthly instructions for preparing also contained a list of
recently eliminated monthly reports. 722
Despite these improvements, reporting burdens were still a concern in the early 1970s. In
a September 1971 memo, MACV Headquarters noted that it and its subordinate commands,

717

Eugene P. Bable, Assistant Deputy for CORDS, IV CTZ, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV
Corps Information Bulletin 91-68.”
718 John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Headquarters, DMAC, “Administrative Instructions for Preparation and Forwarding of Province
Reports (RCS MACCORDS 31.01), Field Program Reports and Other Associated Reports for January
1970, CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 16-70.”
719 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “Monthly Reports Pick-Up Instructions, CORDS, DMAC Information Bulletin 971,” January 8, 1971, Box 64, Folder: 227-01 CORDS-DMAC Information Bulletins 1-71 -- 60-71;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.
720 Robert C. Payette, Asst. DEPCORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly
Reports Pick-Up Instructions, CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 31-72,” January 26, 1972, Box 87,
Folder 227-01 CORDS/DRAC info bulletins 3-72 -- 110-72; CORDS/MR4/Management Support
Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records; Records of Civil Operations for Rural
Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia,
1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
721 Robert C. Payette, Acting Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta
Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly Recurring Reports Submissions Instructions, CORDS/DRAC
Information Bulletin 9-73.”
722 Robert C. Payette, Asst. DEPCORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Monthly
Reports Pick-Up Instructions, CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 31-72”; Robert C. Payette, Asst.
DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Regional Assistance Command,
“Monthly Reports Pick-Up Instructions, CORDS, DRAC Information Bulletin 68-72,” February 23,
1972, 68–72, Box 87, Folder 227-01 CORDS/DRAC info bulletins 3-72 -- 110-72;
CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch, General Records;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD.

231

including CORDS, spent “over 500,000 annual man hours” creating reports.” 723 MACV
Headquarters declared that this level of effort spent on reports “cannot be tolerated,” 724 and
ordered a review of all reports, with the expectation that “all but absolutely essential reports”
would be cancelled. 725 A January 1972 memo from the MACV Chief of Staff addressed the
heavy reporting burden that was faced by advisory teams. The Chief of Staff claimed that
advisory teams were required to produce 68 recurring reports—these included weekly, monthly,
quarterly, and periodic reports. This was on top of the at least 33 one-time reports that the IV
Corps headquarters requested that teams fulfill during the last quarter of 1971. 726
The warrants and rules issued at the theater and corps level, which governed the creation,
distribution and use of province reports, highlighted several issues concerning the report.
CORDS leaders also raised these issues as areas of concern in critiques of province reports
submitted by advisory teams. These issues centered around three themes: insightful analysis,
concise and timely reports, and the report-writing burden on advisory teams. This concern
emerged from the desire of CORDS leadership that the province advisory teams would produce

723

Donald H. Cowles, Major General, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “Control of Reporting Requirements, Chief of Staff Action Memo 71-66,”
September 3, 1971, 1, Box 59 Chief of Staff Action Memorandum No. 70-74 THRU Chief of Staff
Action Memorandum No. 72-50, Folder CSAM 71-4 thru 71-92; MACV Adjutant General Issuances;
Records of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance
Command Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 19501975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
724 W G Dolvin, Major General, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “Improve Reporting and Reduce Paperwork, Chief of Staff Action Memo 70-115,”
September 24, 1970, 1, Box 59 Chief of Staff Action Memorandum No. 70-74 THRU Chief of Staff
Action Memorandum No. 72-50; Folder CSAM 71-4 thru 71-92; MACV Adjutant General Issuances;
Records of the Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance
Command Vietnam (MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 19501975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
725 W G Dolvin, Major General, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “Improve Reporting and Reduce Paperwork, Chief of Staff Action Memo 70-115,”
1.
726 Donald H. Cowles, Major General, Chief of Staff, Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam, “Reduction of Reports, Chief of Staff Action Memo 72-03.”

232

province reports containing original, thoughtful insights; accurate, specific, and honest
information; a concise focus on the most important issues; and timely submission. CORDS
leadership sought these qualities to support meaningful insight into the wicked problem of the
insurgency in South Vietnam. Reaching these goals for high quality province reports and other
reports took extensive time and effort. MACV and CORDS struggled to balance the needs for
information against the risk of overwhelming their advisors with report-writing responsibilities.

233

Illustration 5.2
CORDS IV Corps Directive No. 73-69 727
John P. Vann, Deputy for CORDS
Headquarters, Delta Military Assistance Command, Office of the Deputy for CORDS
May 14, 1969

727

Reproduction of “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69.”

234

Conclusion
In this chapter, I have presented this dissertation’s findings on the recordkeeping context of the
province report as well as the report’s structure. This chapter has built on the broader social,
political, and military context described and assessed in Chapter Four. This chapter included
examinations of the report’s structure, use and purpose, creation process, and dissemination. In
Chapter Five, I also examined the warrants and rules that governed the creation of the province
reports as well as critiques of their quality. Embedded in these documents about the province
report were concerns about creating thoughtful reports, producing timely and focused reports,
and the burden of report writing for the advisory teams. The province report was intended to be a
qualitative, narrative counterbalance to a vast array of quantitative reports that were focused on
very specific measures, activities, and programs. It was an explicit space that was intended for,
and described as where the PSA and his advisory team could express their observations and
judgments about the state of the war, the GVN, and the citizens of their assigned province. Yet at
the same time, the warrants and rules of the report shaped a particular understanding of the war.
The report structure informed and reinforced prevailing conceptualizations of the war within
MACV and the broader Washington leadership. The province report was therefore a
recordkeeping tool that CORDS used to normalize its understanding of the wicked problem of
the South Vietnam insurgency. It was also at the nexus of the recordkeeping challenge of trying
to thickly describe the rich complexity of a wicked problem at the scale of the problem’s entire
scope.
This is the second of three findings chapters in this dissertation. It is followed by Chapter
Six, which reviews the content of province reports from Dinh Tuong province and a selection of
other IV Corps provinces. That chapter will present findings that illustrate the effect that the
structure and warrants of the province reports had on its content. Specifically, it will provide

235

evidence of the tensions and contradictions that may arise when trying to gather scalable
quantitative data and produce qualitative narratives to understand a wicked problem. It also
provides evidence of tension in the effort to insightfully describe a wicked problem while also
normalizing those insights to fit the worldview of the organization that is attempting to address
the problem.

236

Chapter Six
Findings III: The Content of the Province Report

Introduction
Chapter Six is the third and last chapter of findings in this dissertation, which are presented in
three layers: context, structure, and content. Chapter Four reviewed the institutional, political,
and military context of the province report. Chapter Five outlined the recordkeeping context and
structure of the province report. This chapter examines the content layer of findings, based upon
content analysis of province reports written by the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
province advisory teams as well as the reports created by all 16 IV Corps province advisory
teams during the month of January from 1968 through 1973.
The analysis focuses on two types of content in the province report: 1) the Hamlet
Evaluation System (HES) scores and discussions about the system found in the Overview and
Territorial Security sections of the province reports and 2) discussions about insurgent forces
found in the Enemy Situation section of the province reports. Examination of HES content
provides an opportunity to explore subthemes, such as thick description at scale, the role of the
individual within an institutional setting, and the use of warrants to normalize the description of
wicked problems to familiar concepts. Methods for producing findings from this content analysis
are described in Chapter Three and documented in Appendix A. Table 6.1 provides a summary
of this chapter’s framework.

237

Table 6.1
Content Analysis of Province Reports Framework
Content
Topics

Province
Report Section

Province Report Population

Subtheme Focus

HES Scores
and
Discussion

Overview

All IV Corps advisory teams,
Januarys 1968-1973

1.1 Thick description at
scale

Dinh Tuong advisory team, all
available months

1.2 Role of individual within
an institutional setting

Kien Hoa advisory team, all
available months
Phong Dinh advisory team, all
available months
Territorial
Security

All IV Corps advisory teams,
Januarys 1968-1973

1.2 Role of individual within
an institutional setting

Dinh Tuong advisory team,
February 1969 – January 1972

1.3 Normalizing description
to the familiar through
warrants

Kien Hoa advisory team,
February 1969 – January 1972
Phong Dinh advisory team,
February 1969 – January 1972
Insurgent
Forces

Enemy
Situation

All IV Corps advisory teams,
Januarys 1968-1973

1.3 Normalizing description
to the familiar through
warrants

This examination of the content in province reports primarily focuses on the presence of
HES content—both the HES scores and discussions about HES content—in the Overview and
Territorial Security sections of the province report. Analyzing the discussions among province
advisors about the management, validity, and reliability of HES data provides the opportunity to
examine recordkeeping discussions found within the province reports. My analysis looks at the
presence of HES content, the patterns of how that content appeared, and how HES data were
used as part of the province reports’ assessments of their respective provinces in these two
sections. In addition, I explored some of the concerns expressed by province advisors in these
and other sections of the province report about the management, use, validity, and reliability of
the HES and HES data. Examining how province advisors used HES data in their province

238

reports to help describe their Government of (South) Vietnam (GVN) partners affords the
opportunity to explore the tensions of presenting unique, rich, thick, and qualitative assessments
while also delivering assessments that were transferable, scalable, and quantitative. While most
of the rules and warrants did not instruct advisors to include HES data in the province reports,
the IV Corps Office of CORDS Information Bulletin 78-70 from February 1970 asked advisors
to include HES data in the report’s Territorial Security section. My examination of HES content
in the Territorial Security section provides the opportunity to explore the relationship between
the province report’s rules and the content advisors put into these reports.
In this chapter, I also examine province advisors’ discussions on the topic of insurgent
forces that are contained in the reports. This analysis is confined to content within the province
report’s Enemy Situation section. References to insurgent forces in other sections are not
evaluated in this study. This focus affords the opportunity to compare the instructions for this
section with its content and provides another chance to explore the relationship between the
report’s rules and its content.

Population
For this exploration, I performed a content analysis primarily on two sets of province reports: 1)
the entire available run of province reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
advisory teams (174), and 2) monthly province reports from all IV Corps provinces during the
month of January for each year, from 1968 through 1973 (78 excluding Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa,
and Phong Dinh; 96 including those three province advisory teams). January is the only month
where copies of all IV Corps province reports are available from NARA (National Archives and
Records Administration) for all six of those years. Examining the complete set of IV Corps
province reports during that month affords a systematic comparison of these reports across all 16

239

of these provinces. Political, military, and geographical factors specific to the month of January
were discussed in Chapter Three.
As noted in Chapters One, Three, and Four, I chose to examine the province reports from
the Dinh Tuong advisory team because the province was actively contested during the war. It
was the subject of an extensive study by historian David Elliot, which allows me to further
situate my analysis of the reports from that advisory team in an existing historical context. 728
Like all province advisory teams, the Dinh Tuong advisory team wrote province reports from
November 1967 through February 1973. However, during my research at NARA, I was not able
to locate Dinh Tuong province reports from November 1967 and March 1968 through December
1968, which represents 11 of the 64 reports the advisory team wrote in total.
In addition, I have examined province reports from the advisory teams of Kien Hoa and
Phong Dinh provinces, both of the IV Corps. I was able to locate all but one Kien Hoa province
reports (September 1968), for a total of 63. I was able to locate 58 Phong Dinh province reports,
with those from November 1967 and August through December 1968 missing, representing six
of the 64 reports the advisory team wrote in total.
While, as noted in Chapter Five, producing a province report was a team effort, each
report was written under the province senior advisor’s (PSA) signature and its content and timely
submission was ultimately his responsibility. Specifically, the responsibility for writing the
Overview Section and the Future Problems and Projections sections normally fell to the PSA.
Knowing the succession of PSAs (Table 6.2) on the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
advisory teams provides a useful context for examining the reports. Patterns of the province
reports’ content often changed, not surprisingly, with the arrival of new PSAs.

728

The Vietnamese War, 2003; The Vietnamese War, 2003.

240

Table 6.2
Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh Advisory Team Senior Province Advisors
Dinh Tuong Advisory Team
Province Senior Advisors

Kien Hoa Advisory Team
Province Senior Advisors

Phong Dinh Advisory Team
Province Senior Advisors

Lieutenant Colonel Edward R.
Schowalter Jr.
December 1967 – February 1968

Richard I. Burnham (civilian)
November 1967 – May 1968

Colonel Josiah A. Wallace Jr.
January 1968

N. G. W. Thorne (civilian)
June 1968 – July 1968

Lieutenant Colonel / Colonel
Lester M. Conger 729
February 1968 – March 1970

Colonel Harry O. Amos
January 1969 – June 1969
Colonel Joy K. Vallery
July 1969 – December 1970

Albert L. Kotzebue (civilian)
November 1968 – February 1973 Colonel Harold A. Van Hout
April 1970 – May 1971

John D. Evans, Jr. (civilian)
January 1971 – February 1973

Lieutenant Colonel / Colonel
Edward J. Porter 730
June 1971 – September 1972
Warren E. Parker (civilian)
November 1972 – February 1973

Dinh Tuong province reports from November 1967 and March through December 1968 are missing from
this study. Acting province senior advisors signed the January 1968, April 1969, December 1969, June
1970, and November 1972 province reports.
The Kien Hoa province report from September 1968 is missing from this study. Acting and deputy senior
advisors signed the December 1967, August 1968, September 1968, July 1969, August 1969, April
1970, December 1970, May 1971, March 1972, and September through November 1972 province
reports.
Phong Dinh province reports from November 1967 and August through December 1968 are missing from
this study. Acting and deputy senior advisors signed the December 1967, March 1968, April 1968, March
1969, February 1970, November 1971, March 1972, June 1972, and October 1972 province reports.

HES Scores and Discussion
Hamlet Evaluation System Background
The Hamlet Evaluation System was a numeric scoring system for assessing the level of political
and security control that the GVN had over hamlets throughout the South Vietnamese
countryside. MACV implemented the HES in January 1967 and operated the system until March

729
730

Conger was promoted to Colonel in July 1968.
Porter was promoted to Colonel in October 1971.

241

1973, when it turned the database over to the GVN. 731 The HES was one of six systems that
composed the Pacification Evaluation System (PACES) and was part of the MACCORDS
Reporting System discussed in Chapter Four. 732 There were three major versions of HES:
MACV and CORDS used the first version of the HES, called HAMLA from 1967 to 1969;
HES/70 from 1969 to 1970; and HES/71 from 1970 to early 1973. 733
One of the motivations for developing and implementing HES was to gain a more
granular knowledge of the GVN’s control of its population. While villages were the smallest unit
of GVN government administration, many were composed of multiple hamlets that had various
levels of control between the GVN and the insurgency. Gathering data at the hamlet level was
the most granular level at which CORDS could reasonably gather data. 734 Across South
Vietnam’s 44 provinces, there were approximately 2,300 villages comprising roughly 13,000
hamlets.
As discussed in Chapter Four, over the course of the mid-1960s, US advisors in the field,
and officials in MACV, the Pentagon, and White House became increasingly dissatisfied with
reports on the GVN and US counterinsurgency efforts, largely because they were susceptible to
manipulation by local GVN officials, too focused on security issues, and did not produce data
with sufficient granularity. 735 In October 1966 the Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, told

731

Thayer, War without Fronts, 138–41; Gayvert, “Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet
Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in Afghanistan?,” 8.
732 Erwin R. Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System” (SEATO
Internal Security Seminar, Manila, 1968), 19–22.
733 Thayer, War without Fronts, 140–141; Gayvert, “Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet
Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in Afghanistan?,” 3–9; Stathis N. Kalyvas and Matthew
Adam Kocher, “The Dynamics of Violence in Vietnam: An Analysis of the Hamlet Evaluation System
(HES),” Journal of Peace Research 46, no. 3 (May 1, 2009): 340–342.
734 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 3.
735 Thomas C. ed. Thayer, “Population Security,” A Systems Analysis View of the Vietnam War 19651972 (Washington DC: OASD(SA)RP Southeast Asia Intelligence Division, Department of Defense,

242

the CIA to develop and implement a system that automated, systematized, and improved the
granularity of “pacification progress” measurements in South Vietnam—a system that became
the Hamlet Evaluation System. 736 The HES was part of the wave of quantitative reports that
CORDS and other US agencies created in 1966 and 1967.
In the process of generating HES data each month, US district senior advisors (DSA)—
part of a province advisory team and who normally reported to the province senior advisor—
scored hamlets using the nine security and nine development indicators on the Hamlet
Evaluation Worksheets. Scores were on a five-point scale: (A to E) ranging from essentially full
GVN control (A) to hamlets where insurgents operated freely at night (E). DSAs could not visit
and therefore evaluate hamlets under full insurgent control and so gave those hamlets a score of
VC, for Vietcong. 737 After compiling the monthly hamlet scores into HES databases, CORDS
conducted extensive statistical analysis on the data to report on the progress or regression of
pacification efforts. US and GVN military and civilian leaders used these reports to analyze their
counterinsurgency efforts, identify priority hamlets, and make resource allocation decisions. 738
The first version of the Hamlet Evaluation System, commonly referred to as HAMLA,
became operational in January 1967. US district advisors made monthly evaluations of GVN
control over its hamlets and villages and forwarded them up to MACV headquarters in Saigon,
which entered the data into a central HES database. MACV headquarters then returned printed
versions of the reports back to the advisors and pushed summary reports to various US and GVN

1975); Thayer, War without Fronts, 138; Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet
Evaluation System,” 2.
736 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 2; Daddis, No
Sure Victory, 191–92.
737 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 8–13.
738 Maurice D Roush, “The Hamlet Evaluation System,” Military Review, September 1969, 10–17.

243

military commands and government agencies. 739 District advisors recorded their evaluations of
hamlet pacification on four documents: The Hamlet Evaluation Worksheet (HEW), the Hamlet
Evaluation Summary Form (HESF), the Hamlet Classification Form (HCF), and a document for
remarks. The HEW document was a table of six factors measuring hamlet security and
development that subdivided into 18 indicators. 740
Table 6.3
Hamlet Evaluation Worksheet Factors and Indicators 741
HEW Factors

HEW Indicators

1. VC Military Activities

a. Village Guerrilla Unit
b. VC External Forces
c. Military Incidents Affecting Hamlet

2. VC Political and Subversion Activities a. Hamlet Infrastructure
b. Village Infrastructure
c. Activities Affecting Hamlet
3. Friendly Security Capabilities

a. Hamlet Defense Plan and Organization
b. Friendly External Force Assistance
c. Internal Security Activities

4. Administrative and Political Activities

a. GVN Governmental Management
b. Census Grievance Program
c. Information and PSYOP Activities

5. Health, Education and Welfare

a. Medical Services
b. Education
c. Welfare Differences

6. Economic Development

a. Self-help Activities
b. Public Works
c. Economic Improvement Programs

District advisors scored each indicator on a five-point scale (A to E). 742

739

Thayer, War without Fronts, 138–39.
Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 3–4.
741 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 4–5; Gayvert,
“Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in
Afghanistan?,” 4.
742 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 10–12; Gayvert,
“Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in
Afghanistan?,” 5–6.
740

244

Table 6.4
HES Rating Scale 743
HES
Security Measures
Score
A
Virtually no Vietcong presence.

Development Measures

B

Vietcong presence at least six
hours away. Only occasional
raids.

Mostly effective government; most
officials fully resident.

C

Overt Vietcong activity broken;
periodic attacks in surrounding
area.

Officials mostly resident at night.

D

Vietcong activity at night.

Some governance activity and loyal
officials present, although many do not
spend the night in the hamlet.

E

Effective Vietcong presence.
Regular attacks.

Vietcong has infrastructure to tax local
population. Loyal officials only present
during day. Many government services
not present.

VC

Under Vietcong control. Cannot be evaluated by US advisors.

Other

Usually hamlets that have been abandoned.

Effective elected local government; all
officials fully resident.

The HEW also listed ten problem areas, such as corruption and delays in government
salary payments that DSAs could mark and score. After scoring the hamlets on the HEWs, DSAs
recorded their scores on the Summary Forms, which they then forwarded, along with the
Classification Forms (which contained data about GVN pacification efforts), to MACV
headquarters for data entry. The advisors kept the completed HEWs. The Remarks document
gave DSAs the opportunity to write notes or concerns about their scores. Advisors forwarded the
remarks to MACV headquarters but the content was not entered into the HES database. 744
Throughout CORDS’ use of the HAMLA version of HES, the organization ran a number

743

Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 10–12; Gayvert,
“Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in
Afghanistan?,” 5–6.
744 Thayer, “Population Security,” 6–7; Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet
Evaluation System,” 8.

245

of studies to examine the effectiveness and accuracy of the system. One of the primary
conclusions that CORDS administrators drew from these studies was that advisors directly
scoring the state of hamlet security and development were too subjective and their biases were
influencing HES scores. 745 Some of the biases that CORDS pointed out were: US advisors’
dependence on Vietnamese sources; some US and Vietnamese officials had the incentive to
inaccurately score hamlets to ensure that the HES data reflected well on them; and many US
advisors did not have the opportunity to learn the subtleties of hamlet politics because many of
them were there for short tours that often lasted less than one year. 746 CORDS and MACV more
broadly tried to address these concerns with the development of a second version of HES, called
HES/70, which had DSAs answer a set of 25 monthly and 102 quarterly questions about hamlets
rather than directly give the hamlets a set of scores. The DSAs would send these questions to
MACV headquarters, which would apply ratings criteria using a weighting system and Bayesian
probability analysis to the questions in order to derive security and development scores. 747
HES/70 contained multiple-choice questions, such as “Is the GVN hamlet chief regularly
present in this hamlet?” with choices:
•
•
•
•
•
•

No
No, irregularly
Yes, regularly, but only by day
Yes, regularly, day and night
Not Applicable
Unknowable/Unable to Judge

Other questions included, “Do enemy forces tax goods and produce moving to or from
this village?”; “Were armed enemy military forces present in inhabited areas of this hamlet

745

Thayer, War without Fronts, 139.
James W. Johnson and Charles Anello, “Measurement of Pacification Progress in Vietnam” (Mclean,
Virginia: Research Analysis Corporation, September 1968), 16.
747 Thayer, “Population Security,” 151.
746

246

during the month?”; and “Which of the following most closely reflects the activity of the village
level VC infrastructure in the village?” 748 MACV and CORDS tested HES/70 from July through
December 1969 and implemented the new version of the system in January 1970. 749
MACV and CORDS implemented HES/71 in January 1971 after testing it in 1970. This
new version of the HES was essentially structured like HES/70 with advisors answering
questions and MACV headquarters scoring hamlet security and development based on weighted
statistical analysis. The main changes in HES/71 were weight adjustments that gave greater
emphasis to the political factors that contributed to security scores. 750
CORDS and MACV used computer systems to aggregate and analyze the monthly HES
data gathered by district advisors to produce a wide range and extensive volume of reports. 751
Noteworthy reports included the Hamlet Category Change Report, which highlighted changes in
HES scores from month to month; the Hamlet Plot, HES Population Density Map, and the
Category Change Plot which were essentially GIS outputs; the HES Condition Report, which
highlighted remarks and other data for hamlets whose scores met certain conditions; and Overlay
Analysis reports, a quarterly report with time-lapse data. 752 In addition, MACV, CORDS, and
civilian agencies incorporated HES data into many other reports. 753 Among these reports was the
monthly province report. The presence of quantitative HES data in the qualitative province report
and the nature of this dynamic between aggregated quantitative data and unique qualitative
narratives is the focus of this portion of my findings presented in this chapter.

748

Thayer, “Population Security,” 154–55; Thayer, War without Fronts, 154–55.
Thayer, War without Fronts, 139–41; Gayvert, “Teaching New Dogs Old Tricks: Can the Hamlet
Evaluation System Inform the Search for Metrics in Afghanistan?,” 7–9.
750 Thayer, “Population Security,” 217; Thayer, War without Fronts, 141.
751 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 8.
752 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 12–13.
753 Brigham, “Pacification Measurement in Vietnam: The Hamlet Evaluation System,” 12.
749

247

HES Content in the Overview Section
My analysis of HES content in the Overview section of the province reports from all available
province reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh advisory teams and all IV
Corps advisory teams’ January reports first identifies the presence of this kind of content in this
section. Second, I created a qualitative assessment of the patterns in which this content appeared
in this section. Finally, I coded HES content in this section into five categories to explore how
advisors used HES scores to describe the war and how they talked about HES as a management
and evaluation tool.
An examination of the presence of HES content in all IV Corps provinces during the
month of January from 1968 through 1973 suggests that the frequency with which the province
advisory teams included HES content in the Overview section varied and that the Dinh Tuong
PSAs were among the most consistent users of HES data in their Overview sections. Table 6.5
lists the IV Corps advisory teams and the number of times their January province reports (six
total) included HES content in the Overview section.

248

Table 6.5
Advisory Teams with HES Content in January Province Report Overview Sections
An Giang
Kien Phong
Sa Dec
Phong Dinh
Kien Hoa
Kien Giang
Go Cong
Chau Doc
Bac Lieu
Ba Xuyen
Kien Tuong
Chuong Thien
Vinh Long
Vinh Binh
An Xuyen
Dinh Tuong
0

1

2

3

4

5

Four teams had HES content in the Overview section in four of their January reports.
Two teams had HES content present in the Overview section in three of their January reports;
eight teams had two January reports with HES content in the section; one team with HES content
in one January report; and one team never had any HES content in its Overview section in any of
its January province reports. No team had HES content in the Overview section in five or all six
January reports. In addition to the variation in the appearance of HES content among advisory
teams, the presence of HES data changed over time, as illustrated in Table 6.6. HES content did
not appear in the Overview section of any advisory teams’ January 1968 province report. This
changed in the following January with 12 of 16 (75%) advisory teams including HES content in
the Overview section of their province report. The inclusion of HES content in this section tailed
off dramatically with the January 1973 province reports, with content present in only 3 of 16
(19%) reports, as advisory teams were winding down their operations and transferring the
administration of HES and other data gathering and evaluation tools over to the GVN.

249

Table 6.6
January Province Reports with HES Content in the Overview Section
January 1973
January 1972
January 1971
January 1970
January 1969
January 1968
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

The Kien Hoa advisory team had HES content in the Overview section in two of its six
January province reports. HES content was present in the Overview section in 20 of 63 available
Kien Hoa province reports (32%). HES content made the most consistent appearance in the
Overview section from January 1969 through October 1971, appearing 17 times in those 34
months (50%). Like the Kien Hoa team, the Phong Dinh advisory team had HES content in the
Overview section in two of its six January reports. HES content was present in the Overview
section in 23 of 58 available Phong Dinh province reports (40%). HES content appeared in this
section in all but one report from January 1971 through August 1972 (19 of 20 months, 95%).
For long stretches, HES content plays a remarkably prominent and consistent role in the
Overview section of the Dinh Tuong advisory team province reports. The Dinh Tuong advisory
team’s inclusion of HES content in the Overview section of its province reports also provides an
example of the influence that individuals can have on institutional recordkeeping. As noted in
Table 6.5, Dinh Tuong was one of four advisory teams that had HES content in the Overview
section in four of their six January province reports. HES data or other mentions of HES
appeared in the Overview section in 45 of 53 available Dinh Tuong province reports (85%).

250

Starting in January 1969 Dinh Tuong PSAs consistently and prominently featured HES data in
the Overview section. From that month through November 1972 the Overview section included
HES data in all but two months, July 1969 and February 1970 (45 of 47, 95%). Consecutive
reports without HES content in the Overview section only occurred at the very end of the
advisory team’s existence (December 1972 through February 1973) and at the start of use of the
province report (December 1967 through February 1968). Without the missing Dinh Tuong
province reports (November 1967 and March 1968 through December 1968), it is not clear if the
PSA began to consistently include HES data in the Overview section during 1968.
HES content made a remarkably consistent appearance in the Overview section of the
Dinh Tuong province reports while John D. Evans, Jr. served as the team’s PSA from January
1971 to the end of the team’s operations in February 1973. Evans opened nearly all of his
Overview section entries in the province report with references to HES scores. Of the 25
province reports he signed, 22 of them included HES content in the Overview section. 754 In his
first 13 months as PSA—and 14 of his first 15 months—he opened his Overview section with
HES content in the first sentence. The sentences always started with the phrase “The [month]
HES reported [or “revealed” or “attests” or “indicates”].” For example, the first sentence in
Overview section of the May 1971 report said, “The April HES revealed that the number of AB
hamlets increased by four to 288—60.4% of the 477 hamlets and 74.1% of the population.” 755
The first sentence of November 1971 reports stated, “The October HES attests that Dinh Tuong

754

The November 1972 province report was signed by Acting PSA John D. Ramsey. That report is
excluded in this count.
755 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “May 1971 Province Report,” June 1,
1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD. HES data lagged a month behind province reports.

251

Province is making modest strides in accomplishing the goals of the 1971 CDLD Plan.” 756
Evans used HES data to shape his overarching assessment of Dinh Tuong province. Thus,
Evans framed his description of the province in terms of the level of control that the GVN
exerted over villages and hamlets in Dinh Tuong, according the HES scores. These scores
became the language Evans used to convey those assessments. Only once, in the March 1971
province report, did Evans question the validity of the HES data. 757 To what extent Evans
believed the HES data or how well it represented reality is not knowable from the report. It
appears likely that he found HES data to be an effective shorthand and a useful way to convey
and frame the situation in Dinh Tuong. 758 Starting in April 1972 Evans changed his pattern for
positioning HES data in the Overview section, dropping this information to the middle of his
entries. This change was driven by the Easter Offensive, a large-scale attack launched at the end
of March by the North Vietnamese military throughout many areas in South Vietnam, which
included attacks by the South Vietnamese insurgency. The Easter Offensive turned into a series
of attacks and battles that lasted into the fall. During this time Evans led his Overview entries
with accounts of armed engagements that took place in Dinh Tuong.
756

Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province and My Tho City Advisory Team), “November 1971
Province Report,” December 1, 1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications
and Records Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
757 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “March 1971 Province Report,” April 1,
1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD. Evans wrote, “The February HES reported a 0.9% population drop in
the ABC category; 9 B hamlets slipped to C and one hamlet dropped to D. Actually, relative security
(95.7%) is not that good. This is not to say that HES is wrong; it is a very good trend-indicator—and a
month old. The enemy initiated 84 incidents (only 2 more than last month), but the nature of these attacks
is changing.”
758 It is possible that Evan received pressure from the IV Corps Office of CORDS to lead his Overview
sections with HES data, although that does not seem likely because this pattern was not present across
province reports from the 16 IV Corps advisory teams.

252

Evans’ two predecessors, Harry O. Amos and Joy K. Vallery, also included HES data in
their Overview section entries in the provinces reports that they signed. In the five province
reports that Amos signed from January through June 1969, plus the one that Howard R. Gross
signed as acting PSA in April 1969, Amos usually wrote five- to six-paragraph Overview section
entries. In four of the six entries, the second paragraph was dedicated to reporting HES figures.
While Amos did not open his Overview entries with HES data, he did dedicate at least one
paragraph in four of his five entries to this type of data. His last two province reports in May and
June 1969, in fact, included tables with HES data within the Overview section. Joy Vallery also
included HES content in his Overview entries on a consistent basis, with 14 of the 16 province
reports he signed for containing HES content in that section. 759 Over the course of his term as
PSA, Vallery was not as consistent as Amos or Evans in how he presented his HES content. In
four of his last five province reports (August through December 1970), however, Vallery started
his Overview section with sentences conveying HES data.
This careful look at how the Dinh Tuong PSAs presented HES content within the
Overview Section of their province reports illustrates some of the recordkeeping behavior factors
that shape the content of records. The variation between Amos, Vallery, and Evans provides
evidence of the significant role that individuals play within the bounds of institutional
recordkeeping. As PSAs they had the latitude within the framework of the various warrants and
rules to interpret and shape the content and narrative of their province reports. As noted earlier,
the Dinh Tuong advisory team used HES data in their Overview section more frequently than the
Phong Dinh advisory team and especially the Kien Hoa team. Recordkeeping behaviors,
therefore, varied between teams and within advisory teams over time as the PSAs changed. The
759

16 of 18 of province reports had HES content in the Overview section counting the two province
reports signed by acting PSAs during Vallery’s time as PSA.

253

presence and pattern of HES data in the overview section of the province report is an example of
individuals and circumstances coming to the forefront as the recordkeeping factors exerting the
largest influence over the content of records.
In order to take a closer look at how PSAs used HES data or wrote about the HES in the
Overview section, I have coded the HES content appearing in this section of the province reports
for five themes: 1) HES Scores as Description, 2) Explaining HES Scores, 3) Predicting HES
Scores, 4) Administration, 5) Validity and Reliability. Definitions for these themes are in
Appendix A. Additional details on this coding are discussed in Chapter Three and Appendix A. I
have coded all IV Corps province reports from the month of January as well as all available
reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh advisory teams. The results of the
January reports are conveyed in Table 6.7. Results from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong
Dinh reports are contained in Table 6.8.
Table 6.7
HES Content in the Overview Section by Category,
All January IV Corps Province Reports
Category

Portion with HES
Content in Overview
Section

Portion of all
January Reports

HES Content
in Overview
Section

100% (38/38)

36% (38/96)

HES Scores
as Description

89% (34/38)

35% (34/96)

Explaining
HES Scores

26% (10/38)

3% (10/96)

Predicting
HES Scores

8% (3/38)

3% (3/96)

Administration

18% (7/38)

7% (7/96)

Validity and
Reliability

16% (6/38)

6% (6/96)

254

Table 6.8
HES Content in the Overview Section by Category,
Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh Province Reports
Category

Portion
with HES
Content in
Overview,
Dinh Tuong

Portion of
all Reports,
Dinh Tuong

Portion
with HES
Content in
Overview,
Kien Hoa

Portion of
all Reports,
Kien Hoa

Portion
with HES
Content in
Overview,
Phong Dinh

Portion of
all Reports,
Phong Dinh

HES Content
in Overview
Section

100%
(45/45)

72%
(38/53)

100%
(20/20)

31%
(20/63)

100%
(23/23)

40%
(23/58)

HES Scores
as Description

96%
(43/45)

81%
(43/53)

60%
(12/20)

19%
(12/63)

91%
(21/23)

36%
(21/58)

Explaining
HES Scores

27%
(12/45)

23%
(12/53)

30%
(6/20)

10%
(6/63)

13%
(3/23)

5%
(3/58)

Predicting
HES Scores

13%
(6/45)

11%
(6/53)

30%
(6/20)

10%
(6/63)

35%
(8/23)

14%
(8/58)

Administration

22%
(10/45)

19%
(10/53)

15%
(3/20)

5%
(3/63)

9%
(2/23)

3%
(2/58)

Validity and
Reliability

4%
(2/45)

4%
(2/53)

10%
(2/20)

3%
(2/63)

0%
(0/23)

0%
(0/58)

The preponderance of HES content in the Overview section contained HES scores that
PSAs used to describe the security situation, the performance of the GVN, or trends in the war.
In the January reports, 34 of the 38 Overview sections with any kind of HES content had these
types of entries (89%), which I coded as “HES Scores as Description.” This type of entry was
present in 43 of 45 (96%), 12 of 20 (60%), and 12 of 23 (91%) Overview sections with any kind
of HES content in Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh reports, respectively. HES scores
were incorporated into Overview sections by PSAs to succinctly convey the level of control the
GVN had over the countryside of each province. The HES scores served as a statistical shorthand
in a narrative account of the conflict in each province. In these instances, HES scores were
presented at face value with little explanation. However, at other times PSAs included
explanations and discussion with the HES scores in their Overview entries, and occasionally

255

even questioned the meaningfulness and accuracy of the scores. I have scored these entries as
one of the other four HES content categories: “Explaining HES Scores,” “Predicting HES
Scores,” “Administration,” “Validity and Reliability.”
The most frequently occurring of these four remaining categories was “Explaining HES
Scores” with explanations occurring in 10 of the 38 (26%) Overview entries with HES content in
the January reports. Explanations occurred in 12 of 45 (27%), 6 of 20 (30%), and 3 of 23 (13%)
Overview sections with any kind of HES content in Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
reports, respectively. In these cases, PSAs qualitatively described events and circumstances to
explain the reasons for HES scores—especially ones that seemed surprisingly low or high or had
noteworthy changes. For example, after noting a 3.4% decrease in population living in hamlets
with a A, B, or C ratings in the May 1971 province report, the Phong Dinh PSA explained, “This
marks the third month of such regression and can be attributed to the increased enemy activity
accompanied by a decrease on the aggressiveness of the territorial forces.” 760 Increases or
decreases in scores were often attributed to increased operations and aggression by GVN or
insurgency forces, respectively. HES entries coded with this category were generally more
tightly integrated within the narrative weave of the Overview section. These explanations also
enhanced the centrality of HES data in these Overview entries because the PSA devoted some of
the qualitative narratives discussing and contextualizing the HES scores. In these cases, the PSAs
felt the scores were important enough to merit elaboration.
HES discussions in the Overview section of the province report also included predictions
that the PSA made of upcoming HES scores through the assessments of circumstances in their
760

Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team), “May 1971 Province Report,” June 2,
1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.

256

respective provinces. I have coded these entries as “Predicting HES Scores.” Three of the 38
(8%) Overview entries with HES content in the January reports included predictions of HES
scores. HES predictions were found in 6 of 45 (13%), 6 of 20 (30%), and 8 of 23 (35%)
Overview sections with any kind of HES content in Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
reports, respectively. For example, the Phong Dinh PSA wrote in the December 1971 province
report, “A great improvement in the HES ratings will result from the current campaign but I
predict that it will be 3 or 4 months before it will be evident.” 761 In a similar manner to the
entries that explained HES scores, entries that predicted these scores served to enhance the
centrality of the HES data in the Overview section narratives by making them a marker for
forecasting the performance of the GVN’s counterinsurgency campaigns.
Some Overview section entries included descriptions of the administration of HES as a
system. I have coded these entries as “Administration.” In the January reports, 7 of the 38
Overview sections with any kind of HES content had these types of entries (18%). Discussions
about the management of HES and HES data were present in 10 of 45 (22%), 3 of 20 (15%), and
2 of 23 (9%) Overview sections with any kind of HES content in Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and
Phong Dinh reports, respectively. Many of these entries were about adjustments to census counts
of villages and hamlets. Of the 15 Overview sections with this kind of HES content from the
Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh province reports, eight discussed adjustments to village
and hamlet populations, redrawing boundaries, eliminating unpopulated hamlets from registries,
and reconciling lists of hamlets. None of these report entries discussed the reasons why hamlet
and village populations sometimes changed so dramatically or why hamlets were entirely
761

Advisory Team 56 (Phong Dinh Province Advisory Team), “December 1971 Province Report,”
January 3, 1972, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records
Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

257

abandoned by their inhabitants. Some of the entries in the Overview section that discussed the
administration of HES pointed out decreases in HES scores because of increased evaluation
rigor. The January 1970 Ding Tuong report, for example, contained the comment, “Most of the
regression [in HES scores] will be due to more realistic ratings in Chau Thanh District.” 762 The
April 1970 report from the same advisory team noted that district advisors were spending more
time and effort on producing HES data. 763 The February 1971 Ding Tuong province report noted
in the Overview section a decrease in HES scores because of adjustments made to the weighting
of the scoring in the new HES/71 version of the system. 764 The March 1970 report from the same
advisory team noted that the implementation of the HES/70 version was causing confusion
among the advisory staff and their Vietnamese colleagues. 765 All of these entries provide
glimpses of HES scores being influenced not solely by the level of GVN control over its hamlets,
but also by a variety of other factors, such as the level of effort expended by those gathering
scores and confusion over the use of the system. These discussions in the Overview section of
theses province reports about the administration of the HES did not explicitly acknowledge the
762

Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “January 1970 Province Report,”
February 1, 1970, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records
Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
763 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “April 1970 Province Report,” May 3,
1970, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.
764 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province and My Tho City Advisory Team), “February 1971
Province Report,” March 1, 1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
765 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “March 1970 Province Report,” April 2,
1970, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.

258

biases of the Hamlet Evaluation System. There were a few entries, however, that did explicitly
discuss threats to the validity or reliability of HES scores.
As noted in tables 6.8 and 6.9, the most infrequent type of HES content entries appearing
in the Overview section consisted of discussions about the validity or reliability of the HES
scores. I scored these entries as “Validity and Reliability.” Only two of the 45 reports with HES
content in the Overview section from the Dinh Tuong advisory team had discussions about
reliability or validity. The January 1970 report referred to more realistic assessments in one
district leading to a downturn in HES scores. Following that, the March 1971 report noted that
HES data reported in the province reports were a month old and did not always provide the more
telling indication of the current state of security on the ground. 766 Of the two (out of 20 reports
with HES content) Kien Hoa province reports that I scored as having discussions about HES
validity or reliability, the June 1969 report made a cursory acknowledgement that HES scores are
“open to question” while, in contrast, the February 1970 report claimed that HES scores were “a
reasonable reflection of reality.” 767 None of the Phong Dinh province reports contained

766

Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “January 1970 Province Report,” 1;
Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “March 1971 Province Report,” 1.
767 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “June 1969 Province Report,” July 2, 1969,
1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province Reports;
Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the
United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College
Park, College Park, MD; Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “February 1970
Province Report,” March 3, 1970, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and
Records Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD. In the Overview section of its October
1971 province report, the Kien Hoa advisory team noted that some district chiefs were using the HES as a
management tool to pressure village and hamlet chiefs into a more vigorous posture against the
insurgency. The main focus of this entry was conveying HES scores of certain districts, so I coded it as
HES Scores as Description. The entry, however, briefly touched on factors that potentially influenced
HES scores and called into question the reliability of these scores. Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province
Advisory Team), “October 1971 Province Report,” November 3, 1971, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management
Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations

259

discussions of HES validity or reliability in the Overview section.
In the 38 January province reports with HES entries in the Overview section, only six
discussed the reliability or validity of HES scores. Two of those entries, both from the Vinh Binh
advisory team, touched on GVN officials manipulating HES scores. In the January 1969
province report, the Vinh Binh PSA noted that HES scores were at variance with reality because
the province chief had stated “future goals as present accomplishments, thereby forcing his
subordinates into irretrievable positions. Finding accomplishments virtually impossible, they
merely make false reports which conform to the Province Chief’s exaggerations. In his
inimitable style, the P.C. rarely actually checks the reports for authenticity; rather he prefers to
remain in righteous ignorance, so that he will not know that reality does not measure up to the
past claims.” 768 Three years later, the same advisory team once again raised the concern about
GVN officials altering HES scores to cover-up shortcomings in their performance. When GVN
officials fell short of goals, the advisory team claimed in their January 1972 province report,
“there has been a tendency to ignore or hide those enemy activities having a detrimental effect on
HES ratings.” 769 These entries illustrated and illuminated the role that the motives of records
creators—in particular, GVN officials—could play in shaping the content of records.
In addition to these discussions in the Overview section, the Dinh Tuong and Kien Hoa

for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in
Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
768 Advisory Team 72 (Vinh Binh Province Advisory Team), “January 1969 Province Report,” February
3, 1969, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.
769 Advisory Team 72 (Vinh Binh Province Advisory Team), “January 1972 Province Report,” February
4, 1972, 1, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.

260

advisory teams also expressed in the Future Problems and Projects section of their province
reports their concerns about GVN officials manipulating HES scores. In its August 1969 report,
for example, the Dinh Tuong team claimed that GVN officials would “exert increasing pressure
on their American counterparts to manipulate HES ratings for purposes of meeting 1969
Pacification Plan goals as well as such objectives as President Thieu’s desire to see 50% of the
population in A or B rated hamlets by 31 October.” 770 The team urged US officials at the corps
and theater level to remind GVN leaders and officers “that the HES is not the sole standard for
measuring the success or failure of a pacification plan and…to place less stress on HES ratings
when dealing with their subordinates.” 771
Concerns over the reliability of HES data generated by GVN officials was held by at least
some CORDS advisors and officials. Even a positive assessment about HES data generated by
GVN officials revealed some of these concerns. In the final province report from Dinh Tuong
advisory team in February 1973, the advisors noted that the GVN had taken over nearly all HES
data gathering and reporting. The team expressed confidence in the validity of these HES reports,
claiming, “The HES reporters are generally unbiased and well-informed. They unabashedly
recorded the 40 DE and 19 V hamlets generated by the NVA offensive last July. We feel that the
HES will continue to be as valuable—and as valid—as it has been in the past.” 772 The fact that
this team highlighted this forthright creation of HES reports indicates that concerns over the
770

Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “August 1969 Province Report,”
September 3, 1969, 8, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records
Branch/Province Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military
regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National
Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
771 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “August 1969 Province Report,” 8.
772 Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “February 1973 Province Report,” March
1, 1973, 3, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.

261

reliability of HES data was held by at least some CORDS advisors and officials.
The Kien Hoa PSA pointed out in the Future Problems and Projections section of its
September 1969 Kien Hoa province report that the misuse of the HES data was not exclusive to
GVN officials. He noted,
Criticism of the province chief by the Corps Commander for “failure” to meet project
goals indicates a need to assure that key Vietnamese officials understand this new tool
(HES) they are so fascinated with. As with many U.S. administrators, they must be made
to understand that the HES is not an exact portrayal of the situation on the ground, but a
tool to be used to indicate possible problem areas. If the province chiefs are to be judged
exclusively by the numbers appearing on the printout, the pressures to inflate those
numbers is going to be become intense. Of course, I am assuming our own high level
officials have too much sense to rely overmuch on the HES, or any other written report,
in making their judgments and decisions. 773
While this passage took a patronizing tone—“they must be made to understand”—toward
the South Vietnamese, the Kien Hoa PSA appears to have more sharply criticized US officials
for having the same uncritical overreliance on HES data—“own high level officials have too
much sense to rely overmuch on the HES.” This noteworthy passage encapsulated many of the
challenges with HES data. Many historians, such as Gabriel Kolko, Mark Moyar, and Guenter
Lewy, have contended that motivations of US district advisors, local GVN officials, highranking US and South Vietnamese officials, and villagers all played a roll in shaping HES
data. 774 The more closely commanders and senior leaders tied performance evaluations to HES

773

Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “September 1969 Province Report,” October
2, 1969, 5, CORDS/MR4/Management Support Division/Communications and Records Branch/Province
Reports; Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support (CORDS) military regions; Records
of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group 472; National Archives at
College Park, College Park, MD.
774 Gabriel Kolko, Anatomy of a War: Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical Experience
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1985), 241; James Gibson, The Perfect War: Technowar in Vietnam
(Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1986), 307–9; Mark Moyar, Phoenix and the Birds of Prey:
Counterinsurgency and Counterterrorism in Vietnam, Bison Books ed. (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 2007), 258–59; Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978),
192; Gregory A. Daddis, “No Sure Victory: Measuring U.S. Army Effectiveness and Progress in the
Vietnam War” (Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2009), 195. Some authors

262

scores, the more strongly motivated people were to skew those scores in support of their selfinterests. The entry also pointed out that HES data needed to be understood with subtlety
because, like all records, they were representational traces, not exact replicas, “of the situation on
the ground.” 775 The HES captured a particular measure of the conflict, and was designed to
indicate broad trends. Reasonable use of HES data required an understanding and
acknowledgment of the story that the HES was designed to tell.
While some entries in the Overview section of the province reports contained explicit
concerns related to the use of HES and its representation of the conflict, HES content in this
section of the province report was often a manifestation of using HES data as an unchallenged
shorthand account of the struggle between GVN and insurgent forces. The HES content in the
Overview section represented a tension between qualitative and quantitative descriptions of a
wicked problem. HES content was built with the intention of showing broad trends. Biases in the
data caused by data creators were smoothed out as returns from individual hamlets were
aggregated over several months and provinces. Yet, when HES data were included in province
reports, these data were embedded within thick, qualitative assessments of the state of the war
and the GVN within a particular province in a particular month. HES data functioned as a
language that could convey a quick sense of what was happening in the war. Some PSAs found
utility in using this quantitative language to convey a qualitative story concisely. The cost of this

claimed that HES data tended to be inflated because US and GVN commanders pressured subordinates to
report good results. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 192; Moyar, Phoenix and the Birds of Prey, 259; Gibson,
The Perfect War, 307. Other claims contended that DSAs gathered HES data anticipating the results
commanding officers wanted to see and that the US government used the inflated HES data to mislead the
public about the state of the war. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 192; Kolko, Anatomy of a War, 240. A US
Army colonel questioned the fundamental reliability of HES data, noting in a memoir that an advisor told
him that “HES was a night once a month when all the guys got together, had a party, got drunk, and tried
to figure out what figures would make higher headquarters happy.” David Hackworth, About Face: The
Odyssey of an American Warrior (South Melbourne: Macmillan, 1989), 747–48.
775 Advisory Team 88 (Kien Hoa Province Advisory Team), “September 1969 Province Report,” 5.

263

affordance in most of the Overview section entries was that these data that were best suited to
describe general trends in the war were being used to tell particular geographic- and timebounded stories. Additionally, the limits of these HES data were usually left unstated in the
province reports for at least several possible reasons: in the interest of brevity; implicit
assumptions about the reader’s understanding of the data; or acceptance of the data at face value.
Finally, some PSAs may have seen reporting HES data as an end in itself—a reporting obligation
to complete—regardless of how well they thought HES data represented reality.

HES Content in the Territorial Security Section
As noted above, I did not find instructions among the warrants and rules issued at the theater
level or by the IV Corps on including HES content in the province report, with the exception of
one instance. This exception came in the February 1970 IV Corps Office of CORDS Information
Bulletin 78-70, which instructed province advisors to include in the Improve Territorial Security
section, a sub-section embedded within the Priority Pacification Programs section, “a general
summary of the province security situation as it relates to the upgrading of hamlets to AB and
ABC categories. Compare this with the previous month.” 776 The instructions also asked advisors
to “discuss the status of land and water lines of communication” and include four sub776

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” February 14, 1970, Appendix 1 to
Inclosure 2, 1, General Records, 1967-1973, Box 1067, Folder 160-09A Misc -- 1971; Advisory Team 66
(Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team) Administrative and Operational Record, 1968-1973; Records of
MACV Subordinate Commands 1962-73, Records of Civil Operations for Rural Development Support
(CORDS) military regions; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record
Group 472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD. MACV Joint Directive 4-67, the first
warrant for the province report, characterized security as “the freedom of the population to lead their lives
free from the intrusions of an armed insurgency.” Headquarters, United States Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam et al., “MACCORDS Field Reporting System, Joint MACV/JUSPAO/USAID/OSA
Directive 4-67,” October 30, 1967, Annex A, Appendix 1, 2, MACV Planning Directive No 9-66 THRU
MACV Planning Directive No. 1-71, Box 62; MACV Adjutant General Issuances; Records of the
Adjutant General’s Office; Records of Headquarters of the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam
(MACV) 1958-1973; Records of the United States Forces in Southeast Asia, 1950-1975, Record Group
472; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.

264

sections. 777 Throughout its history, the province report had a Territorial Security section,
although its title and location in the report changed over time. 778 Information Bulletin 78-70
presented an update to the province report template presented in MACV Joint Directive 2-69.
The Joint Directive asked province advisors to include in the Territorial Security section “a
general summary of the province security situation as it affects pacification activities. Compare
this with the previous month. In this general statement, discuss status of land and water lines of
communication (LOC’s).” 779 Instructions for this section in Joint Directive 2-69 did not include
any references to the HES. After Information Bulletin 78-70, the next set of instructions from the
IV Corps Office of CORDS which included a province report template, was Letter of Instruction
3-71, issued in January 1971. This letter of instruction did not mention HES scores for the
Territorial Security section. Instead it directed advisors to “Include a general summary of the
province security situation as it affects pacification activities. Compare this with the previous
month. In this general statement, discuss status of land and water lines of communication
(LOCs).” 780

777

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2, 1.
778 See Table 5.2 in Chapter Five for an overview of where the Territorial Security section appeared in
the various iterations of the province report.
779 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Annex A, Appendix 1, Tab A, 1.
780 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 3-71,” Inclosure 1, 1.

265

Table 6.9
Outline of Instructions for the Territorial Security Section in IV Corps, Office of
CORDS, Information Bulletin 78-70 and Letter of Instruction 3-71 781
Information Bulletin 78-70
February 14, 1970
2. Priority Pacification Programs
a. Improve Territorial Security
(1) Enemy Situation
(2) Friendly Situation
(3) Status of RF and PF
(4) Status of National Police

Letter of Instruction 3-71
January 11, 1971
2. Priority Pacification Programs
a. Territorial Security
(1) Enemy Situation
(2) Friendly Situation
(3) Status of RF and PF

A review of the Territorial Security sections in all January 1970 IV Corps province
reports reveals none with HES content, while 8 of 16 (50%) of the January 1971 IV Corps
province reports had HES content in this section.
Table 6.10
January Province Reports with HES Content in the Territorial Security Section
January 1973
January 1972
January 1971
January 1970
January 1969
January 1968
0

5

10

While clearly there was a notable increase in the presence of HES data in the Territorial Security
section after the information bulletin was issued, it is difficult after the fact to determine a causal
relationship between the instructions and the presence of the HES content, with many

781

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “CORDS DMAC Information Bulletin 78-70,” Appendix 1 to Inclosure 2, 1;
Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 3-71,” Inclosure 1, 1.

266

confounding factors being present which could pose alternative explanations for the change. In
addition, the January 1971 reports were produced 11 months after Information Bulletin 78-70
was released, relatively far removed from the bulletin’s issuance. To address this issue, I
examined all province reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh advisory teams
from February 1969 through January 1972 (36 months), which runs twelve months before
Information Bulletin 78-70 to twelve months after Letter of Instruction 3-71. The findings
indicate that the province report’s rules played a role in shaping the content of those reports, but
also suggest that province senior advisors (PSA) and their advisory teams had the space within
those rules to significantly shape the content of their report. Tables 6.11 and 6.12 give snapshots
of how frequently HES content appeared in the Territorial Security section of the province
reports of these three advisor teams during this time period.
Table 6.11
Phong Dinh, Kien Hoa, and Dinh Tuong Province Reports with HES Content
Clustered by Date
Date Segments
February 1969 to before
Information Bulletin 78-70
12 Months
February 1969 – January 1970
Information Bulletin 78-70 to before
Letter of Instruction 3-71
11 Months
February 1970 – December 1970
Letter of Instruction 3-71 to
January 1972
13 Months
January 1971 – January 1972

Phong Dinh
1 of 12
8%

Kien Hoa
1 of 12
8%

Dinh Tuong
0 of 12
0%

10 of 11
91%

7 of 11
64%

0 of 11
0%

2 of 13
15%

0 of 13
0%

13 of 13
100%

267

Table 6.12
Phong Dinh, Kien Hoa, and Dinh Tuong Province Reports with HES Content
Clustered by Province Senior Advisor
Date Segments
Lester M. Conger
14 Months
February 1969 – March 1970 782
Harold A. Van Hout
14 Months
April 1970 – May 1971
Edward J. Porter
8 Months
June 1971 – January 1972 783
Albert L. Kotzebue 784
36 Months
February 1969 – January 1972
Harry O. Amos 785
5 Months
February 1969 – June 1969
Joy K. Vallery 786
18 Months
July 1969 – December 1970
John D. Evans, Jr.
13 Months
January 1971 – January 1972

Phong Dinh
2 of 14
14%

Kien Hoa
NA

Dinh Tuong
NA

11 of 14
79%

NA

NA

0 of 8
0%

NA

NA

NA

8 of 36
22%

NA

NA

NA

0 of 5
0%

NA

NA

0 of 18
0%

NA

NA

13 of 13
100%

HES content was present in the Territorial Security section of the Phong Dinh province
reports 13 times (36%) from February 1969 through January 1972. 12 of those 13 entries with
HES content occurred from March 1970 through February 1971. In other words, the HES content
started appearing in this section one month after the issuance of Information Bulletin 78-70 and
stopped appearing one month after the release of Letter of Instruction 3-71. Changes in PSAs
782

This is inclusive of the March 1969 and February 1970 province reports when Franklin F. Kelly Jr.
signed for the reports as the acting PSA.
783 This is inclusive of the November 1971 province report when Bill J. Jadwin signed for the report as
the acting PSA.
784 This is inclusive of the July 1969, August 1969, April 1970, December 1970, and May 1971 province
reports when Amil J. Eckhart signed for the report as the acting PSA.
785 This is inclusive of the April 1969 province reports when Howard R. Gross signed for the report as the
acting PSA.
786 This is inclusive of the December 1969 province report when Hugo W. Matons signed for the report
as the acting PSA and the June 1970 province report when C. W. Eckels signed for the report as the acting
PSA.

268

appear to have occasionally changed the pattern of an advisory team’s province reports.
However, this does not appear to be the driving factor for this particular change of pattern in the
Phong Dinh province reports. As indicated in Table 6.1 the leadership of the advisory team
changed in April 1970—two months after Information Bulletin 78-70—when Colonel Harold A.
Van Hout took over from Colonel Lester M. Conger and signed for that month’s report.
Lieutenant Colonel Edward J. Porter replaced Col. Van Hout in June 1971—five months after
Letter of Instruction 3-71—and signed for that month’s province report. Although Col. Van Hout
took over for Col. Conger shortly after the release of Information Bulletin 78-70, Col. Conger
included HES data in the Territorial Security section in the March 1970 province report, his last
month as the PSA. In the previous ten previous province reports he signed for, he only once
included HES in this section. Col. Van Hout included HES data in this section in his first 11
province reports, but stopped in March 1971—one month after Letter of Instruction 3-71—and
did not include HES data for his last three reports. The evidence suggests that the Phong Dinh
advisory team was responsive to the changing instructions in the information bulletin and letter
of instruction and that the change in the report template instructions was the primary driver for
the change in the pattern of how this advisory team wrote the Territorial Security section.
In the Kien Hoa advisory team province reports, HES content appeared in the Territorial
Security section in 8 of 36 (22%) province reports from February 1969 through January 1972.
Seven of those occurrences happen from February 1970 through January 1971, when
Information Bulletin 78-70 and Letter of Instruction 3-71 were published, respectively. Four
province reports did not include HES data in the section during this period between the two rule
sets. However, like the Phong Dinh province reports, Kien Hoa has a similar pattern of reports

269

with HES data in the Territorial Security section clustered between the publication of
Information Bulletin 78-70 and Letter of Instruction 3-71. 787
The pattern of HES content in the Territorial Security section of province reports from
the Dinh Tuong advisory team was notably different than the pattern found in reports from the
other two advisory teams. From February 1969 through January 1972, HES content was present
in this section 13 times (36%). All of these appearances occurred from January 1971 through
January 1972. HES content, therefore, did not appeared in this section until 11 months after
Information Bulletin 78-70 was published. In fact, this content started to appear in the Territorial
Security section in the same month that Letter of Instruction 3-71, which had no mention of HES
data, was published. In addition, unlike the Kien Hoa and Phong Dinh province reports, HES
data continued to appear in the Territorial Security section in every Dinh Tuong province report
until January 1973. For 16 months, from September 1969 through December 1970, the advisory
team included a quantitative table, titled “Summary of Significant Activities,” as an appendix.
This table contained data on insurgents killed and captured, weapons captured, number of people
processed through the Chieu Hoi program, insurgent initiated incidents, insurgent mining of
roadways, local government troops kills, weapons lost, number of refugees, and the commodity
price index. The numbers from the current and proceeding five months were reported in this
table. In addition the table reported on the number of insurgent-controlled hamlets and the
populations of GVN-controlled, insurgent-controlled, and contested hamlets—all data that was
generated through the Hamlet Evaluation System. 788

787

Albert L. Kotzebue was the Kien Hoa PSA throughout the February 1969 to January 1972 span, so
there were no PSA changes to consider.
788 For three months, September, October, and November 1969, the province reports included the
“Master Provence HES Summary” as a second appendix. This table included monthly HES scores for
several provinces, including Dinh Tuong.

270

In January 1971 the Dinh Tuong advisory team stopped including the “Summary of
Significant Activities” appendix and began to include HES data in the Territorial Security
section. That was the same month that the advisory team’s leadership changed, as John D. Evans
Jr took over for Colonel Joy K. Vallery. HES data was reported in this section in a notably
consistent manner through January 1973, the advisory’s team penultimate province report. HES
scores were usually presented in a narrative paragraph, normally clustering the number of
hamlets together that had an A or B rating; an A, B, or C rating; or a D or E rating and noting
changes from the previous month. One or two tables presenting additional numeric details often
followed this paragraph. For example the May 1971 Dinh Tuong province report conveyed the
following information in this section:
During April the number of AB hamlets increased by four to 288 (60.4% of the 477
hamlets). Those in the ABC category decreased by six to 436 (92.7%). At present 97.1%
of the population lives in ABC hamlets; 74.1% inhabit AB hamlets. Of the 41 DE
hamlets, containing 16,500 residents, only one hamlet is still rated E. A comparison of
April and March statistics reveals the following:
HES (Mar 71 vs Apr 71)
(Hamlets)

A

B

C

D

E

V

Total

Mar 71

19

265

158

333

2

0

477

Apr 71

16

272

148

40

1

0

477

Change

-3

+7

-10

+7

-1

0

0

+4

-3

-1

0 789

The evidence suggests that Evans played a significant role in changing and shaping how
HES data was presented in the Dinh Tuong province reports. The switch from HES data being
conveyed in an appendix to the Territorial Security section coincided with Evans’ arrival. The
consistent reporting of HES data in the Territorial Security mirrored Evans’ stay as the PSA for

789

Advisory Team 66 (Dinh Tuong Province Advisory Team), “May 1971 Province Report,” 1.

271

the duration of the advisory team’s operation. It may be that another member of the advisory
team was the driving force behind shaping how HES data was articulated in their province
reports. A CORDS official may have expressed displeasure with the appendices and instructed
Evans to eliminate them when he took the PSA assignment. In contrast to the province reports
from the Kien Hoa and Phong Dinh advisory teams, the reports from the Dinh Tuong advisory
team illustrate that advisory teams did not always perfectly mirror the instructions of the rules
and warrants in their province reports. Within those rules and instructions was space for advisory
teams, especially the PSAs, to shape the province reports into their own structures and patterns.
The motivations, experience, knowledge, and judgment of members of the province advisory
teams and PSAs played an important role in shaping the reports and what they said, including the
stories the reports told and the details that they obscured. As with HES content in the Overview
section, the presentation of HES content in the Territorial Security section illustrates that the
creation of institutional records is shaped by multiple factors, and that at various times and in
various settings, different factors, such as people or rules, will come to the fore in shaping the
creation of these records.

Insurgent Forces Content
In this section, I examine how province advisory teams in the IV Corps described insurgent
forces in the Enemy Situation section of the province report. I have explored province reports
produced during the month of January from 1968 through 1973 from all IV Corps advisory
teams. I have coded the content in this section for three concepts: 1) descriptions of kinetic
engagements initiated by either insurgent forces or the GVN or its allies, 2) descriptions,
assessments, or estimates of insurgent force size, organization, or movement, 3) political, social,
or other non-military activities by the insurgency. These concepts are defined in Appendix A.

272

The findings from coding the Enemy Situation section for these three categories indicate
that IV Corps advisory teams used this section predominantly to document kinetic incidents
between government and insurgent forces. IV Corps advisory teams used the Enemy Situation
section on a consistent basis over the course of the province report’s existence. Of the 96
province reports created by all 16 IV Corps province advisory teams during the month of January
from 1968 through 1973, 89 included Enemy Situation section entries (93%). 790 Of those 89
reports, 87 contained accounts of kinetic engagements (98%); 55 contained descriptions of
insurgent force size, organization, or movement (62%); and 19 included descriptions of insurgent
political, social, or other non-military activities (21%).
Breaking down these numbers for each January allowed me to examine how frequently
these concepts were included in the Enemy Situation section over time. These findings are
summarized in Table 6.13.

790

In 10 of those 89 province reports the Enemy Situation section was not called out with a section
header entitled “Enemy Situation” or something similar. However, these 10 reports had paragraphs within
their Territorial Security section with content consistent with the content of Enemy Situation sections in
other province reports. Therefore, I counted these 10 province reports as having Enemy Situation
sections.

273

Table 6.13
Occurrence of Coding Categories in Enemy Situation Section in the Province Report
Enemy Situation
Section Present

16

87
98% of reports with
Enemy Situation
sections
14

Insurgent Force
Size, Organization,
Movement
55
62% of reports with
Enemy Situation
sections
10

Political, Social,
Non-military
Activities
19
20% of reports with
Enemy Situation
sections
4

14

14

11

1

16

16

11

0

15

15

10

0

16

16

9

6

12

12

4

8

January 89
1968 – 93% of all possible
1973
province reports
January
1968
January
1969
January
1970
January
1971
January
1972
January
1973

Kinetic
Engagements

Table 6.14
Percentage of Enemy Situation Entries per Coding Category
January 1968
January 1969
Non-military Activities
January 1970
Size, Organization,
Movement

January 1971

Kinetic Engagements
January 1972
January 1973
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100% 120%

This is the percentage of the Enemy Activity sections present in each set of January IV Corps
province reports that had content in each of the three coded concepts. For example, of the 16
January 1969 IV Corps province reports, 14 had Enemy Situation sections. Of those 14, I coded
all 14 as having Kinetic Engagements content, which is indicated as 100% in this table.

274

The data described in tables 6.13 and 6.14 give a strong indication that advisory teams
nearly always used the Enemy Situation section to describe a variety of kinetic actions. These
included accounts of shelling, hit-and-run attacks, mines laid by insurgents and struck by GVN
or civilian vehicles, or targeted killings by insurgent forces. These kinetic actions also included
armed clashes between GVN and allied units and insurgent elements, initiated by either side.
Kinetic actions appeared consistently across advisory teams and over time. This section also
frequently contained descriptions, estimates, and predictions of insurgent force strength, unit
organization and movements, which I have coded as “Insurgent Force Size, Organization,
Movement.” This type of content was most prevalent in the January 1969 province report
totaling 11 of 14 reports with an Enemy Situation section, (79%) but declined each January
before reaching only 4 of 12 reports with an Enemy Situation section (33%) in January 1973.
IV Corps province advisory teams infrequently used the Enemy Situation section to
describe non-military insurgent activities for 19 of 89 January reports with an Enemy Situation
section (21%), which I coded as “Political, Social, Non-military Activities.” There were no
descriptions of non-military insurgent activities in this section in any of the IV Corps province
reports from January 1970 and January 1971. There was an uptick in this kind of content in the
January 1973 reports with 8 of 12 reports containing non-military insurgent activity in the
Enemy Situation section (67%).
Further examination of these descriptions of non-military activities indicates that these
accounts fit within a framework of viewing the insurgency as a military force and not a social
movement. Of the 19 entries I coded as “Political, Social, Non-military Activities,” five
described propaganda activities, 4 relayed accounts of insurgents collecting taxes, and four

275

described “proselytizing” activities. 791 Although coded here as non-military activities, it is also
reasonable to frame these activities as civil affairs and psychological operations carried out by a
military force. Two of the most commonly used terms, “proselytizing” and “propaganda” held
the negative connotation of the insurgency tricking the population into supporting their cause.
The collection of taxes implied that insurgent forces were coercing funds out of local
populations. In the available province reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh
advisory teams, none of the Enemy Situation entries included descriptions of the insurgency as a
social revolution. 792 In these entries from the three advisory teams, the insurgency was
consistently conceptualized as a military force. The entries do not provide additional reasoning
or any consideration of why the population would support the insurgency other than coercion.
Examining the content of the Enemy Situation section afforded another opportunity to
examine the role of warrants in shaping the content of the province report. Reviewing the
province MACV and IV Corps Office of CORDS report templates that I examined in Chapter
Five revealed that the report warrants and rules framed the insurgency primarily, if not
exclusively, as a military force. Table 6.14 provides the instructions that the warrants and rules
provided for the Enemy Situation section. As noted above, the Enemy Situation section was a
subsection within a Territorial Security section, which was within the Priority Pacification
Programs section in most versions of the province report.

791

There were single mentions of relying on a local population, establishing a political presence, the
political administration of territories, political study courses, political rallies, not receiving the support of
civilians, insurgent morale, engaging in political negotiations with the GVN, and not changing political
and economic activities. Four of the 19 entries contained multiple topics.
792 The concept of the insurgency as a social revolution is discussed in Chapter Five.

276

Table 6.15
Instructions for Enemy Situation Section in the Province Report
Warrant & Rules

Province Report
Structure Location
4. Security / b.
Enemy Situation

Instructions

MACV
Memorandum
August 26, 1968

2a. Territorial
Security / a. Enemy
Situation

Only significant enemy actions that affect
pacification activities; indications of apparent
enemy intentions to disrupt the province
pacification effort; and the degree of threat to
important GVN population and economic centers.

MACV
Joint Directive 2-69
July 1, 1969

2. Priority Pacification
Programs / a.
Territorial Security /
(1) Enemy Situation

Include only significant enemy actions that affect
pacification activities and indications of apparent
enemy intentions to disrupt the province
pacification effort.

Office of CORDS
IV Corps
Information Bulletin
78-70
February 2, 1970

2. Priority Pacification
Programs / a.
Improve Territorial
Security / (1) Enemy
Situation

Include the number of enemy initiated contacts but
describe only significant enemy actions that affect
pacification activities and indications of apparent
enemy intentions to discrupt [sic] the province
pacification effort.

MACV
Joint Directive 4-70
December 1, 1970

2. Priority Pacification
Programs / a.
Territorial Security /
(1) Enemy Situation

Include only significant enemy actions that affect
pacification activities and indications of apparent
enemy intentions to disrupt the province
pacification effort.

Office of CORDS
IV Corps Letter of
Instruction 3-71
January 11, 1971

2. Priority Pacification
Programs / a.
Territorial Security /
(1) Enemy Situation

Include only significant enemy actions that affect
pacification activities and indications of apparent
enemy intentions to disrupt the province
pacification effort.

Office of CORDS
IV Corps Letter of
Instruction 10-71
March 12, 1971

2. Situation,
Problems, and
Analysis /
a. Self Defense

These paragraphs should contain brief statements
in subparagraphs covering any significant
achievements, non-achievements, or problems
which affect the status of any programs or
organizations related to that broad objective. Omit
subjects without special significance… Territorial
Security to include enemy situation, RF/PF, PSDF,
National Police, Phung Hoang, and Chieu Hoi.

MACV
Joint Directive 4-67
October 30, 1967

Include details and an evaluation of significant
enemy actions, both by Main Force and guerrilla
elements, affecting pacification activities. Comment
on indications of apparent enemy intentions to
disrupt the province pacification effort.

277

Office of CORDS
IV Corps Letter of
Instruction 40-71
August 4, 1971

2. Situation,
Problems, and
Analysis /
a. Self Defense

These paragraphs should contain brief statements
in subparagraphs covering any significant
achievements, non-achievements, or problems
which affect the status of any programs or
organizations related to that broad objective. An
assessment of the impact of various reward
programs and institutional changes on internal
security should generally be included. Omit
subjects without special significance… Territorial
Security to include enemy situation, RF/PF, PSDF,
National Police, Phung Hoang, and Chieu Hoi.

Office of CORDS
IV Corps Letter of
Instruction 11-72
April 20, 1972

2. Situation,
Problems, and
Analysis /
a. Self Defense

These paragraphs should contain brief statements
in subparagraphs covering any significant
achievements, non-achievements, or problems
which affect the status of any programs or
organizations related to that broad objective. An
assessment of the impact of various reward
programs and institutional changes on internal
security should generally be included. Omit
subjects without special significance… Territorial
Security to include enemy situation, RF/PF, PSDF,
National Police, Phung Hoang, and Chieu Hoi.

Five of the nine warrants and rules that I examined, from the MACV August 1969
memorandum through the IV Corps Office of CORDS January 1971 letter of instruction,
included guidance that said, or essentially said, “Include only significant enemy actions that
affect pacification activities and indications of apparent enemy intentions to disrupt the province
pacification effort.” 793 These instructions asked advisory teams to focus on actions and
indications that affected or disrupted the GVN’s pacification efforts. This framed the insurgency
not as a movement that built but as a force that destroyed. Within this construct, the insurgency
acted only as an entity in opposition to government activities. Starting with the March 1971 IV
Corps Office of CORDS letter of instruction, the guidance for this section reduced its reference

793

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 470,” Tab A to Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

278

to the insurgency in a brief mention, “territorial security to include enemy situation.” 794 These
instructions asked advisory teams to note the enemy situation and various GVN security
programs only if they were “significant achievements, non-achievements, or problems which
affect the status of any programs or organizations related to that broad objective.” 795 These
instructions, like the previous rules, framed the insurgency not on its own merits, but as a
problem that interfered with government programs. Furthermore, the Enemy Situation section
was, for most versions of the province report, situated within a larger territorial security section.
Thus, the structure, in addition to the instructions of the province report, framed the insurgency
as merely an opposing armed force and did not provide the prompt to describe it as a social
movement.
The structure of the province report was shaped to focus on the GVN. The report had
many multiple sections for describing provincial GVN officials, programs, local security forces,
and the economy. This framing reflected the responsibilities of the province advisory teams and
the realities of operating in a war zone. The central responsibility of the advisory teams was to
advise provincial governments. In addition, US advisors could not safely operate in areas
controlled by the communist insurgents or North Vietnamese forces. Travel into contested areas
could be extremely dangerous. Advisors’ primary focus, advising the GVN and security
concerns, prevented them from reporting on the insurgency with anywhere near the same depth
as their reporting on the GVN. The warrants and rules of the province report reinforced, rather
than mitigated, these existing structural tendencies in the province advisory teams’ reporting.

794

Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” Inclosure 1, 1.
795 Wilbur Wilson, Asst. DEPCORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Headquarters, Delta Military
Assistance Command, “DMAC CORDS Letter of Instruction 10-71,” Inclosure 1, 1.

279

Conclusion
This chapter is the third and last findings chapter of this dissertation. While Chapter Four
addressed the institutional, political, and military context of the province report and Chapter Five
discussed the recordkeeping context and structure of the province report, in this chapter I
examined the content of province reports. This content layer of my context-structure-content
analysis of the province report focused on the presence and pattern of HES scores and discussion
about the HES in the Overview and Territorial Security sections of the province report. I also
examined how insurgent forces were described in the Enemy Situation section of the province
report, in order to explore the relationship between the content of records and the rules that
govern their creation. I completed this content analysis by examining province reports created by
all 16 IV Corps province advisory teams during the month of January from 1968 through 1973,
plus all available reports from the Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, and Phong Dinh advisory teams.
In this chapter I explored several themes that appeared in the Chapters Four and Five, the
first two findings chapters. The examination of HES content in the Overview section of the
province report afforded me the opportunity to explore the role that an individual plays as a
factor in shaping institutional recordkeeping. The warrants and rules for the province report gave
individual PSAs notable latitude to highlight what each felt were the most salient points of the
war and the performance of his GVN partners during each month. The Overview section became
a space in which the patterns and writing habits of individual PSAs came to the fore as a
predominant factor in shaping the content of the province report. In looking at HES content in
the Overview section, I also had the opportunity to further explore the dynamic between
qualitative narratives that can richly describe environments and quantitative data designed to
scale up to the full scope of a wicked problem. In looking at HES content in the Territorial
Security section of the province report, I was able to explore the themes of the roles that

280

individuals and warrants play in shaping the content of records. I was also able to examine how
warrants can normalize the description of wicked problems into terms and concepts that
institutions already understand. I was able to further consider this theme of warrants normalizing
the content of records through my examination of the description of insurgent forces in the
Enemy Situation section of the province report.

281

Part Three
Themes

282

Chapter Seven
Discussion

Introduction
In this chapter, I have summarized and recast the findings presented in Chapters Four, Five, and
Six against the themes and research questions I articulated in Chapter One. There are four
research questions posed in this dissertation—two that directly emerge from the historical case
study and two conceptual questions. The research questions are:
•

Case Study Research Questions
o In what ways did US civilian and military officials use the province report to
document and understand the Vietnam War?
o In what ways did the structure and rules of the province report frame its
documentation of the Vietnam War?

•

Conceptual Research Questions
o In what ways do organizations’ recordkeeping practices frame their understanding
of wicked problems?
o In what ways can wicked problems be seen as recordkeeping challenges?
This dissertation contains two overarching themes: 1) wicked problems as recordkeeping

challenges and 2) institutional recordkeeping effectiveness. Both of these themes each have three
sub-themes. These themes and sub-themes are listed below in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1
Themes and Sub-themes
Themes
1. Wicked problems
as recordkeeping
challenges

Sub-themes
1.1 Thick description at scale
1.2 Role of the individual within an institutional setting
1.3 Normalizing description to the familiar through warrants

2. Institutional
recordkeeping
effectiveness

2.1 Role of thoughtful analysis
2.2 Concise, efficient, and timely report writing
2.3 Burdensome report writing

283

Wicked Problems as Recordkeeping Challenges
At the core of this overarching theme is the contention that wicked problems are recordkeeping
challenges. As discussed in Chapter One, wicked problems are deeply complex problems that
can change unpredictably and are understood differently by an assortment of constituencies.
Portraying wicked problems with any measure of fidelity requires thick description that can
encapsulate the depth of the challenges these problems present. At the same time, wicked
problems are, by definition, large problems. A single individual or institution cannot directly
witness the full scope of a wicked problem. Therefore, conceptualizing a wicked problem
requires a representation—a record—of the problem. Documentation of wicked problems must,
therefore, capture both the scope and richness of these problems.
These two dimensions, scope and richness, are represented within the first sub-theme of
thick description at scale. In the historical case study of the province reports, both dimensions
appear in the use of Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) quantitative data as part of the province
report qualitative narratives. More broadly, the province report served as a qualitative report in a
larger network of scalable, quantitative reports. Individual advisors determined how quantitative
HES data was embedded within the narratives of the province reports and, in the main, the
overall tenor of each province report’s narrative. The role that advisors played in shaping the
province reports’ content is at the heart of the second sub-theme, the role of the individual within
an institutional setting. In addition, the warrants and rules steered the content of the province
reports in particular directions. The role of the warrants and rules governing the province reports
forms the basis of the third sub-theme, normalizing description to the familiar through warrants.
The centrality and complexity of recordkeeping in a wicked problems context is
demonstrated by considering the challenge of describing wicked problems thickly and at scale in
the presence of factors such as warrants and individuals’ motivations which can influence that

284

description. Defining a wicked problem emerges from documenting the problem. Addressing a
wicked problem is largely done in the act of defining the problem. Thus, attempts to meet the
challenges of wicked problems are, to a significant degree, recordkeeping acts—acts that have
their own set of complexities, challenges, and wickedness.

Thick Description at Scale
One challenge in conducting a historical case study with the intent of making generalizations to a
theoretical proposition is avoiding treating contemporary actors in the historical event as mere
stand-ins for our lessons, or to judge them on the basis of hindsight. By generously treating
historical actors as fully realized, with their own intelligence and failings, and understanding the
limiting circumstances under which they operated, we can draw meaningful lessons from
historical case studies and apply them to our contemporary society.
It is easy to criticize MACV and CORDS for trying to reduce the Vietnam War into a
mere set of numbers that ended up misrepresenting the war, misleading the American public, and
creating perverse incentives. 796 There is plenty to criticize about how American officials
measured and analyzed the war. 797 There were rigorous internal debates and critiques within
MACV and CORDS throughout the war about how the US documented the conflict. Out of this
contemporaneous criticism, a new wave of counterinsurgency reports, including the province
report, emerged from CORDS and MACV in 1967. Part of the richness of the case study of the
province report was the debate among American officials about how to measure the war. It
provides an illustration of multiple organizations and individuals grappling with the complexity

796

See, for example, Nick Turse’s critique of MACV’s use of body counts in Kill Anything That Moves:
The Real American War in Vietnam (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2013).
797 See Gregory A. Daddis, No Sure Victory: Measuring U.S. Army Effectiveness and Progress in the
Vietnam War (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011) for a wide-ranging critique of how MACV and
CORDS measured and evaluated the Vietnam conflict.

285

of documenting a wicked problem. It is in this struggle that we may be able to draw our most
useful lessons about the relationship between recordkeeping and wicked problems.
The Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) was a flashpoint in the debate over how to
measure the war. The system was designed to present a systematic view of the war across the
thousands of villages and hamlets in South Vietnam. It enabled US officials to make
comparisons across time and space. Important figures in the US counterinsurgency campaign
such as Robert Komer, John Paul Vann, and Thomas Thayer all gave forceful defenses of the US
effort to systematically analyze the war, which included quantifying aspects of the conflict.
Komer, for example, noted that the US needed a way to systematically evaluate what was
happening in thousands of villages and hamlets across South Vietnam. 798 Vann highlighted the
need to have a systematic way to gather and analyze data so CORDS and MACV could
accurately compare how GVN and US programs and officials were performing. 799 Both officials
were aware that quantitative representations of the complexity and messiness of the war were an
approximate representation at best. They were striving to get a rough picture of the entire war.
Komer and Vann, along with many other US officials were dissatisfied with reports from the
early to mid-1960s, viewing them as too idiosyncratic, impressionistic, and subjective to be
useful as the basis for systematic and comprehensive analysis of the war. Komer acknowledged
that this quantitative, systematic, goal-oriented approach to documenting the war ran the risk of
giving people perverse incentives to manipulate numbers for their own interests. This approach,
Komer also noted, had the potential to seduce people into unthinkingly reducing the war into a

798

Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 243.
John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Military Assistance
Command, “Comparative Analysis of Provincial Accomplishments on 1969 Pacification Plan.”
799

286

mere set of numbers, where numbers became ends in themselves, and not representations to a
more complex reality. 800
The province report was meant to serve as a check against that reductionist temptation.
CORDS intended for the report to thickly represent and make sense of the often-bewildering
dynamics occurring within each province. The province report was designed to give CORDS and
MACV a rich, qualitative understanding of the war at the province level that would arm them
with the knowledge they needed to draw informed, sensible conclusions about the quantitative
data they were analyzing. As noted in Chapters Five and Six, however, the province report had
an embedded set of assumptions that shaped the qualitative description of the war and the GVN
that the report was supposed to deliver. Chapter Five contained a close examination of the
province report’s warrants and rules that revealed how the architects built in a focus on GVN
programs and counterinsurgency goals. The structure and instructions of the report made
assumptions that everyone in South Vietnam, save for the armed insurgents, would share a vision
of what progress would entail—an assumption that did not match the diversity of what some
considered progress.
In addition to the program-centric assumptions that the rules and warrants injected into
the province report, many PSAs, on their own inclination, framed their narratives around
quantitative HES data. As reviewed in Chapter Six, HES data, for example, was consistently and
prominently featured in the Overview section of province reports from the Dinh Tuong advisory
team. One particular Dinh Tuong PSA, John D. Evans, Jr., framed his overarching assessment of
the province in terms of the rise and fall of HES scores, usually starting every Overview entry
with a recitation of these scores. For Evans and other PSAs, HES scores became a shorthand

800

Komer, “Organization and Management of the ‘New Model’ Pacification Program - 1966-1969,” 189.

287

language that could quickly convey a sense of the state of the war in individual provinces. The
language of HES scores, and how they were conveyed in the province report, embedded several
implicit assumptions. Of the Overview section entries with HES content, comparatively few
contained discussions about the management, reliability, or validity of these scores. The limits of
HES scores were essentially left unstated in these reports, either because the authors accepted the
scores at face value or they assumed the reader’s knowledge of the data’s strengths and
weaknesses.
The province report and the broader set of quantitative reports in the MACV field
reporting system provided an example of a large, multi-part institution struggling to implement
and maintain a recordkeeping infrastructure and process capable of documenting a wicked
problem with thick description at scale. Through most of the reports in the field reporting
system, MACV and CORDS attempted to systematically document the full scope of the war by
using a wide range of quantitative measures and a framework of plans, goals, and programs that
were designed to support relatively straight-forward measurements. At the same time, MACV
and CORDS included the province report in the field reporting system to facilitate a narrative
assessment of the war in each province. This and other narrative reports—this thick
description—were designed to help keep statistical and process-oriented analysis grounded in the
multifaceted realities of the war and preventing the analysis from drifting off into its own
disassociated reality.
The province report emerged, however, out of the same institutions, people, and
underlying logic that generated the statistical data and program-oriented measures. It is
unsurprising that the province report had a program-centric orientation. Nor is it surprising that
PSAs leveraged the logic of HES data, the most widely used and notable statistical

288

counterinsurgency measure of the war, to form the basis of their narrative description of their
provinces and the war in the province report. This province report case study demonstrates that
the challenge to document a war at scale with thick description can be understood as an effort
that is fundamentally at tension with itself. Documenting a wicked problem is an ongoing
balancing act between richness and scale that requires continuous reexamination.

Role of the Individual Within an Institutional Setting
Within MACV and CORDS’ recordkeeping infrastructure, individual Province Senior Advisors
(PSA) and members of their province advisory teams had the latitude to significantly shape the
content of the province report to fit their understanding of the war. Their conceptualization of the
wicked problem they faced in Vietnam, along with their professional backgrounds, knowledge,
and motivations, were significant factors in determining how the content of province reports
characterized the war, insurgent forces, and provincial GVN administrations. Although this study
does not parse out the motivations or influences on the report writing of individual PSAs, it does
demonstrate that advisors had the space to extensively shape the narrative of their province
reports.
PSAs, as noted in Chapter Four, created province reports while carrying out an
immensely difficult job. Each PSA was the leader for a US province advisory team, which
included district teams, and additionally advised the GVN chief of his province on a wide range
of civil and security issues. The job demanded a wide range of skills and areas of expertise,
including military operations, policing, civil affairs, logistics, and training. Each PSA had to gain
a deep knowledge of his assigned province and its key actors and constituencies in short order as
most advisor assignments were only 12 months long, all the while mastering Vietnamese. The
PSA had to triangulate his own professional ambitions, as the assignment was possibly

289

detrimental to his career; the demands of his superiors; the broader goals of CORDS; and the
aims of the province chief, which were not always aligned with US interests. Province senior
advisors had to thread their own understanding of the war together with this multitude of often
competing interests into a single, coherent province report narrative. The PSAs attempted to
navigate that challenging narrative terrain within the latitude given to them by the province
report rules and warrants.
This latitude, enabled by these warrants and rules, allowed PSAs to determine what
topics they wanted to highlight and how to describe these in their province reports. As noted in
Chapter Five, two of the three warrants for the province report indicated that the report template
was a recommendation rather than an inflexible mandate, pointing out that the report sections
suggested “the subjects of primary interest to this headquarters [MACV]. There is no intent to
require inclusion of specific subject matter.” 801 The different patterns of how HES data appeared
in IV Corps province reports illustrated the flexibility that individual PSAs had to craft their
report narratives. For example, in Chapter Six, I looked at how John D. Evans, Jr., the Dinh
Tuong PSA from January 1971 through February 1973, featured HES scores prominently in his
Overview section entries in most of the 25 province reports he signed. He almost always started
these entries with HES scores—writing these opening sentences in the same pattern. Evans used
HES data to frame his overarching assessment of the Dinh Tuong government and events in that
province. While Evans’ two predecessors also used HES data in the Overview section of their
province reports, they did not use that data as consistently and prominently as did Evans. This
difference between Evans’s and his predecessors’ use of HES data in this section demonstrated
not only the leeway that the warrants and rules gave PSAs for injecting their own judgment, but
801

Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 269,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1; Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et
al., “Joint MACV Directive 4-70,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1.

290

also demonstrated that individuals’ knowledge, experiences, and views were a important factor
in shaping the content of the province reports.
One can get a closer look at the interplay between individual records creators and
recordkeeping warrants and rules as factors in shaping the content of records by reviewing HES
data in the Territorial Security section of the province report. In Chapter Six, I analyzed the
presence of HES data in the Territorial Security section entries in province reports produced by
the Phong Dinh, Kien Hoa, and Dinh Tuong advisory teams, all from the IV Corps. I framed my
analysis against changes in the rules for that section regarding the inclusion of HES content. The
IV Corps rules for this section ranged from not mentioning HES data, to asking for it in a
February 1970 rule, to once again making no request for HES data in a superseding January 1971
rule. The Phong Dinh and Kien Hoa teams essentially hewed to the changes in the instructions,
adding HES content to the Territorial Security section when the rules called for it, dropping that
data when it was no longer requested. The presence of HES content in the Territorial Security
section of the Dinh Tuong province reports transformed not with updates to rules, but with
personnel changes in the PSA role. The appointment of John D. Evans, Jr., mentioned above as
the Dinh Tuong PSA, coincided with significant changes on the conveyance of HES data in the
province team’s province report. In addition, HES data remained in the Territorial Security
section well past the point when rules required this data. Its presence mirrored Evan’s continued
tenure as PSA until the end of team operations in early 1973.
In this single section of the province report from these three advisory teams, we can see
recordkeeping rules and individuals as factors in shaping the content of records. In some
circumstances, rules and warrants were the prevailing recordkeeping factor. In other situations,
individuals held the most sway over records’ content. Advisory teams’ province reports did not

291

always perfectly mirror the report’s rules and warrants. The story of the province report
illustrates the ongoing dialectic between recordkeeping rules and the records creators.
Institutional records creation can be understood as a creative act of tension between the rules of
the institution and the individual operating within those institutional boundaries. This interaction
between institutional recordkeeping infrastructure and rules and the individuals operating within
that recordkeeping construct is vital to consider as we attempt to understand the role of
recordkeeping in wicked problem settings. Wicked problems demand scale that only institutions
can match, but they also demand a depth of understanding that only actors with the space to think
about and creatively describe the problems can provide.

Normalizing Description to the Familiar Through Warrants
Recordkeeping is a reinforcing, normalizing process for institutions. The recordkeeping
infrastructure of an institution supports understanding and making sense of the work that it
performs, the related work of others, and more broadly, the world that it engages. Active
recordkeeping is part of this sense-making act by normalizing actions and events into content,
context, and structure that members of the institution can consume and understand.
Recordkeeping warrants and rules provide the crosswalk between external reality and
consumable understanding. These warrants and rules are an expression of the underlying logic
behind every institution’s understanding of itself and its environment. This crosswalk exercise is
particularly important in a wicked problems context because there is often a great distance
between the full complexities and scope of a problem and institutional leaders’ brought
understanding of the world. Documenting a wicked problem is the act of traversing that gap
between the wicked problem and an institution’s worldview.

292

The American involvement in the Vietnam War can be understood as such a struggle, an
attempt to square institutional outlooks to the realities of a wicked problem. American historians
and participants in the war have claimed that the US military’s and government’s worldviews
brought to the Vietnam War, and their inability to adjust their worldviews and actions to the full
complexities of the war, were a critical factor in the outcome of the war. Andrew Krepinevich
and John Nagl, both defense policy analysts and retired US Army officers, explored the tension
within the US Army between understanding the Vietnam War as a traditional war of large unit
battles or as an insurgency, and how that struggle shaped America’s actions in Vietnam. 802
Jeffery Race, a former US advisor in the war, contended that the insurgent forces ultimately
prevailed because its leaders had a “comprehensive view of revolution as a stage-by-stage social
process” 803 whereas the GVN and the US saw the insurgency as a merely a threat to overthrow
the government regime rather than an attempt to overthrow “the existing social system itself.” 804
This misunderstanding of the conflict, Race contended, doomed the GVN to defeat. 805 American
sociologist James William Gibson claimed that the American conduct of the war was driven by
conceptions of power and knowledge held by a wide array of military officers and civilian
leaders and bureaucrats at a “deep structural level of logic.” 806 US leaders, Gibson argued, saw
the war as a “high-technology, capital-intensive production process,” 807 framing the conflict and
insurgent forces within a technological, scientific, and capitalistic world-view. Former US Army
officer and historian Richard Hunt contended that US leaders and advisors were susceptible to
802

Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam, 5–6, 21–23, 27–53–97, 165–168, 216–200; John Nagl, Learning
to Eat Soup with a Knife: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2005), 118–81.
803 War Comes to Long An, 141.
804 War Comes to Long An, 151.
805 War Comes to Long An, 151–52.
806 The Perfect War, 11.
807 The Perfect War, 26.

293

seeing various counterinsurgency programs and initiatives as ends in and of themselves, which
obscured fundamental socio-economic and political questions about Vietnamese society. This
program-centric view of the war bent the focus of measurements and reports to tangible
accomplishments that could be measured against programmatic goals, which often led to
misleading conclusions about the state of the war. 808
Certainly, there was not a singular understanding of the war among US officials or
institutions. Throughout the American involvement in Vietnam, US civilians and military
officials continuously debated the nature of the war and the best strategic options to follow, as
discussed in Chapter Four. The province report emerged out of this discussion. The province
report and the MACV field reporting system was part of the US government’s reorganization of
its civil affairs efforts in Vietnam with the creation of CORDS. The province report’s warrants
and rules, therefore, were reflections of the dynamic, ongoing discussions among a wide range of
civilian and military institutions to define and grapple with the wicked problem of the Vietnam
War. They were also a reflection of the prevailing line of thinking on what the US should do in
Vietnam. In turn, those report warrants and rules tended to reinforce that prevailing
conceptualization of the war.

808

Pacification: The American Struggle for Vietnam’s Hearts and Minds (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1995), 279. In another context, the President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI) provides an example of how the
intellectual context of an organization encountering a wicked problem framed its characterization and
description of the problem. Information science student and researcher Yee May Chua contended that the
President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI) operated within a framework of “a social epistemology of malaria”
that emerges from the practices and assumptions of the World Health Organization and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. In turn, this shaped how the PMI and its third party partners document
malaria—which Chua defines as a wicked problem—and malaria prevention and treatment efforts. Every
organization that describes and documents a wicked problem uses an “epistemology of knowledge” that
provides a grounding of research, practices, and assumptions that frame a wicked problem in ways that
makes sense to the professional and cultural traditions of the organization. “The Complex System
Records Model: Recordkeeping for Wicked Problems” (Masters Thesis, University of California Los
Angeles, 2012), 4–5.

294

Most of the sections in the province report focused on GVN counterinsurgency and local
development programs, such as Chieu Hoi, Rural Forces/Popular Forces (RF and PF), and Phung
Hoang (Phoenix). The spirit of the instructions for these report sections may have steered PSAs
to accept the underlying premise of these programs rather than to fundamentally question the
purpose of the programs or to delve into the complexity of the war. On balance, the warrants and
rules for the province report reflected an understanding that the people of South Vietnam,
especially the rural population, needed improvement in government-provided security, services,
and governance rather than a social and political revolution. To be sure, PSAs were given the
space in the report, especially in the Overall Status and Future Problems and Projections sections
to raise any concerns they had. The sections of the report that asked PSAs to write about specific
topics, however, tended to reflect this incremental view of the war, which aimed to defeat the
communist insurgency and essentially leave the current government and social order in place.
Additionally, as noted in Chapter Six, the province report’s warrants and rules steered advisory
teams to describe the insurgency as a military force rather than as a social movement. The
warrants and rules conceptualized the insurgency as a force that opposed and threatened GVN
programs through kinetic actions rather than a social order with its own logic. In this section on
insurgent forces, we see how the content of most reports content fell in line with the report’s
warrants, as the vast majority of entries described the insurgency as a military force and focused
on combat operations, including hit-and-run attacks, bombings, assassinations, and other uses of
force.
The warrants and rules of records meant to document wicked problems can be understood
as a reflection of the prevailing understanding of that problem, as we saw with the province
report. Records provide institutions with a bridge between their conceptions of reality and the

295

on-the-ground facts and the messiness of wicked problems. Ideally, records provide the
information that can enable institutions to continuously question and reshape their
conceptualizations of a wicked problem. This needs to be a reflexive process where the
recordkeeping infrastructure, including warrants and rules, are interrogated and adjusted. At their
most effective, reflective recordkeeping will have the power to change an institution’s perception
of a wicked problem and even its place in the world. 809 The inherent risk in a wicked problems
context is that recordkeeping warrants and rules are expressions of a specific understanding of
the problem formulated at a particular moment, made by the person or entity that had the
authority to create and enforce those warrants and rules. Without iterative reevaluation, this set
of recordkeeping warrants and rules will ossify into a singular point-of-view. However, by their
very nature, wicked problems are dynamic and multifaceted and cannot be properly understood
by a single viewpoint. Recordkeeping systems must be built with the robustness and flexibility to
formulate a complex, evolving, and even contradictory understanding of wicked problems if they
are going to be useful tools for institutions grappling with such challenges.

Institutional Recordkeeping Effectiveness
The theme of institutional recordkeeping effectiveness revolves around the effort by MACV and
CORDS to foster an efficient and effective report creation and management system. This effort
reflected an attempt by the US to maintain a system that could document the scope and
complexities of the Vietnam War. By extension, the province report and the broader
recordkeeping infrastructure of CORDS and MACV illustrate the central role that recordkeeping
plays in organizations that are attempting to understand and address wicked problems. This

809

Brian W. Head and John Alford highlighted the transformative experience of attempting to meet the
challenges of wicked problems for institutions in “Wicked Problems: Implications for Public Policy and
Management,” 722.

296

theme is composed of three sub-themes: 1) the role of thoughtful analysis in report writing, 2)
the importance of concise, efficient, and timely report writing, and 3) the concern that report
writing was too burdensome of a task for advisors.
Across MACV and CORDS, officials struggled to make sense of the war. While US
military forces and civilian agencies gathered tremendous amounts of data, they had difficulty
turning that data into a coherent, accurate, and meaningful picture of the war. Data gathering
tended to outstrip analysis. 810 Additionally, the war, which featured an insurgency, was
exceedingly difficult to understand and define. The war played itself out in deeply complex and
unique ways in each village across South Vietnam. 811 Thus the Vietnam War presented as a
wicked problem in two recordkeeping dimensions: 1) as a challenge to normalize accounts of the
war into something understandable, yet retain the fidelity of the conflict’s unique circumstances,
events, and actors and 2) as a challenge to richly and uniquely describe the war’s events and
locations at scale. These two dimensions are discussed above as sub-themes within the first
theme of wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges.
Embedded within the first theme is the recordkeeping challenge of creating
documentation of sufficient quality, effectiveness, and scale than can support meaningful
insights and good decision-making. The first theme can be understood as conceptualizing the
relationship between recordkeeping and wicked problems. The second theme—institutional
recordkeeping effectiveness—on the other hand, is directed toward understanding the attributes
that recordkeeping systems need to have in order to effectively help institutions define and

810

This is Gregory Daddis’ underlying thesis in his study of MACV’s efforts to measure the war. No
Sure Victory. This was also a central contention of Thomas Thayer. War without Fronts.
811 Thomas Thayer noted that the war manifested itself in each village in different ways, likening the war
to a mosaic. War without Fronts, 4.

297

address wicked problems. 812 This historical case study of the province report illustrates three of
these attributes—thoughtfulness, effectiveness, and economy of effort. These are clearly not the
only attributes required of such a system and the intent of this dissertation is not to build a set of
requirements for recordkeeping systems documenting wicked problems. Through telling the
story of the province report, however, I have illustrated, in the sub-themes below, some of the
recordkeeping characteristics that organizations must strive for if they are to address wicked
problems.

Role of Thoughtful Analysis
As discussed in earlier chapters, Joanne Yates provided a model of institutions sending records
with instructions, requirements, and goals down their organizational hierarchy and in turn
sending records documenting productivity and actions up their reporting structure. Yates’ model
provides a useful frame for describing the MAVC field reporting system, which encompassed the
province report. The field reporting system—managed by CORDS—was MACV’s attempt to
implement a network of reports that provided a systematic, comprehensive, and up-to-date
picture of the insurgency and the GVN effort to fight that insurgency. Individual advisors in
province and district advisory teams gathered data on a wide range of counterinsurgency
programs and economic, political, and social indicators and reported those data up the chain of
command in a set of reports that comprised the field reporting system. Synthesis and analysis of
those data usually occurred at higher levels of command. In contrast, province senior advisors
were required to sow their own analysis within the narrative of the province report. As discussed
812

Here “recordkeeping systems” is meant in a broad sense to encompass not just recordkeeping
applications, but also the institutions, people, infrastructure, polices, and procedures that, along with
applications, collectively compose recordkeeping systems. Digital Collections and Archives, Tufts
University and Manuscripts & Archives, Yale University, “Project Overview,” Fedora and the
Preservation of University Records (Medford, MA and New Haven, CT: Tufts University and Yale
University, 2006), 3, http://dl.tufts.edu/catalog/tufts:UA069.004.001.00001.

298

in Chapter Five, the province report was designed to move up the chain of command unchanged,
as a self-contained narrative. It was not meant to be aggregated and recast with other reports as
they moved up the reporting chain as was the case with so many of the quantitative reports in the
CORDS field reporting system. In the province report, analysis and report creation were meant to
be the same act. The quality and usefulness of the province report were designed to depend on
the thoughtfulness of the analysis in the report.
Officials within CORDS persisted in placing emphasis on the quality of the analysis in
province reports. The various rules and warrants for the reports provided PSAs flexibility within
the framework of the province report to discuss and highlight issues they felt were the pressing
concerns of their respective province. The province report was designed to accommodate
analysis, not to merely convey quantitative data that had been captured in other reports. CORDS
officials repeatedly emphasized the importance of thoughtfulness in the province report. For
example, as cited in Chapter Five, The Office of CORDS in the IV Corps reminded PSAs that,
“The value of the report is directly proportional to the degree of effort given to its presentation.
PSAs must concentrate on reporting significant events and on the analysis of their meaning.” 813

Concise, Efficient, and Timely Report Writing
In addition to concerns about the quality of analysis in their reports, MACV and CORDS
officials strongly encouraged PSAs to write their province reports concisely and turn them in on
time. In dynamic situations like wicked problems, timeliness is important. Because the war was a
dynamic phenomenon, MACV and CORDS needed an up-to-date understanding of what was
happening on the ground in the provinces across South Vietnam in order to remain responsive to
events. Providing a framework for advisory teams to turn in reports on time was a feature of the
813

Wilbur Wilson, Deputy for CORDS, Office of the Deputy for CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance
Command, “CORDS/DRAC Letter of Instruction 11-72,” 1.

299

field reporting system—a system designed to work systematically and comprehensively. As
noted in Chapter Five, CORDS tracked late reports and pointed out tardiness in monthly score
sheets. 814 Not only was timeliness an important feature of documenting the dynamic wicked
problem of the communist insurgency, it was a leverage point which CORDS officials used to
monitor how well advisory teams met their recordkeeping requirements. Keeping tallies of late
reports was a relatively simple, straightforward indicator of how well advisory teams managed
their report writing responsibilities.
CORDS leaders also placed a strong emphasis on advisors writing concise reports. It is
here that we probably see the most sustained and visible attempts by senior officials to change
the report writing behavior of advisors. CORDS officials at the theater and corps level issued
numerous memos and directives urging advisors to shorten their writing. Joint Directive 4-67,
the original warrant for the province report, noted, “This report will be most valuable if it is
short.” 815 As cited in Chapter Five, John Paul Vann bluntly told province senior advisors to
“shorten the [province] reports whenever possible. They are too wordy.” 816 He noted in another
memo, “There appears to be a belief that additional verbiage adds to the importance of a report.
Quite the contrary!” 817 In addition to issuing admonishments about verbose writing, CORDS
changed the structure of the province report to shorten its length. The most significant change
was to drop the district reports from the province reports. CORDS made other changes to the
report’s template and succeeded in shortening the province reports from typically upwards of 15
to 20 pages in 1968 to around five pages by 1972.
814

See for example, John P Vann, Deputy for CORDS, Office of CORDS, IV Corps, “CORDS IV Corps
Information Bulletin 147-69.”
815 Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam et al., “Joint MACV Directive 467,” Appendix 1 to Annex A, 1. This advice was repeated in MACV joint directives 2-69 and 4-70.
816 “CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
817 “CORDS IV Corps Staff Memorandum 47-69,” 1.

300

Besides incisiveness, CORDS leaders emphasized that advisors should write with
precision, clarity, and thoughtfulness. Vann declared noted in a memo “the poor grammar, the
poor spelling, the verbosity and the lack of proofreading” in the province reports. 818 Another
officer noted the misuse of terms, typographic and formatting errors, and missing sections in the
reports. 819 The quality of report writing was seen by at least by some CORDS leaders as an
essential component of the effectiveness of the province report, and more broadly the CORDS
field reporting system.
The MACV field reporting system was part of the broader effort of establishing CORDS
in 1967 to develop a better coordinated, more efficient, and more effective response to the
insurgency in South Vietnam. Despite concerns expressed by some MACV and CORDS advisors
that report writing was an activity apart from advising that took away from “real” advisory work,
the work of documenting, evaluating, and analyzing the GVN counterinsurgency effort and the
state of the war was indeed a core advising activity. In the context of the province advisory
teams, recordkeeping was an advisory act, a fundamental part of their attempt to address the
wicked problem of the insurgency.
Because recordkeeping is a fundamental component of confronting wicked problems,
organizations must have robust, scalable, and efficient recordkeeping systems that can document
the dynamic, large-scale complexity of wicked problems. The effectiveness of an organization’s
recordkeeping can therefore be understood as an indicator of the broader performance of an
organization as it grapples with wicked problems. This effectiveness can be understood as the
efficiency of a recordkeeping system. It can also be understood, however, as the fidelity of the

818

“CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.
Wendell P Knowles, Director, Plans, Programs and Reports Division, Office of the Deputy for
CORDS, Delta Regional Assistance Command, “Province Monthly Reports,” 1–2.

819

301

documentation produced by the system to the complexities of the problems being documented. A
good understanding of a wicked problem is a good documentation of the problem. Conversely,
poor documentation indicates a poor comprehension of a wicked problem. In Vietnam John Paul
Vann made some of the most explicit connections between the quality of report writing and the
quality of advising. As cited in Chapter Five, Vann wrote that “Rather than a successful program,
the lack of problems [described in province reports] indicates to me either a lack of interest and
involvement by the Province Senior Advisor in the reporting process, or a lack of comprehension
of the problems that you are all facing.” 820 For Vann, a lack of clear, precise, honest, and
thoughtful writing in a province report was a key indicator of a poorly performing province
advisory team. Without using the terminology of wicked problems or archival science, Vann
framed poor report writing as poor advising. Report writing equaled advising for Vann. This case
study illustrates how effectively addressing wicked problems means effectively documenting
those problems.

Burdensome Report Writing
This push to create thoughtful analysis in province advisors’ records was balanced by a concern
held by many MACV and CORDS officials that these advisors were spending too much time
writing reports. The establishment of CORDS and a new counterinsurgency reporting system in
1967 had led to a proliferation of reports that reached its high water mark in 1968, with each
province advisory team responsible for producing approximately 50 reports a month. From this
point to the end of America’s direct involvement in the war, there was a concerted effort within
CORDS to reduce advisors’ reporting obligations.

820

“CORDS IV Corps Directive 73-69,” 1.

302

Much of the discussion around the reporting burden was framed in terms of report writing
taking away from the “real” work of advising, generally defined as direct interactions with
Government of [South] Vietnam (GVN) military and civilian officials. Because one theme of my
dissertation is the notion of wicked problems as recordkeeping challenges, I certainly do not see
the creation of the province report as an activity separate from the broader work of advising.
Writing the province reports was an essential activity in defining the nature of the wicked
problem of the insurgency. As discussed throughout this dissertation, documenting a wicked
problem is the central effort to understanding its full complexity and scope.
Despite what I see as a mistaken conceptualization of recordkeeping as an activity
separate from advising, CORDS and MACV advisors had a reasonable concern that in the
complex array of advisor responsibilities, report writing was taking an increasingly
disproportionate share of advisors’ time. MACV and CORDS made a concerted effort to
eliminate redundant reports and streamline report content, frequently encouraging advisors to
write concisely. Generalizing from this case study, part of an essential challenge of documenting
wicked problems is that this recordkeeping work is complicated, difficult, and time-consuming.
Creating multifaceted descriptions of wicked problems that give justice to the enormity and
depth of these problems will almost invariably require a diverse array of quantitative measures
and qualitative descriptions. This descriptive work will itself be a laborious task. There is always
the risk that the effort to describe a wicked problem more faithfully spawns a proliferation of
report and measurement requirements. This can lead to recordkeeping becoming divorced from
the goal of understanding and defining the wicked problem.
Maintaining a recordkeeping regime that remains focused on brining understanding to a
wicked problem requires a continuous effort. Wicked problems are dynamic challenges. The

303

ongoing discussions about and modification to recordkeeping practices within MACV and
CORDS provide a historical example of an organization continuously engaging with its
recordkeeping practices. This is not to suggest that MACV and CORDS had a perfect
recordkeeping process for documenting, measuring, and understanding the war—far from it. But
this historical example illustrates how a wicked problem demands thoughtful and creative
recordkeeping and documentation. Wicked problems require organizations to constantly
revaluate, test, and question how they are documenting these grand challenges and how well
their documentation efforts are presenting a meaningful picture of these challenges. Finally,
wicked problems make efficient recordkeeping particularly difficult because it is never clear
what aspects of a wicked problem should be documented. If it were clear, the problem would not
be particularly wicked. This encourages organizations to try to describe wicked problems with an
ever-increasing raft of measures and accounts. Thus, the attempt to efficiently describe a wicked
problem richly, comprehensively, and meaningfully is perhaps an unachievable ideal which all
organizations engaged in wicked problems must nonetheless struggle to achieve.

Research Questions
Case Study Research Questions
These two questions are placed squarely within the realm of the historical case study of the
province reports. These questions were important in keeping the nature of records and
recordkeeping as the central focus of this case study.

In what ways did US civilian and military officials use the province report to document and
understand the Vietnam War?
US civilian and military officials, primarily in CORDS and MACV, but also in civilian and
military organizations in Washington, used the province report from November 1967 through

304

February 1973 to facilitate a narrative monthly account all 44 provinces in South Vietnam as
understood by each province’s province senior advisor and his province advisory team. The
province report was a report within the MACV field reporting system, a system with over 40
reports. Most province reports were predominately quantitative and focused on particular
programs. These reports were narrative and qualitative, intended to paint a holistic picture of
what was happening in a province and how the provincial government was performing. The
province report was designed to provide a space to create thick descriptions of a specific
province in order to support informed analysis of the war grounded in the full complexities of the
conflict.
Unlike most statistically oriented reports produced by US advisory teams or military
units, the province report was not designed to have its content aggregated with other reports to
generate new reports with a wider scope. The CORDS field overview report, drafted by the corps
senior advisor, did draw on the province reports from his corps to serve as the basis for his
narrative report. This was the exception, however. MACV and CORDS intended the province
report to be consumed as a narrative whole on its own terms, even as it was delivered up the
chain of command. Only the Actions Requested section of the province report was designed to
elicit specific responses from higher chains of command. The IV Corps province advisory teams
only used this section sporadically.

In what ways did the structure and rules of the province report frame its documentation of the
Vietnam War?
Although it went through several revisions, the province report essentially had four main
sections: 1) Overview, which allowed PSA to highlight what they thought were the most
important events and issues in his province, 2) Priority Pacification Programs, which contained

305

subsections on a range of GVN programs as well as insurgent activities; 3) Future Problems and
Projections for PSA to anticipate upcoming issue and describe pending GVN projects and plans;
and 4) Required Actions, which was for alerting higher command levels of unresolved, usually
administrative, problems.
The design of the province report was intended to give PSAs and their advisory teams the
space to qualitatively describe what they saw as the most important developments occurring in
their respective provinces. These qualitative, unstructured narratives, especially in the Overview
and Future Problems and Projections sections, were meant to give a grounded picture of what
was happening in the provinces of South Vietnam because holistic pictures were susceptible to
getting lost in the details of program-centric quantitative data. The rules of the province report
gave advisors flexibility to highlight what they felt were the most notable and important issues
for a particular program within the sub-sections of the Priority Pacification Programs section.
The structure and rules of the province report were part of a genuine effort by many CORDS
officials to capture the most thoughtful and honest understanding of the war possible.
The rules and structure of the province report also reflected, however, an acceptance of
the underlying logic of various GVN service and counterinsurgency programs that equated the
success of these programs in meeting prescribed goals with the successful conclusion of the war.
The rules and structure of the report steered PSAs and their teams to describe GVN programs
using the programs’ own internal logic and did not explicitly encourage advisor teams to step
back and question the fundamental purpose of the programs and how they connected to the
successful pursuit of the war. Broadly speaking, the rules and structure of the province reports
reflected an understanding of the war that aimed to improve but not remove the South
Vietnamese government, rather than foster a social revolution. One can see this, for example, in

306

the rules for the Territorial Security section, which framed the insurgency purely as a military
force that was a hindrance to the success of GVN programs instead of framing the insurgency as
a broader social movement which was armed.

Conceptual Research Questions
These two questions guided my exploration of transferring my findings from this province report
historical case study to a theoretical proposition about the intersection of recordkeeping and
wicked problems.

In what ways do organizations’ recordkeeping practices frame their understanding of wicked
problems?
Recordkeeping is the key act that facilitates understanding and describing wicked problems.
Wicked problems contain such deep complexity and large scope that they require a robust and
careful documentation effort. Institutions and individuals need a recordkeeping infrastructure
that can product a consumable representation of any wicked problem. Recordkeeping practices
always, therefore, frame organizations’ understandings of wicked problems because those
practices are the mechanism through which organizations comprehend such problems.
An organization’s recordkeeping practices are usually expressions of the organization’s
values, priorities, interests, and worldviews. Using recordkeeping practices to document a
wicked problem is an act of normalizing a wicked problem into documentation that can readily
understood by an organization. Sometimes institutional recordkeeping practices are used to
translate wicked problems into narratives and data that fit neatly into pre-existing worldviews,
regardless of the appropriateness of that fit to the realities of the wicked problem. On the other
hand, in the best circumstances, organizations use their recordkeeping practices to gain a
provisional understanding of a wicked problem in accordance with their brought knowledge and

307

viewpoints. These organizations acknowledge the limitations of their documentation efforts and
their understanding of the wicked problems. They continuously document the wicked problem
and iteratively revise their understanding of the problem and how they document it. Ideally it is a
self-reflective experience that informs and matures organizations’ outlooks and understandings
of the world as well. This is a continuous process. Organizations never get the documentation of
wicked problems perfectly right. A reflexive, recursive, and continuous effort to document a
wicked problem gives organizations the best chance to meaningfully understand, describe, and
address the challenges that wicked problems present.

In what ways can wicked problems be seen as recordkeeping challenges?
Wicked problems are deeply complex problems on a large scale. The depth of their complexity
and the enormity of their size means that a single organization or person cannot directly observe
the full depth and breadth of wicked problems. Description and comprehension of wicked
problems therefore requires a documentation that can represent such problems in a consumable
manner. As Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber discussed in their landmark article on wicked
problems, coming to an understanding of a wicked problem is also suggesting solutions for the
problem. 821 Conceptualizing how to describe a problem is also conceptualizing how to address
the problem. Thus, recordkeeping is a central activity in the struggle to successfully address
wicked problems. The challenge of recordkeeping in a wicked problems context is that one must
document both the full complexity and entire scope of the problem. This requires description that
is regularized so it can scale up to the size of the problem. It also requires thick description that
can capture the full, unique, often contradictory, frequently bewildering complexity of the

821

Rittel and Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” 161.

308

problem. This is a recordkeeping challenge of thick description at scale, making wicked
problems a recordkeeping challenge.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I reviewed how the historical case study of the province report written by US
province advisor teams during the Vietnam War informed the two overarching themes of this
dissertation. With the case study, I examined three aspects of the first theme, wicked problems as
a recordkeeping challenge. This included the challenge of thickly describing wicked problems at
scale, the role of the individual within the recordkeeping context of an institution documenting a
wicked problem, and the role recordkeeping warrants play in normalizing the description of
wicked problems into understandable depictions. In the second overarching theme, institutional
recordkeeping effectiveness, I examined the role of thoughtful analysis in the documentation of
wicked problems. I also looked at the importance of concise, efficient, and timely records
creation to a responsive and effective recordkeeping system in a wicked problems context.
Finally, I looked at the risk of records creation becoming a burdensome task when trying to meet
the grand challenge of documenting wicked problems.

309

Chapter Eight
Conclusion

Overview
In this dissertation, I have explored the relationship between recordkeeping and wicked
problems, centered on an historical case study of US advisors who created monthly province
reports during the Vietnam War. This case study illustrated some of the challenges that
institutions face while trying to maintain a recordkeeping system that can efficiently and
meaningfully document wicked problems. I also used this case study to explore how wicked
problems may be understood as recordkeeping challenges. At the core of this dissertation, I have
made the claim that understanding, describing, and addressing wicked problems with sufficient
fidelity requires ongoing acts of documentation that has the richness to engage the full depth of
the complexities these problems carry. Implicit in this claim is the contention that archival and
records theory has an essential role to play in the scholarship of wicked problems. This claim is
suggestive of future research that could build on the findings of this dissertation. In this chapter, I
outline further research that examines the intersection of recordkeeping and counterinsurgency
warfare through the lens of the Vietnam War. I also describe research opportunities focusing on
the role of recordkeeping in a range of wicked problems. Finally, I discuss questions that this
case study raises about the nature of institutional recordkeeping occurring in any circumstances,
not just in the midst of a wicked problem.

Future Research for Recordkeeping in Counterinsurgency Contexts
One direction for extending this research is to move beyond the province report case with further
research on the broader US effort to document the insurgency and counterinsurgency campaign
during the Vietnam War. This could include studying province reports from advisory teams

310

stationed across all four corps of South Vietnam, or examining the broader set of reports that
advisory teams had to produce. One could also more deeply explore the work of figures that
made important contributions to how the US documented and analyzed the war, including Robert
Komer, John Vann, and Thomas Thayer.
The US involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan has sparked a renewed interest in the US
assessment efforts during the Vietnam War among military officials, analysts, and scholars. 822
For example, in a 2012 RAND report on counterinsurgency assessment, Ben Connable, an
international policy analyst and retired Marine Corps officer, highlighted the province report as a
historical example of a complex, contextually informed report. 823 Connable reached back to the
assessment measures made during the Vietnam War—devoting an entire chapter on the topic—to
support his research on COIN metrics in the twenty-first century US military. 824 Connable
proposed his own counterinsurgency assessment system he called the Contextual Assessment
Process, which he described as, “A transparent, bottom-up method of assessing progress in a
COIN campaign that captures embedded contextual data—both qualitative and quantitative—at
each layer of assessment, from the tactical to the strategic.” 825 He reproduced the February 1968
Phong Dinh province report in his RAND study to provide “an example of the kind of contextual
assessment that has been and can be produced by counterinsurgents.” 826 Connable’s use of the
province report demonstrates that the study of the report, and Vietnam War-era recordkeeping

822 The most extensive study of US assessment efforts in Vietnam grew in part out of the author’s
experience as a military officer in Iraq. Daddis, No Sure Victory, ix–x.
823 Connable, “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency.” This is one of
the most extensive studies of counterinsurgency assessment and metrics published during the era of the
Iraq and Afghanistan wars.
824 “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 95–152.
825 “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 228.
826 “Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency,” 261.

311

more generally, still resonates today in current discussions about counterinsurgency assessment
and metrics.

Future Research for Recordkeeping in Wicked Problems Contexts
Using the conceptual lens of recordkeeping and archival theory could enrich research on
documenting counterinsurgency conflicts or any wicked problem, such as poverty, public health,
or climate change. Archival theories and concepts, such as the records continuum; the archival
multiverse; or the context, structure, and content construct of the record as I have used in this
dissertation, can add another dimension to our understanding of how to grapple with wicked
problems. Research into the intersection between recordkeeping and wicked problems could be
taken in several directions. First, work could be done to build on some early scholarship that has
used the concept of wicked problems to help frame some of the challenges we face in the
archival, records management, and broader LIS field. 827 Conversely, there are opportunities to
explore how the archival and recordkeeping community can bring its knowledge to bear on
particular wicked problems, such as how archival and library concepts of sustainability may
provide insights on dealing with climate change. 828 This line of research could build on the work
of the Archival Education and Research Institute (AERI) that is examining how archival theory
and practice can make meaningful contributions to efforts to address a wide range of wicked

827

Examples of this kind of work in LIS include Sue Childs and Julie McLeod, “Tackling the Wicked
Problem of ERM: Using the Cynefin Framework as a Lens,” Records Management Journal 23, no. 3
(2013): 191–227; Julie McLeod and Sue Childs, “A Strategic Approach to Making Sense of the ‘wicked’
Problem of ERM,” Records Management Journal 23, no. 2 (2013): 104–35; Chris Awre et al., “Research
Data Management as a ‘Wicked Problem,’” Library Review 64, no. 4/5 (2015): 356–71; Andrew M. Cox,
Stephen Pinfield, and Jennifer Smith, “Moving a Brick Building: UK Libraries Coping with Research
Data Management as a ‘wicked’ Problem,” Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 48, no. 1
(2016): 3–17.
828 See, for example, the call for papers for the upcoming “Libraries and Archives in the Anthropocene: A
Colloquium,” New York University, May 13-14, 2017, http://litwinbooks.com/laac2017call.php.

312

problems. 829 Research in this area could include theoretical examinations of the intersections of
recordkeeping and wicked problems. This line of inquiry could also benefit from exploring other
historical or contemporary case studies of the role of recordkeeping in efforts to address wicked
problems, such as health care and health policy entities grappling with public health challenges,
or scientists trying to document climate change and its effects. A survey or meta-analysis of the
role of recordkeeping in a variety of wicked problems would also inform our understanding this
relationship. These projects should be able to support a research agenda that places archival and
recordkeeping scholarship at the heart of the study of wicked problems. That agenda should be
able to foster a body of knowledge that pushes, challenges, matures, and extends the claim that
that wicked problems can be understood as recordkeeping challenges.

Future Research for Recordkeeping
This dissertation focused on the intersection of recordkeeping and wicked problems, using the
case study of the province report to develop insights about the nature and role of recordkeeping
in a wicked problems context. One could also read this dissertation more broadly, as a case study
of recordkeeping in a wicked problems context that can suggest more general findings about
institutional recordkeeping. Using a single case study to make propositions about the nature of
institutional recordkeeping, regardless of its setting, must be done cautiously. However, this case
study of the province report, suggests some questions and further research that could enrich the
archival community’s understanding of records and recordkeeping behavior.
One line of further investigation concerns the role that an institution’s worldview plays in
the formulation of its records. The province report provides an example of how records are

829

Gilliland and McKemmish, “Recordkeeping Metadata, the Archival Multiverse, and Societal Grand
Challenges,” 2012, 113–14; Gilliland, “Permeable Binaries, Societal Grand Challenges, and the Roles of
the Twenty-First Century Archival and Recordkeeping Profession.”

313

deeply tied to how an institution understands the world and its own role within that world.
Records not only reflect how an institution understands itself and the world: records also
reinforce that worldview. As noted in this case study, if a military understands an insurgency as
an opposing armed force, it is going to measure that insurgency’s military strength and combat
operations. Recordkeeping with such a focus provides that military with the evidence it needs to
understand the insurgency as a military force. As my case study documents, institutional records
have a tendency to provide the evidence an institution is seeking.
If an institution’s understanding of an event, situation, or practice shapes the formulation
of its records and those records reinforce that understanding, how does an institution’s
understanding of something ever change? What prompts institutions to change how they
document their activities and surrounding environments? Saying an institution “has a
worldview” is a shorthand description of the rough consensus among the members of that
institution on the nature of the world and how the institution fits within that world. It is within
this institutional debate that we can often see a push to change an institution’s worldview and to
change how it documents its environment. In 1967 MACV established CORDS and several new
reports, including the province report, because of debates about the nature of the war within the
US armed services, Defense Department, State Department, CIA, and White House. These
debates were prompted, in part, by the increasing skepticism US officials in Washington and
Saigon had about counterinsurgency reports from GVN officials and US advisors.
Moments of recordkeeping change, such as the development of the province report, can
provide a rich opportunity for research into the nature of institutional recordkeeping and the role
that records play in the life of an institution. The history of US military and civilian officials’
growing mistrust of US and GVN reports in the early- to mid-1960s suggest research questions

314

that could apply to a wide range of studies of institutional recordkeeping change. These
questions include: Do individuals bring a knowledgebase and experiences that prompt them to
question the validity of what their institutions’ records document? Do individuals read their
institutions’ records across the grain to gain insights that the records were not actually designed
to reveal? Do external events force institutions to formulate a new understanding of their
environment, regardless of what their records are designed to document? These questions
suggest the foundation for a framework for exploring the dynamic between institutional
worldviews and recordkeeping. This research could be seen on a continuum ranging from how
worldviews and recordkeeping practices reinforce each other, to looking at moments where
recordkeeping and worldviews change. Additionally, this line of questions suggests the value of
looking at debates within an institution about its recordkeeping. Expressions of frustration over
recordkeeping practices, such as the time it takes or what it does or does not document, can
provide useful insights into the nature and role of an institution’s recordkeeping.
Historical recordkeeping case studies are particularly valuable for this kind of inquiry
because they afford the opportunity to study changes to institutional recordkeeping over time.
Recordkeeping behavior studies that use direct observation are not geared toward capturing
recordkeeping changes over time but tend produce highly detailed studies of recordkeeping
practices that occur in a relatively short period of time. On the other hand, historical studies
provide researchers with the opportunity to study recordkeeping practices across extended
periods of time and to identify moments when recordkeeping change occurred. A vibrant
scholarship of recordkeeping requires both the rich, thick details produced by direct observation
studies and the perspective and span offered by historical studies.

315

This study of the province report also provides insight into the complexity of institutional
recordkeeping. Recordkeeping is an activity that is deeply enmeshed within the culture and
outlook of the institution. Recordkeeping shapes and emerges out of the ongoing internal
discussions that members of all institutions have among themselves as they work to shape the
institution and respond to the surrounding world. Records and recordkeeping practices are not
fixed, but evolve as their institutions evolve. Finally, effective recordkeeping is a struggle.
Records are not a lazy byproduct of institutional activities. Records are consciously designed and
created, even if that work is not explicitly acknowledged. Ensuring that recordkeeping provides
meaningful documentation without being a burdensome task is an ongoing, contentious, difficult,
and vitally important task.