ABSTRACT

AUGMENTED REALITY (AR): A SCHOOL LIBRARY APP TO ENGAGE HIGH SCHOOL
RELUCTANT READERS TO READ FOR PLEASURE
Kai Rush, Ph.D.
Department of Educational Technology, Research and Assessment
Northern Illinois University, 2017
Rebecca D. Hunt, Director

If a student does not read for pleasure, studies have shown it can be detrimental to a
student’s academic success. Augmented Reality (AR) has shown positive results in schools,
classrooms and public libraries, but could be beneficial as a school library tool to help reluctant
readers select books to read for pleasure. In this qualitative case study, seven high school level
reluctant readers were given the opportunity, through augmented reality apps, to explore books
that could help them read for pleasure. Over a school's quarter semester (9 weeks), seven high
school level reluctant readers used Aurasma and LayAR to watch book trailers or click links for
55 books of different genres to guide them in finding a book to read for pleasure. The seven high
school level reluctant readers were studied through nine interviews and three observations
periods to understand the relevance of the AR app recommendations, their engagement with the
AR apps, and the reading materials chosen after usage of the AR apps. The seven high school
level reluctant readers were given reading recommendations by teachers, the school librarian or
other recommenders, but reported they could not independently pick books they enjoyed. Each
high school reluctant reader was independently studied and cross-analyzed to find themes that
helped

or hampered their reading for pleasure. Sustained silent reading, class libraries, and academic
issues played into this study, as major factors for success or failures. Augmented Reality cannot
replace human influence, factors or recommenders, but could be a beneficial tool for reluctant
readers to read for pleasure.

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

This dissertation outlines how Augmented Reality (AR) can be a useful tool in the
educational literacy movement for creating a culture of lifelong reading. Using seven high school
level reluctant readers in a high school library setting, this study took 3D virtual objects (also
known as augmented reality objects) and attached those virtual objects to book covers. AR tools
could then allow the student to explore books outside of viewing the book covers, teachers
and/or school librarians’ recommendations, or catalog descriptions with a mobile device.
Augmented Reality (AR) helped the student investigate books with videos, 3D images, twitter
feeds and many 3D items using the mobile device (smartphone or tablet). AR can be used in
different ways in a school library, but in the scope of this study, AR was used to connect existing
YouTube book trailer videos, Goodreads’ book reviews and/or authors’ twitter accounts to each
book. For example, a Mickey Mouse icon could have an overlay that plays a video advertising
Walt Disney World. AR allows an existing real world object to become animated (augmented) in
a 3D form. From the research of Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006), Jenkins (2009), Whitmire (2010),
and Allyn (2011), this study addresses aiding students in self-selecting books, which can be
linked to reading for pleasure.

2
Background of the Problem

Factors in Engagement of Reading for Pleasure

Over forty years of research has been done to identify the factor of low engagement of
reluctant readers to read for pleasure on all levels of education. Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006),
Jenkins (2009), Whitmire (2010), Allyn (2011), and Hahn (2012) discovered high engagement
and more effective learning when students read for pleasure than rote classroom comprehension
assignments or listening to a lecture. Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006, 2013) concluded that a major
factor to helping reluctant readers is reading for pleasure. In addition, Miller (2009); Harrison
(2012); Whittingham, Huffman, Christensen and Mcallister (2013); Stoller, Anderson, Grabe and
Komiyama (2013); Meredith (2014); and Pittman and Honchell (2014) found that reading for
pleasure is essential for reading comprehension and future student success in school. Krashen
(1993, 2006); Hahn (2012); van Arnham and Spiller (2014); and Kang (2015) expressed in their
studies that school libraries are hugely important to engaging students in reading for pleasure in
our nation’s schools. All four studies concluded that the school library’s main purpose is to
promote literature to the school community and could be a solution to students reading for
pleasure. In this study, the focus was on a high school library, which is the center for reading in a
high school.
Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006), Whitmire (2010), Allyn (2011), Hahn (2012), Harrison
(2012), Whittingham et al. (2013), and Pittman and Honchell (2014) all agree that reading for
pleasure is valuable to students and can help shape a child’s academic future. Brinda (2011)
discovered that students could have personal experiences, such as being discouraged from
reading comic books or graphic novels or being forced to read from a teacher’s established

3
collection, that will not allow them to embrace reading for pleasure. Thompson (2007) and
Brinda (2011) stated that teachers find graphic novels and comic books as too easy, although
comics and graphic novels vary in degree of reading levels. This discouragement can make those
students reluctant readers and can affect a student’s academic future. Rodrigo et al. (2007)
identified a major factor in adult reluctant readers: that as children, they were not stimulated to
read or engaged in reading for pleasure.

Sustained Silent Reading

The engagement of reading for pleasure has been observed in schools during sustained
silent reading (SSR). von Sprecken and Krashen (1998) studied self-selection reading procedures
during sustained silent reading in different schools, which is structured free reading time during
the school day. During this time, Krashen (1993); von Sprecken and Krashen (1998); Miller
(2009); and Stoller et al. (2013) suggest that students should be allowed to read any books,
magazines, comic books, or any reading material a child enjoys reading, although many teachers
in these studies were found to coerce their students toward traditional fiction and nonfiction
books. Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006); Harrison (2012); Whittingham et al. (2013); and Pittman
and Honchell (2014) all learned that if students are disengaged from their reading interests, they
will not perform well in school.

Technology Tools Success in the School Library

With technology entering American schools and school libraries over the past decade,
new tools are being created to help students embrace learning and reading. Kang (2015)
examined engaging STEM students with AR in school libraries. Billinghurst (2002), Billinghurst

4
and Kato (2002), Fellerer (2009), Brill and Park (2008), Walsh (2010), Law and Simon (2011),
Whitchurch (2011), Brown and Green (2012) and Hahn (2012) studied new tools being
introduced to libraries and schools, such as audiobooks, Playaways, QR codes, virtual reality and
augmented reality (AR) tools. Although the tool is not the focus of learning, the tool could be the
attractor to drive the interest level of the reluctant reader. Dünser and Hornecker (2007) showed
that interest in books is declining among all students and that new methods are being explored to
keep all students, in addition to reluctant readers, interested in reading.
Krashen (1993, 1995, 2004, 2006) and Hahn (2012) stated that students can make
positive learning gains through reading for pleasure. Krashen (1993, 1995, 2004, 2006, 2013)
and Hahn (2012) have concluded that educational technology and school library sectors of
education should integrate new tools, such as audiobooks, QR codes, virtual reality and
augmented reality (AR), to motivate reluctant readers. With a focus on school libraries, Krashen,
Lee and McQuillan (2012) emphasized how school libraries are the main establishment for all
the books in a school, which allows for the importance of integration of AR in the school library.
School Libraries’ New Purpose

Ross and Furno (2011) concluded that school libraries can no longer be a place filled
with books, but they need to be a place that fits into the larger framework of the school’s
curriculum. van Arnham and Spiller (2014) also suggested that the library must be the place that
is the main support system for collaboration, research, reading and writing. Ross and Furno
found that for libraries to stay relevant in today’s society, school libraries must incorporate
technology. Adams, Cummins and Johnson (2012) reported in the Horizon report that
Augmented Reality will be a new area for school libraries to develop. Hahn (2012) showed how

AR in a university library can change the collection immediately, based on a user’s needs, and

5

offer a new perspective to an older collection of books.
School libraries can help engage students with reading for pleasure. Through studies and
research, Krashen (1993), Gurian and Stevens (2005), and Boltz (2007) all suggested that school
libraries need to implement more graphic novels and comic books to engage reluctant readers.
Gurian and Stevens (2005), Allyn (2011), and Brinda (2011) found that boys are spatial learners
when they studied boys’ motivation to read. The researchers discovered that boys prefer science
fiction and graphic novels when reading for pleasure. However, Greyson (2007), Griffith (2010),
and Moeller (2011) would argue with their research, noting that girls are just as adaptive to
comic books and graphic novels. It can be concluded that both boys and girls would enjoy nontraditional written formats. Brinda (2011); Boltz (2007); and von Sprecken, Kim and Krashen
(2000) concluded that if students are not allowed to self-select their own reading materials, the
effect will cause the students to disengage from reading. Thompson (2007), Griffith (2010),
Allyn (2011), and Brinda (2011) learned that teachers are too unfamiliar with comic books,
graphic novels and science fiction to make book recommendations, which poses the problem of
assisting students with books that peak all students’ interest.
Boltz (2007), Brinda (2011), and von Sprecken and Krashen (2000) concluded that the
goal is to engage the reluctant reader to self-select a book and read for pleasure. Fellerer (2009),
Mulch (2010), Hahn (2012), Whitchurch (2011), Brown and Green (2012), and Whittingham et
al. (2013) have shown their studies had positive gains with students using new technology tools,
such as audiobooks, QR codes and Playaways. Holum and Gahala (2001) has stated that
technology is beneficial when combined with reading. Miller (2009); Harrison (2012);
Whittingham et al. (2013); Stoller et al. (2013); Meredith (2014); Pittman and Honchell (2014)

6
show that AR is an extension tool that could possibly give more students an option to find books,
which could lead to self-selected reading for pleasure in the future.
Augmented Reality has proven successful in other sectors of society. Billinghurst (2002),
Billinghurst and Kato (2002), and Brill and Park (2008) have shown evidence that when a user
moves their tablet or phone camera over an identified object (street sign, painting or almost any
object), new 3D AR images pop up and provide more information to the user.
Schmalstieg (2001) stated that AR was developed to increase productivity in the real
world. For example, Kipper and Rampolla (2013) explain how the first down line in a televised
football game is an AR line. Fighter pilots use AR while flying jet planes to see their
ammunition, fuel, and other data about the plane on the cockpit window. Disney Parks (2014)
and Aurasma (2015) joined together to offer Disney World guests, during Star Wars’ weekend,
an experience where many objects in the parks come to life with AR using the Aursma app. Ross
and Furno (2011) and Hahn (2012) have used AR in the library to show relevance to the real
world. If AR could be used in a school library with books linked to book trailers on YouTube or
3D images, AR could assist students in self-selecting books toward their interests and/or relevant
to their lives.
Augmented Reality has been successfully used in the school libraries over the last four
years. Chen and Tsai (2012) used AR in a school library in Taiwan. They found that using AR
for teaching students the basic library classification system, over a librarian’s traditional
instruction, was very useful because of student engagement. Actually, AR could help make up
for a librarian’s weaknesses. Hahn (2012) studied AR use with research as a resource for college
undergraduate students to check out books and as a wayfinding (guide) to books in a university
school library. Murphy (2012) used AR with library signage and shelving, which helped students

7
find specialty areas of the library. Meredith (2014) used an AR app that acts as a readers’ advisor
and suggested books based on a reader’s habits. Feltz (2014) recently conducted a mobile
learning environment in a library, and the results showed increase checking out of books. All of
these studies were quantitative and used various library settings, but a study can help AR
research by explaining why reluctant readers engage in using an AR system to find books.
In the K-12 classroom environment, Billinghurst (2002), Brill and Park (2008), and
Chang and Liu (2012) have experimented using textbooks with AR. The students were able to
see graphs, videos, and animated displays throughout a textbook. Brill and Park (2008) provided
a study that showed if a child is in a traditional classroom with a teacher or at home in an online
asynchronous environment, a child can make the content come to 3D life. Billinghurst found that
students are able to collaborate and learn in an artificial world the same as they would in a
traditional classroom.
Dünser (2008) conducted a study using AR tools to engage low ability primary school
readers. Although the study did not produce positive results over higher ability primary school
readers, the study proved that all students were highly engaged in the AR books. The same
results were found in studies by Billinghurst and Kato (2002), Dünser and Hornecker (2007), and
Brill and Park (2008) in that learners enjoyed the experience and were engaged longer with AR.
Augmented Reality could be a factor or tool to help reluctant readers to read for pleasure.
Krashen (1993), Ujiie and Krashen (1996), Jenkins (2009), and Allyn (2011) showed that a
child’s selection of reading material is critical to the success of reading for pleasure. With the
research and knowledge of free voluntary reading, any tool to engage reluctant readers and
promote lifelong reading should be considered. Billinghurst (2002) and Billinghurst and Kato
(2002) agree that AR is a great benefit to our educational society, but there must be more

8
research on the design, development, implementation and evaluation of AR use in the K-12 and
postsecondary levels of education.
Wolfson (2008) and Whittingham et al. (2013) focused on audiobooks to help struggling
readers increase reading skills and engagement in reading. The pre-study interview and poststudy interview revealed that students did not have access to different types of reading materials.
Whittingham et al. (2013) found that student growth through using audiobooks went from -1.48
mean in the pre-interview to a 1.29 mean score in the post-interview. The growth showed that
students must have different options to find materials within their school libraries. Brill and Park
(2008), Wolfson (2008), Law and Simon (2010), Walsh (2010), and Hahn (2012) showed QR
codes and audiobooks were a fun and interactive way to peak students’ interest in books.
Additionally, AR could offer the second step of a visual stimulate to a student’s interest in books.
Whittingham et al. (2013) and Krashen (2014) stated that if the libraries are not meeting the
demand for readers in the future, then they are failing students. As evidenced by the research,
AR could possibly help reluctant readers engage with our school libraries in new ways and find
books they self-select to read for pleasure.

Statement of the Problem

AR has been proven successful in K-12 classrooms, university libraries, and in many
different parts of everyday society. Whittingham et al. (2013) concluded that the public
education system has the ability to offer students eBooks, audiobooks, and other great tools to
engage students in reading, learning, and the school library. Dünser and Hornecker (2007); Di
Serio, Ibanez and Kloos (2013); Mahadzir and Phung (2013); and Wu, Lee, Chang and Liang
(2013) identified that many libraries have brought in gaming systems to entice and entertain

students in the library environment. With all the new technology being engrained in today’s

9

library system with high success, AR could bring excitement, engagement, and interaction with
the real world. The current study examined if AR can be a tool to engage reluctant readers to
read for pleasure in a high school library.
Secondly, this study addressed whether AR is able to help reluctant readers self-select
books in the school library. von Sprecken and Krashen (1998) discovered that a student could be
a lifelong reader, if the student, as a reader, has enough positive experiences with reading. As
stated, Thompson (2007) and Brinda (2011) learned that some teachers may not have the
expertise to recommend different types of books for reluctant readers’. Ujiie and Krashen (1996),
von Sprecken and Krashen (1998), Boltz (2007), and Brinda (2011) identified that there is a need
to engage students in reading. The current study sought to determine whether AR can provide a
new tool to entice new readers or reluctant readers to read for pleasure.
Hahn (2016) said that Minerva, an app created to help university students find books in
an undergraduate university library, could possibly bring in new students that would never use
the library. AR has been explored and researched in the K-12 classroom and university libraries
for basic library instruction, but it has not been researched with reluctant readers at a high school
level in a school library.

Purpose of the Study

The purpose of this study was to investigate the engagement of high school aged reluctant
readers with augmented reality apps in a school library setting. Harrison (2012) referenced that
learning suffers when literacy declines. With reluctant readers, the possible negative effects of
learning are too detrimental to their future. The role of the school library can be essential in

10
changing the mindset of reluctant high school aged readers. With its visual stimulation, AR could
encourage more students to become interested in reading and, possibly, be a beneficial tool for
school libraries.

Significance of the Study

This study can help with the selection of books for reluctant readers, while contributing
to two major sectors of education: educational technology and library science. The findings from
this study will not help every reluctant reader read for pleasure, but the findings have the
possibility to help some reluctant readers through encouragement in self-selected reading. School
libraries are struggling to find relevance in today’s digital world as more books become digital.
Educational technology, along with school libraries, can help drive some reluctant readers to use
technology to find books on topics of interest.
The high school ages of 14 to18 years have not been studied extensively in conjunction
with AR, with reluctant readers, or with school libraries. Billinghurst and Kato (2002), Dünser
and Hornecker (2007), and Brill and Park (2008) all studied low socio-economic or primary aged
students, but not high school aged students. Other studies focused on highly engaged readers or
academically successful students, such as Kang (2015), who investigated AR with STEM
students. The current study examined the relevance of AR on high school level reluctant readers
in a school library setting.
Chen and Tsai (2012) found success explaining the basic Chinese classification system to
students.in a school library in Taiwan. Hahn (2008, 2012) discovered success in a university
library. In Mulch’s (2014) study, one librarian remarked about the excitement the students felt
about their freedom and opportunity for exploration rather than a lecture from him. Ross (2011)

11
showed that when using a clicker system like a cellphone, faculty received an 83% approval
rating and 6% increase in attendance by students. With the success that has been shown in
previous school library studies, there has not been a published study about AR being used to
engage reluctant readers with self-selected reading to help them read for pleasure in a high
school library.
AR has the potential to help every reluctant reader turn a bookshelf into a visual
simulation of online book trailers, YouTube reviews, 3D images, and, possibly, 3D animated
images. In a face-to-face interview, Krashen (2013) talked about the cost of technology for low
socioeconomic populations and found that most students will still read and be engaged by
traditional books. Krashen (2013) felt that until the price of eReaders was more affordable, the
educational system must find ways to engage readers with traditional books. He continued to
express a need for technology to help engage students. With the affordability and mobility of the
AR apps and book trailers’ availability to be attached to books, AR could be a part of the
movement to help students read for pleasure.

Research Questions

Audiobooks, QR codes, and Kindles are new technology tools being introduced into the
school library system. AR could be a successful tool, among other successful technology tools,
to be implemented into the school library system to help reluctant readers. The research
questions were as follows:
1. What are the differences of engagement in finding books to read among reluctant
high school level readers before and after using an Augmented Reality tool?

12
2. How do reluctant high school level readers find books that engage their interest in
using an Augmented Reality tool?

Theoretical Framework

Keller (1979, 1987) created the Attention, Relevance, Confidence and Satisfaction
(ARCS) model, which is based on the engagement of a learner, that is a person’s inputs, outputs
and environmental influences. In the current study, relevance was the theoretical framework that
was used to study the seven high school level reluctant readers. Keller (2009) stated relevance is
a powerful factor in student motivation to learn. The usage of AR did depend on relevance, as
the seven high school level reluctant readers did want to know why they should put their effort
into using the augmented reality tools. The outcome was dependent on the students finding
relevant reading materials that interested them. The same question was answered by the seven
high school level reluctant readers over their school’s quarter semester (nine weeks) to study if
AR could help them find books that matched their interests, as the AR apps and books found
were relevant to their lives. During the study, more questions were added interview-byinterview, drawing from the last interview with the seven high school level reluctant readers for
clarification, member checking, and gathering of additional data for use in future articles.
Keller (2010) developed three sub categories under relevance: that the learner must have
goal orientation, motive matching, and familiarity. All three subcategories were important to this
study. In goal orientation, Keller (2010) stated that learners are engaged to learn if the new
knowledge will help them achieve their goal. In the current study, the goal was that AR could
help these seven reluctant readers find reading materials that interested them. The seven high
school level reluctant readers were given time over the nine week quarter semester to engage

13
with the AR apps and the books they found. With the AR system, the students had the ability to
gain new knowledge, as Keller (2010) suggested, to engage through YouTube book reviews,
author reviews, and many other 3D items through their cellphone apps. Also, the goal was that
reluctant readers would find the genres and sub-genres that most interested them.
The second sub category that Keller (2010) identified is motive matching, which states
that some learners are independent and need to set goals for themselves. Rodrigo et al. (2007)
stated that reading for pleasure must start at a younger age, as their research on adults showed an
inability to read for pleasure as adults. Ujite and Krashen (1996), Sprecken and Krashen (1998),
Boltz (2007), and Brinda (2011) concluded that the main focus of reading for pleasure is selfselection of reading material by the student. AR allows a student to be an independent learner
and to find relevant material to self-select to read for pleasure. The reluctant readers were given
instructions on how to use the AR apps, but they were independent in how they used the app and
the types of books they discovered.
Ujiie and Krashen (1996) realized schools must allow students to have a choice of
reading materials, and Krashen et al. (2012) discovered more access and a variety of reading
materials would make better readers. Sprecken and Krashen (2008) learned that traditional
methods of teachers providing teacher-selected books to the students produced only an 80% ontask reading rate during SSR time. Sprecken and Krashen stated that self-selection is the key to
helping reluctant readers engage in reading for pleasure.
The last sub-category by Keller (2010) is familiarity, which states that learners want
some connection to the material they are using. Ryan and Deci (2000) stated that a person has to
be inspired and motivated to do something intrinsically or extrinsically. AR is a new technology
and gave the seven high school level reluctant readers a connection of using their cellphones and

14
3D technology to connect to reading. Billinghurst (2002), Brill and Park (2008), Chang and Liu
(2012), Chen and Tsai (2012), and Seifert and Tshuva (2013) agreed that AR must have real
world application. Blagg (2009) compared two major AR studies and found that AR allows low
socioeconomic populations to have real world experiences outside of their neighborhoods, such
as viewing a virtual museum right from their cellphones. There is a difference between VR
(Virtual Reality) and AR (Augmented Reality). AR is applied to the real world that surrounds the
reluctant readers. VR creates a virtual book, whereas AR allows existing books to be filled with
many virtual objects to engage them into reading for pleasure. The books are the real reading
materials and, hopefully, engage the reluctant readers to read for pleasure.
Yuen, Yaoyueneyong, and Johnson (2011) and Branson and Thomson (2013) found that
the U.S. military has used AR technologies in its school programs to connect learners to the real
world, just like as Brill and Park (2008) and Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009) provided similar
research with public school students. AR gives reluctant readers the ability to find books and
other materials that might peak their interests and to reward them intrinsically to continue to find
other books they might enjoy. The goal was that reluctant readers could identify relevance in the
AR apps to find books that might be interesting for reading for pleasure.

Definition of Terms

Augmented Reality (AR) - AR takes 3D virtual objects and combines them in a real world
environment (Azuma, 1997; Hahn, 2012). Azuma (1997) wrote that augmented reality systems
“have the following three characteristics: 1) Combines real and virtual, 2) Interactive in real
time, 3) Registered in 3-D” (p. 2). For example, a coloring book with a mobile device can be

15
brought to life, so the image is now 3D (Color Alive). Yuen et al. (2011) described AR as
digital overlays in the real world in which VR (Virtual Reality) is a total digital world.
Reluctant readers - As defined many times by Krashen (2003; 2005; 2009; 2013), a reluctant
reader is a person who does not conform to traditional teaching methods or rote learning. During
silent reading time, these readers are not challenged to read anything, which hurts their academic
growth (Boltz, 2007; Brinda, 2011; Sprecken & Krashen, 2000).
Self-selected Reading - Students are allowed to choose the reading material without required
direction from the teacher or school librarian. Students are allowed to pick their own genre
without influence from teachers or parents (Allyn, 2011; Krashen, 1993, 1995, 2006; Jenkins,
2009; Whitmire, 2010).
Sustained silent reading (SSR) - Students are allowed to read whatever they enjoy reading and
there is no accountability (tests, debriefing, blogging or assignments) (Allyn, 2011; Krashen,
1993, 1995, 2006; Jenkins, 2009; Whitmire, 2010).

Summary

Self-selected reading is an issue for students and teachers, as both are uninformed of what
reluctant readers need to be successful. Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006, 2013) as did Daniels and
Steres (2011), Harrison (2012), and Krashen et al. (2012) studied sustained silent reading and
found that students must have self-selected books to read for pleasure. However, Thompson
(2007), Griffith (2010), Allyn (2011), and Brinda (2011) expressed their concerns that teachers
cannot make recommendations of certain genres of books because of their limited background in
fiction and nonfiction books.

16
To address this problem of self-selection of books to help students read for pleasure, AR
could be a tool to help students self-select books, especially books that teachers cannot
recommend. Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009), Walsh (2010), Hahn (2012), and Whittingham et al.
(2013) emphasized the success of audiobooks and other tools to help peak students’ interest in
learning and/or reading. Billinghurst (2002), Brill and Park (2008), Walsh (2010), Hahn (2012),
and Billinghurst and Kato (2002) identified the benefits of Augmented Reality on learning. AR’s
engagement of reluctant readers was the goal of this study, as AR could be the tool to help
reluctant readers find relevance in reading for pleasure.

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

Augmented Reality (AR) is new to the education field, and researchers such as Chang
and Liu (2012) and Mahadzir and Phung (2012) admitted immediately that this area has not been
extensively explored. With technology entering the education field within the last 20 years
(Johnson, Smith, Willis, Levine, & Haywood, 201; 1Li, 2010) as a main or a supplemental tool
for learning, AR is one of the newest unexplored tools, especially on the effects to learning
(Dunleavy & Dede, 2004). With the exceptions of Chang and Liu (2012) and Hahn (2012), the
effects of using AR in a library setting have been not been academically researched. In this
literature review, researchers such as Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009), Law and Simon (2010),
Walsh (2010), Whitchurch (2011), Brown and Green (2012), Hahn (2012), and Whittingham et
al. (2013) explain how QR codes and audiobooks have engaged library patrons with new
technology. Brill and Park (2008) and Wu et al. (2013) discovered that students love new
technology because it simulates real-life video games and opens new possibilities for teaching
and learning. Chen and Tsai (2012) stated that budget cuts could push education to find new
ways to educate students but, at the same time, engage them in learning in a way that will
enhance their learning over traditional methods.

18
Engagement with AR

Whittingham et al. (2013) researched student engagement using audiobooks to increase
reading among students. Wu et al.’s (2013) qualitative study discovered that students were so
immersed in their AR tool that it was hard to bring students back to the reality of the classroom.
Dunleavy and Dede (2014) found over 10 years ago that AR could be a transformative tool for
changing teaching and learning.
With school libraries supporting teaching and learning, AR has been studied in different
ways to find its relevance in the library. Chen and Tsai (2012) analyzed certain areas of basic
library instruction for their students in Taiwan. They wanted to see if students would learn the
same basic library skills as traditional methods of a live librarian as they introduced students to
the library classification system. Chen and observed that students excelled with AR in memory
and application of the Chinese library classification system, but they needed reinforcement for
comprehension. Whittingham et al. (2013) discovered that audiobooks in the library increased
comprehension, vocabulary, skills, and students’ attitudes toward reading. Two different tools
for two different purposes, but both showed very positive engagement for students.
Billinghurst and Kato (2002), Dünser and Hornecker (2007), and Brill and Park (2008)
studied primary aged students’ usage of AR and found high engagement. All three studies
discovered that almost of the all students found AR fun and interesting, which allowed them to
be engaged in the AR application longer. Hahn (2016) explained that at the university level, AR
could bring in students to the library who may have felt the library was relevant to them. For
example, Hahn (2016) stated, a computer science student can do everything online, but with AR,
they can discover new items in the university’s library.

19
Technology Tools

Krashen (2013) explained that educational technology has changed the face of
technology, education, and the library. Reading has been transformed with iPads, Kindles,
iPhones, and many other devices and applications. The problem we are seeing as a nation is
getting reluctant readers interested in reading for pleasure. Krashen (1993, 1996, 2003), Ujiie
and Krashen (1996), Rodrigo et al. (2007), Brinda (2011), Pittman and Honchell (2013), and
Whittingham et al. (2013) found that if students read for pleasure, it does increase
comprehension so students understand higher level vocabulary and harder concepts in their
learning. With the goal of motivating readers, Krashen (1993, 1996, 2003), Ujiie and Krashen
(1996), Rodrigo et al. (2007), Brinda (2011), Pittman and Honchell (2013), and Whittingham et
al. (2013) confirmed electronic reading tools, such as audiobooks, can engage students in
reading. Whittingham et al. (2013) used audiobooks with students and achieved great success
with struggling readers increasing their reading skills and engagement in reading.
Wu et al. (2013) discovered negative effects on learning, such as low student
engagement. The reason for the negative effects was attributed to the teachers’ use of the new
tools, which in turn could not teach the AR skills to the students. Clarke-Midura, Dede, and
Norton (2011) added that a designer’s perspective of AR can be much different than a teacher’s
perspective of usage in the classroom. Dunleavy and Dede (2014) cited that using AR in the
classroom can be almost as difficult as a teacher arranging a field trip. Perry, Kloper, Norton,
Sutch, Sanford and Facer (2008) examined AR at a zoo with students, in that the students loved
the movement and interaction AR had to offer. But if not designed correctly, AR can cause
confusion for the teacher and the students. Also, if instructions are missed or misunderstood, the
students’ learning will not excel. In addition, Dunleavy and Dede (2014) stated that the biggest

20
negative factor to AR in education is that students, even academically high achieving students,
cannot apply what they have learned outside of the AR simulation. Dunleavy and Dede (2014)
later mentioned that with the educational environment moving to a one-to-one environment, the
education field is looking for more technology teaching tools. Dunleavy and Dede stated that
technology should be a supporting tool for teacher instruction. There were limited studies outside
of classroom usage of AR, but the school library is an extension of the classroom. The school
librarian has more flexibility with the use and relevance of AR and its application in the school
library.
Ross and Furno (2011), van Arnham and Spiller (2014), and Kang (2015) stressed that
school libraries must have technology to stay relevant in today’s society. Rodgers (2014)
achieved success with boys and their reading when applying the latest technologies, such as
blogs, websites, avatars, podcasts, social networking and other tools, to help drive students
toward reading for enjoyment. Martens (2012) and Meredith (2014) explained that books
selected for students are based on browsing habits and not search strategies used by most
libraries today. Meredith (2014) discovered that most school libraries are set up for a text-heavy
and high vocabulary environment.
In Dunleavy and Mitchell’s (2009) study, they used a federal grant and the help of the
University of Wisconsin to create their study. Slowly, some companies, such as Aurasma, have
begun to make free user-friendly AR technology for everyone to use with a regular cellphone.
Krashen (2013) stated that once technology is affordable for low socioeconomic schools, more
schools will be able to engage reluctant readers in school libraries.
Walsh (2010) and Kroeber (2010), Whitchurch (2011,) and Brown and Green (2012)
found that most students have phones with an integrated camera that can help them scan a QR

21
code. Bromley (2012) and Larson (2012) found that technology could assist educators with
reading instruction. With reading being the main focus of a library system, AR could be very
beneficial to a school library. Hahn (2012) and Renner (2014) found that AR applications can
deliver an engaging and interactive information experience.

Sustained Silent Reading

Daniels and Steres (2011), Harrison (2012), and Krashen et al. (2012) clarified that
Sustained Silent Reading (SSR) has been built from research that students need to read for
pleasure during the school day. With SSR, during the school day or during the week, students are
given time to read for pleasure at school. von Sprecken and Krashen (1998) explained that the
one problem that has risen during SSR is with reluctant readers. Students are not allowed to selfselect their reading materials. von Sprecken and Krashen’s (1998) results revealed that even if
the teacher did not model reading, students were not allowed to bring their own book and/or
students were given a limited selection of reading materials. Ujite and Krashen (1996), von
Sprecken and Krashen (1998), Boltz (2007) and Brinda (2011) found SSR is highly successful
with most students, but they concluded that students should be allowed to self-select their books
rather than being given reading materials.
Daniels and Steres (2011), Harrison (2012), and Krashen et al. (2012) concluded that
given SSR and the need for students to self-select their reading materials, schools must be
dedicated to the enjoyment of reading. Whittingham et al. (2013) identified that students are
different types of learners and some may enjoy audiobooks, but Ujite and Krashen (1996), von
Sprecken and Krashen (1998), Boltz (2007), and Brinda (2011) found that others may be
interested in a visual simulation to engage them in a book.

22
Augmented Reality

AR could be used to encourage engagement of reading in school libraries, as Franklin
(2011) noted, we are at the tipping point with mobile technology. Franklin found that students’
lives will be immersed in virtual worlds and augmented reality in the future. Yuenet al. (2011),
Whittingham et al. (2013), and Mahadzir and Phung (2013) found that audiobooks and AR popup books for students have shown positive results on their populations. Dunleavy and Mitchell
(2012) and Kang (2015) studied AR technologies of students’ high interest in mobile devices.
Brill and Park (2008), Blagg (2009), Annetta et al. (2012), and Burton et al. (2012) discovered
that cellphones are being implemented in classrooms, have helped with differentiated instruction,
and have created new learning opportunities. Chen and Tsai (2012) suggested that some students
may still prefer traditional methods, but new tools can encourage unmotivated students.
Dunleavy and Mitchell (2012) created an application called Alien Contact in which
students used GPS and a reality world to solve real-life educational problems. Alien Contact
showed high student engagement in an urban, elementary classroom. The students became so
engaged they lost sense of the real world. In Dunleavy and Mitchell (2012)’s qualitative study,
Alien Contact displayed the highest engagement for students and teachers. Brill and Park (2008),
Yuen et al. (2011) and Chang and Liu (2012) discovered the same high engagement with
audiobooks, textbooks with AR technology, and pop-up AR books.
Brill and Park (2008) and Chang and Liu (2012) agreed that AR could bring textbooks to
3D life. Students are able to see graphs, videos and animated displays throughout a textbook. If a
child is in a traditional classroom with a teacher or at home in an online asynchronous
environment, a child can make the content come to 3D life. Students can communicate in a 3D
augmented reality world just as they would in a traditional classroom.

23
Face-to-face communication and collaboration is a vital part of the traditional classroom,
but can it be accomplished in the 3D augmented reality world? Brill and Park (2008), Dunleavy
and Mitchell (2009), and Wu et al. (2013) discovered that students could be successful with
communication, when using AR technologies. Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009) stated that students
could communicate in real and virtual worlds, increasing every students’ opportunities and
options for learning.
Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009) noted that the unmotivated students in their AR study
seem to have a new spark of interest. Most studies do not show the socio-economic status, racial
makeup, or achievement level of their students, but in Dunleavy and Mitchell’s study, it was
highly noted that lower socioeconomic students showed a high engagement with their AR tool.
Dunleavy and Mitchell found that the affordability of AR technology was too expensive for
lower socioeconomic districts, although AR technology showed high success in an urban setting.
Billinghurst and Kato (2002), Dünser and Hornecker (2007), Brill and Park (2008), and
Seifert and Tshuva (2013) endorsed AR technologies by supporting the student interaction
between reality and augmented reality. They agreed that AR should be equal to or exceed
classroom instruction to be implemented as a tool in the classroom. Billinghurst and Kato (2002),
Blagg (2009), Annetta et al. (2012), Burton et al. (2012), Piovesan et al. (2012), and Seifert and
Tshuva (2013) suggested that AR can enhance reality, permit the user to communicate with other
students in real time, and provide a relevant, meaningful, challenging, engaging tool for students.
In no way, did the researchers suggest replacing teachers, but they did urge adding tools to assist
the students with learning.
Blagg (2009), Annetta et al. (2012), Burton et al. (2012), and Latif (2012) discovered
cellphone use showed great results when used with students and teachers and changed the

24
mindset of how cellphones can be used. Cellphones have been the main tool used to engage
students with AR. Brill and Park (2009) used Alien Contact with students and found that the
students were so engaged in the application, it was hard to bring them back to reality. Clemens,
Purcell and Slkhuis (2013) learned that pre-service teachers were being taught augmented reality,
as an affordable tool, in their pre-service programs.
Krashen’s (1993, 1996, 2013) and Ramos and Krashen’s (1998) studies have shown that
students cannot learn as much from rote learning and worksheets as they can from reading any
book for pleasure. Krashen (1993) discovered that language acquisition for English language
learners could be captured faster through reading for pleasure. Krashen (2013) has spent much of
his career proving that free voluntary reading is equally or more effective than direct instruction
or assigned reading. With technology being a main factor with the new national Common Core
Standards and the suggestions for visual reading, AR could be a way to help reluctant readers
find interest in books. Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009) use of QR codes in the school library has
already begun to be heavily researched, but AR offers a visual environment, such as a comic
books or graphic novels compared to traditional books.
In a personal interview with Krashen (2013), he expressed a need for technology to help
motivate students. Although the end result is the book the student has chosen, it is important to
find the vehicle that gets him/her there. Other contributors to the voluntary reading movement
are Pilgreen and Sprecken (1993), Boltz (2007), and Brinda (2011) have contributed to the
research of reading for pleasure. von Sprecken et al. (2000), Boltz (2007), and Brinda (2011)
have stated three main ideas backed with research. One main idea is that students should be
allowed to self-select their own materials for reading for pleasure.

25
Augmented Reality is new to the education field, and researchers admit immediately that
this area has not been explored deeply (Chang & Liu, 2012). Billinghurst (2002), and Brill and
Park (2008) have extensive studies in AR being used in the educational setting. Although many
others have started to explore and expand research in this area, Billinghurst (2002) and Brill and
Park (2008) are pioneers in AR technology being used in the educational setting. Science
classrooms were mainly studied with this technology, but it has now branched out to other
educational settings and subject areas. Billinghurst (2002), Brill and Park (2008), Chang and Liu
(2012), and Seifert and Tshuva (2013) have all studied AR and its use in the educational setting.
Recently, it has been studied with elementary students, adults, and reading. Mahadzir and Phung
(2013) started to study using AR with children’s books for elementary students, and Chen and
Tsai (2012) examined giving elementary students basic library instruction through AR
technologies. Both of these studies showed success. None of the researchers suggested replacing
a teacher with AR technologies, but most researchers felt AR technology could be a successful
tool to motivate reluctant readers.
Billinghurst (2002) has led the way since the early 1990s, when AR in education was in
its infancy. Many other AR experts have started to explore research based on Billinghurst’s
(2002) and Brill and Park’s (2008) findings. Seifert and Tshuva (2013) started to bridge the gap
of motivation of students and AR technologies, which is uniting the subject of education and AR.
Di Serio et al. (2013) and Mahadzir and Phung (2013) had studied AR in the classroom
but never a school library. Based on the research using AR in the classroom, it has shown to be a
positive and motivating tool for learning. Dunleavy and Mitchell (2009) found that AR mirrors
many other 21st century tools being used to introduce students to the world of reading for
pleasure.

26
Research is limited on AR technology in general and almost non-existent when looking at
AR in a school library setting. AR has been studied in recent years, but at the classroom level.
Sansone (2014) published a dissertation two years ago, entitled Evaluating Educators’ Perceived
Value of Augmented Reality in the Classroom, and many new studies are currently being
conducted. Most of the research is based on classroom studies: Billinghurst (2002), Brill and
Park (2008), Chang and Liu (2012), Chen and Tsai (2012), Seifert and Tshuva (2013) and
Sansone (2014).
With the problem of reading for enjoyment, Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006), Whitmire
(2010), Allyn (2011), Hahn (2012), Harrison (2012), Whittingham et al. (2013), and Pittman and
Honchell (2014) explained that students must be allowed to self-select their books. With AR,
they are allowed to self-select books through visual stimulants. School libraries and AR can help
students with self-select books for reading success.

Conclusion

In conclusion, AR could be a tool to help reluctant readers self-select materials. None of
the researchers suggested that a classroom teacher can be replaced, but Chen and Tsai (2012) and
Hahn (2014) found that basic library instructions or guides might be more effective than
instruction from an actual librarian. Kaufmann (2003) agreed that no tool will ever substitute a
teacher or classroom instruction, but AR offers a new opportunities and possibilities for students.
With the issues that Daniels and Steres (2011), Harrison (2012), and Krashen et al.
(2012) identified in regard to students being able to self-select their own reading materials and
the engagement of reluctant readers, AR offers a new technology tool to help students be

27
successful in self-selecting their own materials. Hahn (2014) has shown success on the university
level, which could be a forecast for the K-12 education level.
AR technology joins the two areas of face-to-face communication in a traditional
classroom and an asynchronous online classroom environment. For example, students can not
only learn about clouds from a textbook and teacher’s instruction in a classroom, but they can
use a mobile device and AR app to view a real cloud and see 3D labeling of clouds and their
formations. Learning can be expanded outside of a classroom, as AR can interact with the real
environment around a student.
Billinghurst (2002), Billinghurst and Kato (2002), Dünser and Hornecker (2007), Brill
and Park (2008), Dünser (2008), Chang and Liu (2012), Chen and Tsai (2012), and Seifert and
Tshuva (2013) found positive results for AR technology being used in the educational setting.
AR could help a child self-select a book anywhere and at any time – for example, imagine a
child holding up a cellphone or personal digital device to a book and a YouTube book trailer
appears to engage a student in the content of that book. With AR technology, no longer does a
student have to search through textbooks or search for information online, students can now
point to the object and expand their knowledge about a book, subject or their learning beyond the
sheet of paper in front of the student. AR could help solve a forty-year-old problem of reading
for pleasur, by helping students find books that meet their interest level.

CHAPTER 3
STUDYING THE ENGAGEMENT OF AR WITH SEVEN HIGH SCHOOL LEVEL
RELUCTANT READERS

Methodology

The purpose of this study was to investigate if Augmented Reality (AR) apps could be a
benefit and engage seven high school level reluctant readers in finding books to read for
pleasure. Pilgreen and Krashen (1993), Yoon (2002), and Garan and DeVoogd (2008) have
shown positive results of sustained silent reading within schools when students self-select their
own books. To further that research while utilizing technology, this study sought to investigate
whether AR apps could be a tool to help high school level reluctant readers find the books they
would enjoy reading. Hahn and Zitron (2011) and Hahn (2012) found extraordinary success in
engagement with augmented reality in a university library setting. In a personal interview, Hahn
(2016) stated, “We should try any tool that helps our students be successful in the library” (J.
Hahn, personal communication, May 14, 2016). In a personal interview with Krashen (2013), he
expressed almost the same view as Hahn, but he felt that technology tools were too expensive to
help all students. Augmented Reality is mostly free technology that could benefit children of all
grade levels, socioeconomic levels, and educational settings, including school libraries. Both
Krashen (2013) and Hahn (2016) felt school libraries could use AR as a tool to engage students
in self-selected reading, which could lead to additional interest in reading for pleasure.

29
Qualitative Case Study

A qualitative case study was chosen as the method to collect data from seven high school
level reluctant readers in regard to using AR apps for self-selected reading. Qualitative case
study methodology allows the researcher to observe and analyze a small group of a population
without limitations. Creswell and Maietta (2002) and Creswell (2013) explained that a
qualitative study does not constrain the targeted population’s views and allows for more detailed
information. Yin (2014) added that qualitative case studies add more in-depth discussion
between the participant and the researcher. In this qualitative case study on Augmented Reality
apps, the study focused on in-depth discussion of Augmented Reality apps, how the seven high
school level reluctant readers were using them, and whether the AR apps did influence their
reading for pleasure. Seidman (1998), Patton (2002), and Creswell (2005) stated that qualitative
research studies are intended to explore issues, provide a deeper understanding of the topic being
studied, and identify main themes from the data that were gathered. Strauss (1987), Strauss and
Corbin (1994), Creswell and Plano Clark (2011), and Creswell (2013) established that the data
gathered in a qualitative case study can be analyzed for common themes and ideas. Strauss and
Corbin (1998) explained that qualitative research will allow a researcher to explore a
phenomenon that cannot be obtained through other research methods.
By using a qualitative case study approach, the seven high school level reluctant readers
were able to answer freely without parameters to their engagement with the AR apps or the
relevance of using the AR apps to read for pleasure. With a qualitative case study, the seven high
school level reluctant readers explained how the Augmented Reality apps interested them and
were relevant to their reading experiences. They described successes or failures generated when

30
reading for pleasure and explained how they connected to the reading materials. Creswell (2005)
stated that a qualitative case study should find a meaning rather than a result.
A qualitative study allowed the seven high school level reluctant readers to explain if the
AR apps helped them find relevant reading materials to read for pleasure. A qualitative study
was preferable to a quantitative study method because it allowed for discussion about the data
gathered in addition to review of the actual data points. In a qualitative study, the seven high
school level reluctant readers were questioned about the AR apps and data points showed
successes or failures. Additionally, the seven high school level reluctant readers explained how
and why they were using the AR apps, what books had engaged them to read for pleasure, and
their opinions of the AR apps. Seidman (1998), Patton (2002), Yin (2003), and Baxter and Jack
(2008) stressed that qualitative case study research questions explore the how and why of the
topic being studied.
The seven high school level reluctant readers were able to explain why the AR apps were
a success or a failure for them over the school’s quarter semester (nine weeks). The reluctant
readers were asked the same eight questions (see Appendix F) each week. During the school’s
quarter semester, they or the researcher could expand on the questions to go more in-depth into a
discussion on AR, a self-selected reading, and/or the AR tools. Finley and Ballinger (2006)
explained that qualitative research allows the researcher to understand the data from the
participants’ viewpoint, feelings, and experiences.
This research was conducted as a qualitative case study because it contains seven
separate cases. Flyvbjerg (2006) warned that a researcher cannot find relevance in one single
case, as it could contain bias toward verification and be difficult to summarize research for a
population based on a single case study. Yin (1989, 2003) stated that case study research grants

31
the ability for qualitative research to conduct cross-case analysis and replication to find the
common themes of a qualitative case study. Herriott and Firestone (1983), Yin (2003), and
Baxter and Jack (2008) explained that a qualitative case study allows confidence and a more
robust, rigorous and reliable study. The cross-case analysis was important to this qualitative case
study to look at the common themes produced by the seven high school level reluctant readers
and whether the successes or challenges were replicated throughout the study. Although each of
the readers’ viewpoints were important, a set of common themes brought validity to the
successes and failures of this study.

Sampling Strategy

The seven readers were chosen through purposive sampling from teachers and/or the
school librarian’s recommendations. At Sunwater High School, there was an established pool of
students enrolled in a reading class or who were deemed reluctant readers by the reading coach
and/or school librarian. The teachers and/or school librarian had observed the pool of students
during sustained silent reading or their engagement with reading for pleasure over the first seven
week of school. In this case study, with a purposive sampling, the teachers and/or school
librarian were able to select seven high school level reluctant readers who would not engage in
sustained silent reading, who expressed displeasure with the preferred reading material, who
were considered a reluctant reader, who were placed in a reading strategies class and/or who
refused to read during free reading time. Students within this pool, who were freshmen, were
offered an opportunity to be in the study. All seven high school level reluctant readers with
parental permission were allowed to be in this study. Northern Illinois University’s IRB
committee directed the researcher to have no contact with the students before parental

32
permission was given. The seven reluctant readers, along with many other students within the
pool, were given the opportunity to be a part of this study. The researchers selected all students
who had signed IRB forms to be a part of the study. The selection of the seven high school level
reluctant readers were made by Sunwater High School’s school librarian, reading coach, science
teacher, and/or principal (see Appendices A and B).
Bernard (2002), Patton (2002), Creswell and Plano Clark (2011), and Etikan, Musa and
Alkassim (2016) identified that purposive sampling is mainly used in qualitative studies, while
convenience sampling is used mostly in quantitative studies. Bernard (2002) and Patton (2002)
contended that researchers need participants who are willing to participate, engage in and
communicate during the study. Bernard (2002) stated that in purposive sampling, participants are
deliberately picked because they were described as reluctant readers and would provide a deeper
understanding of how the AR could assist or hamper their reading for pleasure. The teachers
and/or school librarian were certified by this Midwestern state, were considered highly qualified
educators, and were capable of determining this purposive selection of the seven high school
level reluctant readers in this qualitative case study because of their expertise in literacy as well
as their extensive knowledge of the students’ reading habits. Patton (2002) expressed that
qualitative studies using purposive sampling must identify information-rich cases who are
willing to communicate and participate to provide a deeper understanding to a qualitative study.
Maxwell (2005) explained that “particular settings, persons or activities [should be]
selected deliberately to provide information that can’t be gotten as well from other choices” (p.
88). Lincoln and Guba (1985) and Patton (1990) noted that identical results may not be
reproduced, but the process should be repeatable and results analyzed without bias. This
purposeful sample of seven high school level reluctant readers was chosen by their teachers

33
and/or the school librarian and given the chance to engage with the AR apps to self-select books
to read for pleasure. The only expectation for these reluctant readers during this qualitative case
study was for them to engage with the AR apps and to debrief with the researcher on how
relevant AR apps were in helping them find books that interest them.

Site and Participants

The site chosen for this qualitative case study was Sunwater High School, located in the
Midwest. The student racial makeup was 12.2% Caucasian American, 72.6% Hispanic
American, 5.4% Asian American, and 6.1% African American (IIRC, 2016). The school
population was over 2,600 students, and over 70% of the students were on free and reduced
lunch and had close to an 80% graduation rate on a four-year plan (IIRC, 2016). According to
the IIRC (2016), 73% of the freshmen class were on track to graduate.
The scope of this qualitative case study was limited to seven high school level reluctant
readers of any grade level, although the purposeful sampling strategy produced all ninth graders
for this study. Teachers and/or the school librarian identified students who would not engage in
sustained silent reading, who expressed displeasure with the preferred reading material, who
were considered a reluctant reader, who were placed in a reading strategies class and/or who
refused to read during free reading time.
During the time of this qualitative case study, the school library was under renovation
and the school librarian was unavailable for the beginning of this study. There was a temporary
library in an auxiliary room that contained 2,000 books for all of Sunwater High School’s student
body to check out. The researcher created a library collection of 55 young adult books to sit
separately from the student body’s collection that were reserved for the seven reluctant readers,

34
as the more avid readers in the high school could have made the books unavailable for the
participants during the study. Creswell (2005) stated that time and place are important for a
qualitative case study. The scope of this study did not revolve around the availability of the
school librarian or the school library’s location, but the availability of the seven high school level
reluctant readers for the nine weeks of observations and interviews to determine the successes
and failures of the AR apps.
After Northern Illinois University’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) finalized all
consent forms for students under the age of 18 and students over the age of 18 (see Appendices
A, B, C, D, and E), the IRB reviewer mandated that the researcher not have any direct contact
with students until after the consent forms are signed. Many identified students were reluctant to
bring back signed parental paperwork, as the researcher was unfamiliar to them. The researcher
created a YouTube video for recruitment (Rush, 2016), which the selecting teachers showed to a
pool of high school reluctant readers. This video was an indirect measure to recruit students and
to build relationships with the pool of possible reluctant readers prior to their start in the study.
Initially, the seven high school level reluctant readers individually had an orientation
interview with the researcher (see Appendix F). The seven high school level reluctant readers
were asked to come to the principal’s conference room for their first meeting with the researcher.
The questions in Interview 1 were used for demographic data and allowed the researcher to
observe if each high school reluctant reader would engage with the AR apps. The seven
participants were given a 45 minute orientation, which included Interview 1 and a slideshow
presentation about the study (Appendix I). The researcher asked about the students’ continued
interest in the study. If they agreed, a pseudonym name was selected by the student. Originally,
the participants were to be given time to use the AR apps, but the Sunwater High School School

35
District blocks YouTube, including for staff usage. The students were able to start using the AR
apps in Interview 2 due to these restrictions.
AR cannot exist without an app or program to deliver the content to an electronic device
(smartphone, iPad, tablet or computing device). This study used two apps: Aurasma and LayAR.
Those AR apps delivered the 3D content to the students. The AR apps are important, but the
technological content behind the apps was extremely important to make the 3D experience occur.
Kroeker (2010), Mulch (2010), Walsh (2010), Bryne (2012), Hahn (2012), and van
Arnham and Spiller (2014) had previously used Aurasma and/or LayAR for their research. The
researcher used both apps for this study for this study for three main reasons. The first reason
was that LayAR can be used by anyone with the downloaded app, whereas Aurasma requires a
user with a downloaded app to follow its channel. This was later seen in the study, when one of
the case study participants tried to scan books with the Aurasma app on his personal phone and
the books did not produce any results. Unless the case study participant followed the researcher’s
channel, the AR connected book would not produce any results. The second reason to use two
different apps was unfamiliarity with the school’s web filtering system. Both apps experienced
technical difficulties with the school’s web filtering system. LayAR experienced problems with
connecting to authors’ twitter accounts and YouTube videos. Aurasma experienced the same
difficulties with the YouTube videos and had to have each video uploaded to the Aurasma portal
independently.
Lastly, LayAR is a fee-based system, whereas Aurasma is a free system. LayAR did
allow books to be connected for free for one month (four weeks), but this study was over a nine
week period. LayAR was used for six books and Aurasma was used for 49 books in the study.

36
Books attached with a 3D object were marked with an Aurasma (Figure 1) or LayAR sticker
(Figure 2).

Figure 1. Aurasma control tag.

Figure 2. LayAR control number.

The Aurasma and LayAR apps were available in the iPhone Apple store, Google Play
store, and Android store, and were free of charge. LayAR granted permission to the researcher to
use LayAR for his study for two years. These apps allowed the researcher to create AR objects
that were scanned by the seven high school level reluctant readers on designated young adult
books that would appear in the school’s library. The AR objects were limited to a 3D pictures
that represented the book (Figure 3), YouTube book trailers created by the authors or teen book
reviewers (Figure 4) and/or a clickable link to a website or book review on the book (Figure 5).
These 3D objects were pre-loaded by the researcher for each book in this study. Approximately
50 young adult books were used for this study, although the researcher had duplicate copies of
certain books. During the first six weeks of the study, the collection of books was brought with
the researcher and laid out in front of the students to scan with a designated iPad. During the last

37
three weeks of the study, 35 books were set up with a dedicated iPad in Sunwater High School’s
temporary school library.

Figure 3: 3D Image

Figure 4: Book Trailer

Figure 5: Book review

During the school’s quarter semester, the seven reluctant readers were interviewed every
week and were able to provide answers to the same open-ended eight questions (Appendix F).
Esterberg (2002) cautioned against using leading questions and closed-ended questions, which
led to eight general open-ended questions. The eight questions showed the engagement each
student had with the AR apps, the type of book(s) they had checked out, and the engagement
they had with the reading material they had chosen or were reading.
The principal’s conference room was used for the interviews and the book collection. The
reluctant readers met with the researcher for 5 to 25 minute sessions once per week for the
quarter semester. The students were asked to sit across the table from the researcher, the only
variance is one high school reluctant reader (The Gaming Flaco) chose to sit directly next to the
researcher after Interview 3.

38
The second data collection method came in the form of observations, which were
recorded onto field notes. The researcher observed the reluctant readers three times during the
quarter semester. The reluctant readers were observed twice directly using the AR apps with the
researcher. Observation 3 was in the form of an indirect observation of voluntarily use of the AR
apps in the school library during the last three weeks of the study.
The seven reluctant readers were asked to use their cellphones for this qualitative case
study, but the researcher brought an iPad for the students to explore before their interview time.
Cellphones were the best instrument for this study, as that is the device every student needed to
view the AR on each book in a school library. Blagg (2009), Annetta et al. (2012), and Burton et
al. (2012) agree that AR could expand the minds of students and teachers on how cellphones
could be used and could help to give AR access to students of low socioeconomic status, even
after the study has concluded.

Case Studies

Case Study 1

This student was chosen by a teacher who was a past County Teacher of the Year. This
student was a freshman at Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016, and
ended on December 9, 2016. He self- identified as The Gaming Flaco from his favorite game,
and, at first, he was unable to pick a name and was later identified during the pre-interview and
observation, as Student A. The student self-identified as a gamer and picked a name he goes by
in games. The student is of Hispanic descent. He had a cellphone, but there were technical
difficulties with YouTube and Wi-Fi issues throughout the school. He was asked to use the
researcher’s iPad.

39
Case Study 2

The student was chosen by a teacher who was a past County Teacher of the Year. He was
a freshman at Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016 and ended on
December 9, 2016. He was identified in the study as 117, the name chosen by the student from
his favorite video game. The student is of Hispanic descent. 117 had a cellphone and used it
during the study, after downloading Aurasma and LayAR. During the orientation, 117 expressed
his joy at being in this study because he likes augmented reality. He immediately downloaded
Aurasma and LayAR and wanted to scan the books presented in front of him.

Case Study 3

The student was chosen by a teacher who was a past County Teacher of the Year. This
student was a freshman at Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016 and
ended on December 9, 2016. He was identified in the study as Captain Underpants from one of
his favorite comic books that he enjoys reading. The student is of Hispanic descent. Captain
Underpants did not have a cellphone, so an iPad was provided by the researcher during their
meetings.

Case Study 4

The student was chosen by a teacher who was a past County Teacher of the Year. This
student was a freshman at Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016 and
ended on December 9, 2016. She was identified in the study as Annabeth Chase from a character

40
from the Percy Jackson’s book series. The student is of Hispanic descent. Annabeth Chase had a
cellphone but chose to use the researcher’s iPad to scan the books during their meetings.

Case Study 5
The student was chosen by the school’s reading coach. This student was a freshman at
Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016 and ended on December 9, 2016.
He was identified in the study as Spiderman because that is his favorite comic book character.
The student is of Hispanic descent. Spiderman had a cellphone but chose to use the researcher’s
iPad to scan the books during their meetings. Spiderman would put his cellphone in his locker
during the school day and did not use it during the school day.

Case Study 6
The student was chosen by the school’s reading coach. This student was a freshman at
Sunwater High School. The study was started October 7, 2016, and ended on December 9, 2016.
He was identified in the study as Percy Jackson because it is his favorite book series to read. The
student is of Hispanic descent. Percy Jackson did not have a cellphone and chose to use the
researcher’s iPad to scan the books during their meetings. Percy Jackson was reluctant to be in
the study, as he felt it would interfere with his academics. The researcher asked him for the most
convenient time to call for him once a week, offering multiple days. Percy Jackson chose Fridays
but wanted to be called during certain non-academic periods.

Case Study 7

41
The student The student was chosen by a teacher who was a past County Teacher of the
Year. This student was a freshman at Sunwater High School. The study was started October 14,
2016, and ended on December 13, 2016. She was identified in the study as Rupi Kaur, the name
of an author of a poetry book. During the pre-interview and orientation, she pulled out one of
Rupi Kaur’s books. She was unable to attend the first meeting, as the researcher called for her
during lunch and she was unable to be located. While interviewing and observing the seven high
school level reluctant readers, the researcher was unable to meet with Rupi Kaur and conduct a
pre-interview and orientation with her. The researcher could have started the first interview and
observation, but felt the protocol should stay in place that the first seven high school level
reluctant readers went through.
The student is of Hispanic descent. Rupi Kaur did have a cellphone but was reluctant to
use it during this study. Rupi Kaur chose to use the researcher’s iPad to scan the books during
their meetings. Rupi Kaur was reluctant to be in the study, but after talking to another participant
in the study, she felt it was beneficial. Rupi Kaur’s addition to this study was important since the
original six participants were five males and one female freshman students. She was an essential
part to adding a female’s opinion to AR usage and to add more balance to the study.

Data Collection Methods
Table 1 illustrates the interview schedule that was followed for the nine weeks of the
quarter semester.

42

Table 1
Sunwater High School Interview Schedule

Orientation

During the orientation, the researcher met with each of the participants for 13-25 minutes.
Each was shown the orientation presentation (Appendix H). Then the researcher used his phone
and personal iPad to scan Ready Player One by Ernest Cline and Monster by Walter Dean
Myers. Also, the researcher had an example with an orientation presentation (Appendix H). The
seven reluctant readers watched the researcher scan the books. The researcher explained the
technical difficulties and that the students would have to use the researcher’s dedicated iPad
unless the district allowed permission of YouTube. As the orientation concluded, the researcher
asked background questions (Appendix I) to explore each reluctant readers’ history and to check
for engagement of the student to be in the study. Bernard (2002) expressed that researchers need
participants who are willing to participate, engage, and communicate during the study. The
orientation was important as a background study, but also to build rapport and communication
with the seven reluctant readers.

43
LayAR failed numerous times throughout the study, and Aurasma would not have
worked without an independent upload of each video. Reaffirming that Augmented Reality
cannot work without the full functionality of the AR apps. At this time, the researcher could have
used other AR apps, but they could be costly to implement and/or have the same problems these
apps experienced. As the weeks progressed, if the AR apps failed during the study, the researcher
reset the app and allowed the participants to continue to scan books or work on the AR apps’
technical functionality before the next interview.
After the orientation, the cart of 55 AR-linked books were kept with the researcher, until
week 7, when they were shelved separately in a room within Sunwater High School’s temporary
library. With Sunwater High School’s limited book collection of 2,000 books, the more avid
readers of the school could have possibly checked out the books deemed for the seven reluctant
readers. Also, due to the use of a dedicated iPad and the high value of the iPad, the researcher
was able to securely lock the iPad to a table within a private room. Each book was given a
special tag that was recorded in an Excel sheet by Sunwater High School’s librarian during the
checkout process (see Figure 1 & Figure 2). The seven reluctant readers were allowed to explore
and checkout any of the books during the last three weeks of the study directly through the
school’s librarian (see Appendix J). During the first six weeks, the reluctant readers were
allowed to check out books from the researcher during the interview and observation periods.
During the school’s quarter semester, the seven participants were interviewed once each week
and were allowed to explore any books, as the researcher brought all the books with him during
the first six interviews. The participants were sent back to class after the orientation. Rupi Kaur
was the only student who was not available during the initial orientation interview day. Her

44
orientation interview was combined with Observation 1 and Interview 2. Throughout this study,
the orientation interview is referred to as Interview 1.

Interviews

Lincoln and Guba (1985); Emerson, Fretz and Shaw (1995); Stake (1995); Patton (1999);
and Merriam (2002) stated that in a valid qualitative study, a researcher must use triangulation
with two or more data collection methods to increase the credibility of the study. Yin (2014) and
Patton (2002) expressed that triangulation (usage of multiple sources of evidence) strengthens a
qualitative case study’s findings. Yin (2014) noted that in a qualitative case study, “interviews
are an essential source of case study evidence because most case studies are about human affairs
or actions” (p. 113). In this study, the first triangulation method was in the form of interviews
with the seven high school level reluctant readers every Friday (see Table 1). This study’s focus
was on the AR apps to influence reading for pleasure, which allowed for questions on sustained
silent reading, how the students were reading the books they choose through the AR apps, and
the progress they made with reading for pleasure.
The seven high school level reluctant readers met with the researcher once per week for
10 to 30 minutes during periods 1-4. The researcher called each student during their English,
reading, or non-academic classes. The seven reluctant readers were asked the same questions
(see Appendix F) every week during the nine weeks. In addition to the interview questions, the
researcher and the participants engaged in a freeform dialogue about the study, the AR apps
and/or their reading successes or difficulties. The seven were freshmen, which kept the nine
interviews shorter than an adult interview would have been.

45
The seven high school level reluctant readers provided more detail about their reading
experience and how they felt about academic issues, sustained silent reading, and the AR apps
when allowed to have a freeform discussion with the researcher. Yin (2014) stated that a
researcher should avoid reflexivity, which is where the interviewees would tell the researcher
anything to make them happy. A deeper dialogue or conversation with each reluctant reader
allowed the researcher to find out background information on each reluctant reader but also to
verify their answers to the questions with background details.

Observations

The second triangulation method to establish validity to this study adopted the form of
three observations during the nine weeks. Yin (2014) stated that direct observations will allow
the researcher to see the action in real time for each case’s context. Yin (2014) also noted that
indirect observations allow a researcher “insightful into interpersonal behavior and motives” (p.
106). AR has not been heavily researched at the high school level, and the use of AR apps as a
school library tool and case study has limited the field more. Lincoln and Guba (1985) asserted
that prolonged engagement is important for the researcher to learn the culture of the school and
school library, to build rapport with the school staff and most importantly, and to seek the
phenomena of interest in using the AR apps in the school library. The observation tool chosen
for this study was field notes, which allowed the researcher to document the behaviors and
interests the seven high school level reluctant readers had with regard to the AR apps. Yin (2014)
suggested that observations will offer the researcher additional information on his subjects, their
environment, and the topic studied. Also Yin (2003) explained that through field notes, the
researcher will be able to guide his questions for future interviews.

46
During Observations 1 and 2 (see Table 1), the seven reluctant readers were invited to
meet with the researcher privately in a room in the school’s temporary school library, in the
principal’s conference room, or in the guidance conference room. The setting was not securely
private, as the researcher left one door open for the safety of the student and researcher. The
seven high school level reluctant readers were called to meet with the researcher between 8:30 to
1:00 p.m. An interview preceded Observations 1 and 2 so the researcher could ask questions
about what the students observed. The researcher did observe the participants’ use of the two
apps (LayAR and Aurasma), how long they looked for books, their engagement period with the
AR apps of a selected book, and if they found books to check out. The researcher did not interact
with the reluctant readers, but he provided assistance and instructions, if requested. If any of the
students required assistance with the AR apps, it was noted in the field notes.
Observation 3 was conducted during the last three weeks of the study. The researcher
worked with Sunwater High School’s school librarian to establish a separate room for the study.
Due to the high value of the iPad and the possibility of avid readers outside of the study wanting
the books from the study, the 55 book collection was kept in a separate room (see Figure 6).

Figure 6: LayAR app using ready player one

47
Observation 1

The first observation was conducted during the second week of the study. Originally,
Observation 1 was to take place during the orientation, but technical difficulties, as noted in
Chapter 4, prevented the seven high school level reluctant readers from viewing the books.
During Observation 1, the participants were given the following instructions on the AR system:
I have placed out all the books on the table. I would like you to take this iPad and view as
many books as you like with the Aurasma or LayAR app. There are multiple features on
each book for you to explore [the researcher showed them Ready Player One by Clive
with the LayAR app and three features popped up- a YouTube book trailer, the author’s
website and a linkage to twitter to allow the student to tweet the author (Figure 6).] I am
going to sit over here and watch you, but do not let me influence you. This is totally up to
you on what you want to explore and for how long. Please do what you want to do,
otherwise, it may hurt the research study.
All seven high school level reluctant readers were evaluated in Observation 1 from 7
minutes to 26 minutes. Interview 2 took place after Observation 1.

Figure 7: Penny Chic example

48
Observation 2

Observation 2 took place during Interview 5. The books were set up in the same manner
as Observation 1 and the participants were given the same instructions: “I have placed four
books in front of you. You can view any book on the table, but I would like you to view the four
books in front of you.”
The four books were Tap Out (Figure 5), The Book of the Unknown Americans, Penny
Chic (Figure 7) and Hush, Hush. 117 enjoyed Hush, Hush, which was then replaced by Next by
Michael Crichton. Each book had a different feature that would guide the researcher’s questions
in Interviews 3 and 4. Tap Out had a book review from Goodreads.com attached by the Aurasma
app; The Book of the Unknown Americans had three features attached by LayAR, which included
a YouTube book trailer, the author’s website, and a link to Twitter to allow the student to tweet
the author. Penny Chic, Hush, Hush and Next had an uploaded YouTube book trailer attached by
Aurasma. Observation 2 was 5 minutes to 19 minutes, depending on how long each reluctant
reader wanted to scan books and view the attached AR item.

Observation 3

The third set of observations were conducted over a three week period. An iPad and the
books were setup in a private room in the temporary school. The private room was due to the
library being a high traffic area, for the security of the iPad and for the privacy of the seven high
school level reluctant readers in the study. The following instructions were given to the students,
during Interviews 7 and 8:
I have setup the AR system in the library with the books from the study and an iPad. All
you have to do is ask the school librarian to allow you into the room to scan any book

49
you wish. She has a list of your names and will write down any books you wish to check
out.
The researcher indirectly observed the students by asking in Interviews 7, 8 and 9 if they
had visited the library (Appendix F). Also, the researcher conferred with the school’s librarian
about whether the seven high school level reluctant readers had asked to use the AR system and
if any books were checked out. The school librarian was provided a record of the times the
students visited the collection (Appendix J). The purpose of this independent, indirect
observation was to gain information regarding whether the seven high school level reluctant
readers engaged with the AR apps system independently. The first two observations were
extrinsically motivated by meeting with the researcher, whereas Observation 3 was intrinsically
motivated engagement. This observation is considered an indirect observation, as the researcher
wanted to observe the results of the independent behavior with the AR apps in a school library.
Stake (1975) and Lincoln and Guba (1985) both state that indirect observations can be as
beneficial as direct observations.

Data Analysis

Lincoln and Guba (1985), Strauss and Corbin (1994), Patton (1999), Maxwell (2013),
and Yin (2014) suggested using different methods for collecting data, known as triangulation, to
make a stronger case. Although the interviews and observations are independent sources of
evidence, Patton (2002) and Yin (2014) suggested that all sources of evidence in a qualitative
case study be analyzed, summarized and evaluated to support a stronger case for the study. More
importantly, Creswell (1995) and Maxwell (2005) directed researchers to immediately transcribe
interviews at the conclusion of the interview. For this study, interview data were transcribed and
analyzed immediately after collection. The observation data followed the same protocol, but had

50
separate coding categories, based on different information collected. Denzin and Lincoln (2000)
expressed that data analysis in a qualitative case study should be a creative process, and Stake
(1995) stressed that data analysis can begin at any time during the research process.
During the nine weeks, the researcher used Microsoft Onenote to conduct his interviews
and observations with the students. Within Microsoft Onenote, the researcher used the audio
recording feature. One of the seven high school level reluctant readers inquired about having a
digital recorder on the table while responding to the answers. The researcher found an indirect
method of recording the seven high school level reluctant readers, which did not impede the
research.
Strauss (1987), Miles and Huberman (1994), Strauss and Corbin (1994), Esterberg
(2002), and Maxwell (2013) noted that all data should be taken and coded in categories to find
common themes (Appendix L). Creswell (2009) called this process in vivo, where a researcher
places data into coded categories. In this study, coding categories were developed and common
themes emerged, as the phenomena in the research began to be discovered. Miles and Huberman
(1994) refer to repeating words and phrases called pattern coding, which reduces the list of codes
to a smaller list known as analytical units. In this qualitative case study, 10 major categories were
summarized into three major themes. As recommended by Strauss (1987), Strauss and Corbin
(1994), and Maxwell (2013), all data were coded into common themes, which in the current
study are reported in Chapter 4. Neuman (2003) explained that a researcher should develop
findings into coding categories, report those findings and draw conclusions. In the qualitative
data analysis chart (Appendix L), the process of the collection of data to common themes is
shown throughout the study. Appendix L illustrates the trustworthiness of qualitative research,
which will be discussed in the next section.

51
The computer program that assisted the researcher with organization and analysis of the
data was Atlas.ti. Atlas.ti is a computer-based program that coded the recording of the seven high
school level reluctant readers’ responses and put those responses into common themes.
Transcripts from Microsoft Onenote were saved as a PDF and uploaded to Atlas.ti. Yin (2014)
recommended Atlas.ti as one of the three computer programs that should be used for a qualitative
case study.

Trustworthiness of Qualitative Research

A qualitative case study should have produced the most accurate validity for this
dissertation, as the seven high school level reluctant readers explained if the AR apps increased
or decreased their relevance for engagement to read for pleasure. Data points from a quantitative
study could have shown the self-efficacy for the AR apps but would have not shown the
engagement or relevance the seven high school level reluctant readers had from using the AR
apps. For example, a quantitative survey would have shown the seven high school level reluctant
readers’ self-efficacy but not their engagement over time or the relevance of the AR apps in their
school lives. Strauss (1987) and Strauss and Corbin (1994) proposed that when using a
qualitative study, compiling responses from the seven high school level reluctant readers could
allow for common themes to be developed (Appendix L). Merriam (1998) and Bogden and
Biklen (2003) explained that a qualitative case study allows for the research to be descriptive of
the data and allows for an in-depth understanding of the contents of the research. Justification of
using a qualitative case study is shown by Hartley (2004), who stated that a qualitative case
study is very common throughout the education and social science fields since it allows tracking
and observing human behavior.

52
In this qualitative case study, the researcher used a pilot study, interviews, observations
and member checking to establish the trustworthiness of this study. Lincoln and Guba (1985)
created four areas that must be met, when using a quantitative or qualitative study: establishing
credibility, transferability, dependability and confirmability. Lincoln and Guba (1985) and Patton
(1999) asserted that triangulation (credibility) is important, as stated in the data analysis section
and the three forms of data collection sources, for a qualitative study. To meet the criteria of
credibility and transferability, as suggested by Lincoln and Guba (1985), the seven high school
level reluctant readers were interviewed and observed multiple times, and together we orally
reviewed their answers after every interview. This allowed the researcher to gain an
understanding of the school and temporary library’s culture, allowed for prolonged engagement
(credibility), and constructed an in-depth description of the seven high school level reluctant
readers (transferability), school and AR apps’ usage as well as reported the phenomena and
common themes over the school’s quarter.
Yin (2013) added that qualitative case studies “retain the holistic and meaningful
characteristics of real-life events” (p. 2). Yin (2013) suggested that using case studies for
educational research has helped to improve the educational system, such as in the current study
that sought to engage reluctant readers in reading for pleasure using methods that are new to the
educational system and school libraries. Strauss and Corbin (1993) and Yin (2013) noted the
weakness of being able to reproduce the same results when conducting qualitative case study
research due to the study of human behavior. To meet the criteria for dependability and
confirmability, as suggested by Lincoln and Guba (1985), all field notes, interview records,
video recordings and audio recordings are available for transparency and to establish an audit
trail.

53
All field notes, interview records and audio recordings will be stored by the researcher
for five years. All forms (Appendices E-H) were reviewed, screened and given clarity when
dealing with students on the high school level.

Member Checking

Creswell (2005) and Yin (2014) stressed that researchers should have participants review
transcripts after an interview to check that their words and meanings were recorded correctly. In
this qualitative case study, the seven high school level reluctant readers received a transcribed
copy of their personal interview from the week before to review and check for accuracy of their
words, meanings and feelings. After the first transcript copy was given to all the seven high
school level reluctant readers, the researcher observed that the students did not read the transcript
or the transcript was left behind on the table. Since this qualitative case study was based on seven
high school level reluctant readers, the researcher reviewed the seven high school level reluctant
readers’ answers orally with them at the following week’s interview. The researcher used the
following statement: “So last time you said you didn’t visit the library?”
The seven high school level reluctant readers confirmed the answers or stated that the
researcher had misinterpreted their answer, and he wrote the corrected answer on the transcript.
When interviewing children (the seven high school level reluctant readers), Guba and Lincoln
(1989) suggest that when using alternative methods for member checking.

Limitations

The limitation of using a qualitative case study methodology were minimal, in the
practice of qualitative research, as the researcher used two methods of triangulation (interviews

54
and observations) and allowed the seven high school level reluctant readers to be self-chosen or
chosen by Sunwater High School’s certified staff. This qualitative case study measured seven
high school level reluctant readers out of the 2,600 students within Sunwater High School’s pool
of students. Also, the school library and school librarian were unavailable for most or all of this
study. Different results could have been possible with a traditional school library environment.
The researcher was able to identify seven high school level reluctant readers who had not
engaged in reading for pleasure based on teachers’ and/or the school librarian’s observations or
through self-selection. By studying seven separate cases in this qualitative case study, the
researcher was able to look for similarities and differences among the seven cases, which would
not be possible with a single case study or with quantitative research study. Instead of using a
quantitative study to see if the students were engaging with the AR apps, a qualitative case study
allowed the researcher to understand why the seven high school level reluctant readers were
engaging with the AR apps in a school library. Also, the seven high school level reluctant readers
were able to express their opinions of the genres/books they liked, the AR apps (LayAR and
Aurasma), and if they discovered reading materials they enjoy reading.

Conclusion

This research, given its small sample of seven high school level reluctant readers, did not
prove that AR will work in every school library or with every reluctant reader in the world. This
qualitative case study explored the option that AR could enhance a school library or reluctant
reader and offer a different option for students to select books to reading for pleasure. Maxwell
(2013) noted that even a carefully chosen valid sample may not represent the typical population.
The goal of this qualitative case study was to help high school reluctant readers read voluntarily,

55
which can limit any students’ success at the elementary, middle, high school or college levels.
Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006), Jenkins (2009), Whitmire (2010), and Allyn (2011) expressed that
students must be able to self-select books if students are going to read for pleasure. Many times
students find books they like from teachers and/or librarian’s recommendations, word of mouth,
blog recommendations, advertisements, and/or many other forms of suggestive resources.
Augmented Reality adds another resource for high school reluctant readers to be able to find
books they might enjoy reading. A qualitative case study helped determine if AR can be a
beneficial tool to high school reluctant readers. As Hahn (2016) said in a personal interview,
“Augmented Reality brings the students to the library, who may not be the traditional library
patron. We should try any tool that helps students in a library” (J. Hahn, personal
communication, May 14, 2016). If audiobooks, Playaways, QR codes, blogs and many other
technology tools can help gear students toward reading, can AR be another tool to push students
toward reading for pleasure? A student will have the ability to choose a book based on their
preference using a tool to help them read for pleasure.

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS

The findings of this qualitative case study were considered based on seven individual
cases and then grouped into common themes. Yin (2014) suggested that a researcher may
organize a qualitative case study into separate chapters during the analysis of the data. In Chapter
4, each of the seven high school level reluctant readers was studied as individual cases and then
compared to other cases to give the reader an understanding of the common themes that
occurred.
In this qualitative case study, the finding were collected using a naturalistic case study
approach (Yin, 2014); therefore, the seven high school level reluctant readers were in their
familiar settings, Sunwater High School, over a school’s quarter semester (9 weeks). With all
seven high school level reluctant readers being under the age of 18 and high school students,
their identities, the adults mentioned in the study, and the high school are protected by
pseudonyms. Table 2 shows the intervention schedule for the study.

57
Table 2
Intervention Schedule

Case Studies

Case Study 1: The Gaming Flaco

The Gaming Flaco attended all nine interviews and two observations and was an active
participant in voluntarily using the AR apps in the school library. The Gaming Flaco stated that
he was given time in English class to read. He stated that he liked to read at home, study hall,
and in English class. During Interview 4, he stated he had visited the city’s local library for
books and, by Interview 6, he was reading on the school bus. There was a research caution for
The Gaming Flaco, as he said in Interview 3 that he would be better at reading the book he chose

58
through the AR apps. The researcher stated: “You do not have to read the book, if you so choose.
You need to do what you do regularly or it could hurt the study.”
Throughout the study, The Gaming Flaco mentioned that he liked reading in the library
and liked sustained silent reading time in English class. In Interview 1, The Gaming Flaco was
asked “How do you find books you like to read?” The Gaming Flaco responded: “I go to the
library and ask the helper for books she recommends or I scan through the books to see what is
available.”
The school’s librarian noted that he had asked if the AR apps were available in the
school’s library and he mentioned in Interview 5 that he was scanning the books in the library
with his personal phone to see if the AR apps would work. He tried using the Aurasma app to
scan books. Due to technical issues and the fact that the researcher had linked the 55 books
presented in this study, personal scanning was unavailable for The Gaming Flaco to connect to
any additional books. He chose two additional books, during the study, by browsing through the
library stacks. During the nine weeks, he viewed using the AR apps a total of nine books out of
the 55 books available through the researcher. He checked out one of the eight books he viewed
and checked out an additional two books from the school library. In Interview 8, he stated that he
was reading all three books at different times. In Interview 9, the researcher, after viewing his
data, asked him:
Researcher:
The Gaming Flaco:
Researcher:
The Gaming Flaco:

In this study, you mentioned you were reading three books at once.
Why are you reading three books at once?
I get bored one of book. So I start reading another book to take my
mind off of the other book.
Why do you read?
I read, when I get bored.

The Gaming Flaco was highly comparable with Case Study 2, 117, so they were
compared together. During the orientation, the two school reluctant readers, 117 and the Gaming

59
Flaco, who wanted to use their phones for the study, were instructed to download the two apps,
LayAR and Aurasma. Both students were unable to connect to a Wi-Fi signal using their
personal Wi-Fi or Sunwater High School’s guest w-fi.
The Gaming Flaco and 117 finished two books during the study. The difference was that
The Gaming Flaco read one book based on the AR apps and 117 read both of the books he chose
after viewing the AR apps’ book trailers.
The Gaming Flaco and 117 had a lot of the same patterns. They both described that they
enjoyed video gaming in the orientation interview (Interview 1), choose names that related to
their favorite video games, showed enthusiasm toward using the AR system during the entire
study, and successfully read at least one book that was suggested by the AR apps. Video gaming
was an interesting piece of data, but it was limited to The Gaming Flaco and 117 and was not
within the scope of this study. Video gaming will be suggested for further research in Chapter 5,
but it was not a common theme investigated within the scope of this study.
Another similarity came during observations; they both viewed three to four books in
each observation and choose the book they wanted to read. They both watched the book trailer
and choose a book immediately after viewing the AR apps in Observation 1. Both students stated
they enjoyed the books they read. The Gaming Flaco did not read the book chosen through the
AR apps as fast as 117, but both high school reluctant readers completed the book they read.
The one major difference between The Gaming Flaco and 117 was having time to read in
school. The Gaming Flaco continuously read every day because his classroom teacher had
implemented sustained silent reading into his curriculum. If he needed new books to read, his
English teacher would send him to the school library to pick new books. 117 struggled to read
the AR apps chosen book or any enjoyment book from Interview 1 to Interview 4. He noted that

60
he could not find time to read the book. However, in the Interview 5, 117 said he had read the
entire book in one night.

Case Study 2: 117

117 only missed Interview 6 with the researcher, as he was absent. As stated in Case
Study 1, The Gaming Flaco and 117 demonstrated similar characteristics, themes and patterns
throughout the study. 117 showed increasing enthusiasm throughout the study and thanked the
researcher for letting him be a part of the study in the beginning and throughout the study. He
viewed a total of 8 books out of 55 books available through the researcher. He checked out three
of the eight books he viewed and completed two of those books with the time of the study. When
the researcher explained that the study was ending on Week 8, 117 showed discontent that he
thought the book would be taken from him. The researcher explained that 117 could keep the
books until he completed them. After the explanation from the researcher, he expressed his
appreciation.
One of the major themes that emerged during the study was human influence. 117 was
one of the major contributors to this section, but 117 showed enthusiasm for the use of
augmented reality in Interview 1. With the technical issues with the AR apps, 117 felt there
should be a dedicated iPad to use in the school’s library.
By the end of the study, 117 was questioned about his likes and dislikes of the AR apps.
117:
system.

“It helps you know more about the book.” 117 stated that he had no dislikes about the

61
Case Study 3: Captain Underpants

Captain Underpants only missed Interview 2 with the researcher, as he was absent.
Captain Underpants was the only student to choose a book immediately without using the AR
apps. He chose the book Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A Brave Is Brave. He was shown the
book trailer during Interview 2, but he automatically chose a book during the orientation
(Interview 1). He mentioned in Interview 1: “I like to read comic books.” Junior Braves of the
Apocalypse: A Brave Is Brave is a comic book. The researcher asked why he chose Junior
Braves of the Apocalypse: A Brave Is Brave, he responded: “I liked the book cover.”
This information was important to the common theme of being a main recommender,
which will be discussed in Chapter 5 under Common Theme 2. During the study, he viewed a
total of 8 books out of 55 books available through the researcher. He checked out one of the
eight books he viewed and made progress with Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A Brave Is
Brave. During Interview 5, he reported that he left the book at his grandmother’s house. During
his sustained silent reading time, his teacher had a classroom library available for him to find
another book. Captain Underpants said: “The teacher had a classroom library, so I looked
through the books and found the book Heat.”
Again, he described that he chose the book based on the book cover. He made
more progress on the book Heat than on Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A Brave Is Brave,
throughout the study. He stated that his brother had taken Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A
Brave Is Brave and was reading the book.
When comparing Captain Underpants to the previous two cases (The Gaming Flaco and
117), all three showed enthusiasm about being in the study. Captain Underpants arrived early for
every interview, as did The Gaming Flaco and 117. As compared with the other two case studies,

62
Captain Underpants felt the AR apps could help students find books. Unlike 117, Captain
Underpants and The Gaming Flaco had sustained silent reading and their teachers expected them
to read during that time. Both referred to sustained silent reading, as the 20 minute silent reading
time.
The difference that Captain Underpants showed twice in his case studyis that he chose
books solely by the book cover. He said: “I like the bookcover. I find it appealing.” This will be
discussed in Common Theme 2, as the main recommender for Captain Underpants was the book
cover over the book description, teacher recommendation or the AR apps.

Case Study 4: Annabeth Chase

Annabeth Chase missed the fourth, fifth and final interviews with the researcher due to
sickness and an athletic competition. Originally, Annabeth Chase was reading two books prior to
the study, one book she enjoyed after seeing the movie Nerve and decided to read the book. Also
she was reading a book recommended by her mother, although she did not disclose the book
during the study. It is noted in the interview notes as (title unknown). During the study, she
viewed a total of 12 books out of 55 books available through the researcher. She checked out
none of the 12 books, but mentioned she liked two of the books. She said: “I like these two book,
Next and Life as We Knew It, but my mother has asked me to read another book.”
During Interview 7, she said that she had started another book The Other Side of the
Island, which was recommended by a teacher. She started reading this book during sustained
silent reading that started during Weeks 6 and7, but by Interview 8, she discontinued all three
books. She noted that in sustained silent reading, she was distracted by the noise in the
classroom. During the entire study, she mentioned in multiple interviews that she wished she had

63
sustained silent reading to read her books. Between soccer and her academics, she stated that she
did not have time to read her books. When asked about her dislikes of the AR apps, she
mentioned: “I dislike that sometimes, it lags.”
To find out what would motivate Annabeth Chase to finish her books or implementation
of sustained silent reading would require a deeper study. Also Yin (2013) stated that a researcher
must look for the common themes. Though Annabeth Chase provided invaluable information for
this AR study, she did not choose an AR-recommended book. Her data were inclusive when she
rated all three books, but the researcher did not have an AR-recommended books for comparison.
Like The Gaming Flaco, 117, and Captain Underpants, Annabeth Chase showed
enthusiasm toward the study. At the end of the study, she mentioned she liked the AR apps and
would like to see them in the school library. When asked what she liked about the AR apps, she
mentioned: “I like the popup trailers.” The Gaming Flaco, 117, and Captain Underpants
mentioned the same liking of the book trailers, but their terminology varied from YouTube
video, pop-up trailers and book videos.
Annabeth Chase had more in common with Percy Jackson, who is the next case study.
Both chose names from Percy Jackson’s books, read the back cover description of the books and
viewed the most books. Their viewing time ranged from 19-26 minutes during each observation.
Annabeth Chase went a step farther than Percy Jackson, as she would read the first few pages of
each book. The researcher noted that she read the first five pages of Life as We Knew It after
watching the book trailer and reading the back cover description.
During Observation 1, she explored nine books on the table with the AR apps. At the end,
she pointed to two books she would have chosen, but stated she was already reading a book
called Nerve and a book her mother asked her to read. During Observation 2, she again explored

64
five books on the table, but gave the same reason for not choosing a book. She started a third
book during the study, but ended up not finishing or continuously reading any of the books. She,
however, expressed her hope for opportunities like sustained silent reading.
When viewing Annabeth Chase as a single case study for similarities and differences
from The Gaming Flaco, 117, and Captain Underpants, she did not choose an AR recommended
book and was the only high school level reluctant reader not to choose a book. Also, Annabeth
Chase discontinued reading for pleasure of any books by Interview 7.

Case Study 5: Spiderman

Spiderman missed the third and the sixth interviews with the researcher. He was absent
on both days. He viewed three books out of 55 books available through the researcher. He
checked out one of the three books he viewed and was half through the book Monster by Walter
Dean Myers. Spiderman was very excited to tell the researcher in multiple interviews, including
the orientation, that he was reading a book A Child Called It. He was finishing it up as an
assigned reading before the study started. After finishing A Child Called It, he started to read
Monster. Spiderman was hard to capture as a single case, as he had a lot in common with Captain
Underpants and 117, but especially with The Gaming Flaco. The same was found with Percy
Jackson.
Spiderman had sustained silent reading within his English class. He had the same teacher
as The Gaming Flaco, Percy Jackson, and Captain Underpants, who expected the students to
silently read for 20-30 minutes daily. All four high school level reluctant readers made progress
through their reading material throughout the semester and all noted that sustained silent reading
was where they did the majority of their reading. Also, all four high school level reluctant

65
readers with sustained silent reading mentioned that they were reading at home. Out of the other
three high school level reluctant readers without sustained silent reading, 117 was the only one to
note that he read at home when he had time.
Spiderman and Captain Underpants mentioned that the book cover helped them to choose
a book. This issue is explored deeper in Common Theme 2. Spiderman echoed the almost same
dislike as Annabeth Chase with the AR apps. When the researcher asked what he disliked about
the AR apps, Spiderman replied: “I don’t like all the technical problems.”
The Gaming Flaco and Spiderman had many commonalities, but there was one very
important noticeable difference between them. The Gaming Flaco hand-selected his book,
whereas Spiderman liked to be given books. This finding was not in the scope of the study or
stated in the research questions but will be addressed in Chapter 5, as a suggestion for further
research.

Case Study 6: Percy Jackson

Percy Jackson only missed one interview (Interview 8) with the researcher. He viewed a
total of 6 books out of the 55 books available through the researcher. He checked out one of the
six books he viewed but discontinued reading The Dead after one week. Before he could explore
the books again with the AR apps system, his English teacher suggested he read The Hunger
Games: Catching Fire. For the rest of the study, Percy Jackson spent his time finishing that
book. Captain Underpants, Spiderman, and Annabeth Chase mentioned that a teacher had also
recommended a book they were currently reading, which is developed in Common Theme 2.
Percy Jackson and Rupi Kaur were both reluctant about being in this study. Percy
Jackson asked about being recorded and seemed hesitant or nervous during the pre-interview.

With Percy Jackson’s hesitation, the researcher moved forward with other high school level

66

reluctant readers. However, by the second interview, Percy Jackson stopped by the principal’s
conference room to inquire when his next interview would be. Along with 117, The Gaming
Flaco, and Captain Underpants, Percy Jackson showed enthusiasm for this study and for using
the AR apps. By the end of the study, Percy Jackson stated about the study: “I liked this study
and I would use the AR apps.” Like 117, when asked what he disliked about the study, he
responded: “Nothing.”

Case Study 7: Rupi Kaur

Rupi Kaur was present for a total of four interviews with the researcher. She was not
present for Interviews 1, 3, 4, 6 or 7 due to absences. During multiple interviews, Rupi Kaur
explained that she was hoping to pass her classes and was dealing with other academic issues.
With Rupi Kaur being absent from the study so much, she missed Observation 2 and during the
first part of the study showed no interest in reading Street Love, visiting the library to try the AR
apps in the library, or even being in the study. Percy Jackson showed the same kind of
discontentment in the beginning of the study, but his enthusiasm increased after the first
observation of using the AR apps. With other issues plaguing this student, it was hard for the
researcher to find success in this case study, except that Rupi Kaur connected to all the common
themes in the few interviews. More importantly, in Interview 9, Rupi Kaur showed promise, as
she had read a few pages of Street Love and asked to stay and talk with the researcher.
During the study, she viewed a total of 6 books out of the remaining 48 books available
through the researcher. By the time she interviewed, some books had been checked out from the
researcher, which made fewer books available.

Rupi Kaur’s favorite book was Milk and Honey by Rupi Kaur, which is a poetry book.

67

After Observation 1, the researcher noticed that Rupi Kaur chose a poetry book called Street
Love by Walter Dean Myers, which is on the American Library Association’s reluctant readers
list. The same commonality of genres could be seen with Captain Underpants as he expressed his
interest in comic books and choose Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A Brave Is Brave, a graphic
novel. 117 expressed his interest in video games and chose Ready Player One, and Spiderman
expressed an interest in hardship books like A Child Called It. After the researcher modeled AR
apps in the orientation, Spiderman quickly selected Monster, a book about a gang lifestyle and
prison.
The second major theme that Rupi Kaur helped to establish is that she stated: “Book
covers don’t appeal to me,” unlike Captain Underpants and Spiderman, who felt book covers
helped recommend books they should read. Percy Jackson and Annabeth Chase said they
enjoyed being able to read the back cover description. Rupi Kaur showed a common theme with
117 and The Gaming Flaco in which they expressed their disinterest in the book cover and the
back cover description. Rupi Kaur, 117, and The Gaming Flaco felt the videos would help them
select books, and Rupi Kaur said: “I really like the videos.”
The major finding in this case study was that Rupi Kaur did not have sustained silent
reading like Annabeth Chase and 117 did. Rupi Kaur did not express an interest in having a
sustained silent reading time and said she was struggling academically. The long term effects
Rodrigo et al. (2007) mentions with adults could also be seen during this study. Rupi Kaur, 117,
and Annabeth Chase did not experience sustained silent reading throughout their school day.
Rupi Kaur struggled with absenteeism and with passing her classes, Annabeth Chase stopped
reading all three books she was reading for pleasure by the end of the study. At the same time,

68
Rupi Kaur reported in Interview 9 that she had started reading a few pages of her AR apps
chosen book.
Lastly, 117 showed success in reading at home, but said he went weeks without reading,
depending on academic challenges such as “a big test this week.” The Gaming Flaco, Spiderman,
Percy Jackson, and Captain Underpants all made progress in reading for pleasure using the books
they choose. All four of these high school level reluctant readers stated they were reading for
pleasure during sustained silent reading and at home.

Common Themes

After reviewing each case of the seven high school level reluctant readers and making a
rolling comparison of the cases, themes emerged from the data collected. Although a lot of data
were gathered, this study focused on two main questions:
1. What are the differences of engagement in high school level reluctant readers in
finding books to read before and after using an Augmented Reality tool?
2. How do high school reluctant readers find books that engaged their interest using an
Augmented Reality tool?
Question 1 is answered in Theme: Engagement of Reading, and Question 2 is
addressed in Theme: The Relevance of Augmented Reality Apps on Reluctant Readers. Both
questions relate to the relevance aspect of the ARCS model created by Keller (1979, 1987),
which is based on the engagement of a learner with the AR apps, their pre- and post-reading
habits, and how the seven high school level reluctant readers selected books.

69
Theme 1: Engagement of Reading

Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006) stated that sustained silent reading and having to read for
pleasure is critical to the academic success of students. All seven high school level reluctant
readers were at different levels of academic success, but as stated by Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006)
the effects of reading for pleasure can have positive results for all students. However, Rodrigo et
al. (2007) found that the long-term effects may not be seen until the student is an adult when an
adult cannot read for pleasure or has already suffered academic issues. One of the main research
questions of the current qualitative case study was to explore the engagement of reading before
and after using the AR apps to choose a book. This study could have concluded after a student
selected a book and filled out a survey on his/her opinions of the AR apps. Instead the focus of
this study was to test if AR apps could be justified as a school library or academic tool and if
they can help in the motivation of students reading for pleasure.
None of the seven high school level reluctant readers was forced to engage in reading or
selecting a book they liked during this study. Instead they were given the opportunity to explore
the 55 books with AR apps and check out a book they might enjoy reading. Over the school’s
quarter semester, all seven high school level reluctant readers varied in their ability to make
progress with their reading materials and determining when they would read the materials.
However, six of the seven high school level reluctant readers asked to finish the books they had
selected after the study had concluded.
In this study, four students were given 20 minutes of silent reading in their English
classes: Captain Underpants, The Gaming Flaco, Percy Jackson, and Spiderman. Rupi Kaur
stated that she was instructed in study hall to bring a book to read, but she was allowed to work

70
on her academic needs during that time. Neither 117 nor Annabeth Chase had any structured
time during the day to read their books.
The findings for the use of AR apps were mixed, but after comparing data, success was
found based on which students had sustained silent reading. All four students who had sustained
silent reading built into their schedules – Captain Underpants, The Gaming Flaco, Percy Jackson
and Spiderman – made progress with their reading materials. A few stopped reading the book
chosen with the AR apps based on their like or dislike of the book’s content. All four reluctant
readers said they were reading the book in their sustained silent reading time. This time is known
at Sunwater High School as a 20 minute silent reading time. Captain Underpants reported his
teacher gave him a “30 minute silent reading time.” The researcher used the term sustained silent
reading (SSR) during the study although the four high school reluctant readers who had 20 silent
minute reading time used both terms to describe when they read the book. In addition, the four
high school reluctant readers stated many times that they read at home along with their SSR
time.
The three students who did not have SSR time – Annabeth Chase, 117 and Rupi Kaur –
were very different in their reading for pleasure selections. 117 loved the books he picked with
the AR apps and took two additional books after finishing Ready Player One by Clive in one
night. He struggled to find time to read those books at school or at home. Rupi Kaur suffered
from academic issues and had a hard time reading even one page of her AR app selected book,
Street Love. Annabeth Chase was not hampered by not having a sustained silent reading period
in school at first and stated in Interview 4 that “the teacher was supposed to start us reading for
20 minutes, but I don’t know what happened to that.”

71
The teacher, after Interview 6, started sustained silent reading, but it did not meet the
conditions created for Sustained Silent Reading in which students must be silent during their free
reading time (Heibert & Reutzel, 2014; Krashen, 1993). Annabeth Chase reported that students
were allowed to talk and it was too loud for her to read. By Interview 7, Annabeth Chase had
discontinued reading any books for enjoyment. By Interview 8 and at the end of the study, she
was not reading any type of reading material. She was the only student who did not take a book
after Observation 1. Originally, she was reading two books at the time and started a third book,
after not enjoying the book recommended by her mother. During the study, she started three
books and discontinued all three books. Annabeth Chase noted in Interview 7: I did not have
time at home to read, because of travel soccer and homework… At school, during sustained
silent reading, it is too noisy to read…I just put things in my planner and do homework.”
Captain Underpants, The Gaming Flaco, Percy Jackson, and Spiderman, who had sustained silent
reading, all reported their classes were silent and were expected to have reading materials of their
own choosing. All four high school level reluctant readers showed progress in their AR apps
chosen or self-selected reading materials.
After four weeks of checking out a book, 117 reported that he read Ready Player One in
one night (Monday) at his home due to the interest level of the book. 117 did not have sustained
silent reading, but showed amazing progress with the books he chose. During the second
observation, the student was offered a new book to view. After viewing four books, 117 chose
Hush, Hush and I am I Am a Seal Team Six Warrior: Memoirs of an American Soldier. He
reported that the book trailers helped him decide that he wanted to read those books. The
researcher gave him both books. The second research question of this study that was evaluated
was how do these seven high school level reluctant readers find books that engaged their interest

72
using the Augmented Reality tool. The engagement of reading was reported in Chapter 3 (caseby-case) and Theme 1 in Chapter 4. Exploration of the use of the AR app developed into three
separate sub-themes: Use of the AR apps through one-on-one sessions, Use of the AR apps
through the school library and Use of the AR apps for future recommendations. The seven high
school level reluctant readers showed mixed results in their use of the AR apps in different
settings during the school’s quarter semester.

Sub theme A: Usage of the AR Apps through One-On-One Sessions

During Observation 1 (Week 2) and Observation 2 (Week 5), all seven high school level
reluctant readers were given the opportunity to explore the AR books while the researcher
observed them. The setting was the principal’s conference room (see Figure 8) for the
Observation 1 and the guidance conference room for Observation 2. All 55 books were placed on
the conference table for the reluctant readers to explore. After the orientation, the researcher
found many technical difficulties with the school district’s filtering of YouTube, students being
able to use their personal cellphones for the study, and the availability of the temporary school
library. These issues are reported under Use of the AR apps for future recommendations. During
Observation 1 (Week 2) and Observation 2 (Week 5), the seven high school level reluctant
readers met with the researcher in the available private conference rooms. The researcher
instructed the seven high school level reluctant readers with the following script:
I would like you to take the iPad and explore some of the books on the table. It is up to
you to decide how long to watch a book trailer or read a website or book review. Also,
you can decide how many books you would like to view. After you are done, it is your
decision to take a book that you like or not take any books at all. I will have a few
questions after you are done.

73

Figure 8. Principal's conference room.
All seven high school level reluctant readers explored the books for a variety of times.
During both observations, 117 viewed three books and immediately choose his book. He was the
quickest selector. He expressed in the interview that he saw from the book covers what books he
wanted to know more about. Both Percy Jackson and Annabeth Chase read the book description
first before viewing the book trailer. Both spent the most time viewing the books. Captain
Underpants and Rupi Kaur viewed books, and when they found a book they were interested in,
during both observations, they flipped through the book. Both times, Captain Underpants choose
the book he flipped through.
In the interview that followed the observations, the reluctant readers, except for Rupi
Kaur, stated that the cover of the book and/or back description was most important feature to
them in choosing a book. Rupi Kaur felt the AR apps was the most important feature to her
choosing the book she wanted to read.

74
Sub Theme B: Usage of the AR Apps through the School Library

The last observation of this study was set over a period of time. The books and iPad were
placed in the school’s temporary library for the last three weeks of the study. Due to the iPad
being of high value, the school librarian kept the iPad and books in a separate room. The school
librarian was given a list of students in the study. Over the last three weeks of this study, the
researcher asked the seven high school level reluctant readers if they had visited the library. The
Gaming Flaco was the only student to visit the library over that three-week period. The school
librarian noted that The Gaming Flaco had been asking if the system was available in the library.
In Interviews 5 and 6, The Gaming Flaco stated he had been visiting the library and tried
scanning the school library’s books to see if the app would work with his phone. The researcher
explained that only the 55 books in the study would work with the app. In Interview 5, The
Gaming Flaco did mention since the AR app (Aurasma) would not work for him, he chose two
books by their covers after browsing through the books. The Gaming Flaco was given time
during English or had regular library visits, which the other seven high school level reluctant
readers were not given or did not take advantage of.

Sub-Theme C: Use of the AR

In the orientation of this study, only two high school reluctant readers had prior
knowledge of what Augmented Reality or AR meant. 117 said he had an understanding of AR
through playing games with augmented reality. He stated: “I am very happy to be a part of this
study.” The other high school reluctant reader was The Gaming Flaco. He stated, “My cousin
showed me what it was. He showed me on an augmented reality app.”

75
Both 117 and The Gaming Flaco showed already understood what AR is. Both stated
they were gamers and they picked pseudonyms that were from popular video games. The
expected outcome for the case studies of 117 and The Gaming Flaco were projected to be
positive. The other five high school reluctant readers had never heard the term AR. The expected
outcome of their case studies could have been negative or positive. In Interview 7, all seven high
school level reluctant readers were asked about their opinions on the AR apps. Their responses
were as follows:
•

117 stated, “I like the augmented reality apps.”

•

Percy Jackson said “It helps you understand the book more.”

•

The Gaming Flaco exclaimed “Pretty cool.”

•

Annabeth Chase stated “Cool.”

•

Captain Underpants responded “You don’t have to read the back of the book.”

•

Spiderman concluded “Cool and it could be useful for all students.”

•

Rupi Kaur said “I like it. Book covers do not appeal to me.”

Unanimously, all seven high school level reluctant readers enjoyed using Augmented
Reality. The Gaming Flaco enjoyed the AR apps so much, the school librarian reported that he
had come to the library to scan other books. Through his interviews, he confirmed that he started
to scan books in the library with his own cellphone. The Gaming Flaco was very excited to hear
the AR system was available in the library after Interview 6.
In Interview 7, the researcher asked if the AR apps and system should be available in
their school library and all seven participants said, “Yes.” The split of the opinions developed,
when the seven high school level reluctant readers were asked about their likes and dislikes of
the AR apps and system. All of the students stated they liked the system and thought it should be

in the school’s library, their dislikes varied. Annabeth Chase stated, “I do not like all the

76

technology problems with the system. Sometimes things didn’t come up.”
The technical difficulties cited by the students happened in two different events. The first
two technical difficulties happened during the orientation when the students could not see an
example of the AR apps. The school system overseeing Sunwater High School blocked the
access to YouTube, making it impossible for the students to see the attached AR videos for the
55 books in the study. The school’s principal used his personal staff login, which was used for
the entire study, to bypass the YouTube filters. However, a staff login still did not solve the
problem. The researcher had to independently download each video from YouTube, using the
website Keepvid.com, and uploaded the videos into the Aurasma app. This action solved the
problem of the seven high school level reluctant readers being able to access the book trailers,
which turned out to be the most popular feature for all seven high school level reluctant readers.
Only 117 mentioned that he liked all the different features of being able to tweet the author and
look at the book’s website.
The next issue happened at the same time (during orientation) as the YouTube filtering
issue. 117, The Gaming Flaco, and Percy Jackson offered to use their phones for the study but
found that their cell signal was blocked by the school’s structure. In certain parts of the school
building, the students could receive a signal, but not in the locations where we met. At this point,
in the study, an iPad was used to scan the 55 books (see Appendix J) and for the observation
period in Sunwater High School’s temporary library location. This one iPad idea was very
successful and reduced the problems with the engagement with AR in the future.
Overall, the seven high school level reluctant readers enjoyed using Augmented Reality
and stated it would be a benefit to the school library and that they would like to see AR book

77
trailer attached to every book. However, the technical issues were a sign of contention among
three of the high school reluctant readers.

Theme 2: Relevance of Augment Reality Apps on Reluctant Readers

Sub Theme A: Relevance in a School Library

The last three weeks of the study focused on the school library and the placement of the
AR apps in the school library. The first six weeks focused on monitored voluntary engagement
with the AR apps by the researcher. The last observation (Observation 3) focused on voluntary
engagement. After the Week 5 interview, all seven high school level reluctant readers were told
that the AR system would be available in the school library for use among the students in the
study. The setup included an iPad with the Aurasma and LayAR apps and two crates filled with
books. The school’s teacher librarian was worried about theft of the iPad, so the researcher used
a locking case for the iPad and all items were placed in an enclosed room in Sunwater High
School’s temporary school library.
Over the three-week period, the only student to visit Sunwater High School’s temporary
school library and to voluntarily view the books with the AR system was The Gaming Flaco. The
school librarian reported that The Gaming Flaco had been asking if the system was available in
the school’s temporary library. When The Gaming Flaco found out the AR system was not
available, he chose two books by looking at the front cover of the books as he browsed through
the school’s temporary library collection. The AR system was only available for the last three
weeks of this study in the school’s temporary library for Observation 3.
The AR system engaged one high school reluctant reader, but failed to engage the other
six high school reluctant readers. In Interview 9, the other six high school reluctant readers were

asked, “Did you visit the library or use the AR apps to help you find books?” The school’s

78

librarian had a clipboard with all the students’ names, in case they wanted to visit the library.
When questioned why they had not visited the library, the readers gave the following responses:
•

117 said “I have been too busy with tests…academics.”

•

Spiderman stated “I will try to get down there.”

•

Percy Jackson said “I just haven’t had the time to go.”

This theme came up often, except for The Gaming Flaco, who visited the library often,
because his teacher would allow him to go during class or sustained silent reading. By Interview
5, Captain Underpants had chosen a new book to read; he stated he had forgotten the AR apps
chosen book at his grandmother’s house. Needing a book for sustained silent reading, he
browsed the teacher’s classroom library for a new book. Percy Jackson was given The Hunger
Games: Catching Fire by his teacher, who felt he would enjoy reading it. Neither Percy Jackson
nor Captain Underpants had the opportunity to check out books from the school library because
their room contained a classroom library. Both students showed a high level of success with
reading throughout the school’s quarter semester but found or were given books from the class
library.
Another major finding leads into the “who” is recommending the books to the students.
Along with Percy Jackson and Captain Underpants using a classroom library, Spiderman
mentioned throughout the whole study that he was reading the book A Child Called It, which he
stated his teacher recommended. Human influence played a part in Spiderman engaging in a
book he enjoyed reading for pleasure. From the orientation interview, many of the seven high
school level reluctant readers stated that a certain person (recommender) had recommended

79
books they enjoyed in the past. Throughout the study, the human influence of that recommender
became a sign of relevance.

Sub Theme B: Relevance of Human Influence

In the ARCS model, Keller (1987) stated that if relevance was found, it would increase
the student’s motivation, which was shown by all seven high school level reluctant readers in
different phases. The book trailers connected to the books were given a favorable rating by all
seven participants. The interview questions and observations showed the students were highly
engaged in the book trailers at the direction of an adult, but when left to voluntarily use the AR
apps in a private room in the school’s library, none of the seven high school level reluctant
readers used the AR apps.
Keller (1987) emphasized a few strategies to meet the relevance of usefulness, experience
and worth. Keller (1987) expressed that students need to be told why this new learning will be an
advantage to their current skills and the relevance of how this new learning will matter to them
today and tomorrow. The seven high school level reluctant readers seemed to find relevance in
certain people (recommenders) who suggested reading material to meet the students’ interests.
The most creditable research can be found with Rupi Kaur, who did not make any progress until
Interview 9. The study had concluded at that time and Rupi Kaur asked to stay with the
researcher and talk. The topic of the conversation was about strategies for academic success. In
qualitative study, a researcher may talk with participants and have a deeper conversation.
Seidman (1998), Patton (2002), and Creswell (2005) stated that qualitative research studies are
intended to explore issues, provide a deeper understanding of the topic being studied, and
identify main themes from the gathered data. Interestingly, Rupi Kaur read her book by

80
Interview 9, had not skipped the last three interviews, and asked to stay with the researcher to
talk about academic issues during Interview 9. In the ARCS model, Ryan and Deci (2000) and
Keller (2010) stated that a participant wants familiarity with what they are being asked to do and
to be intrinsically or extrinsically motivated to do a task. When the researcher asked her to rate
Street Love during Interview 9, Rupi Kaur gave Street Love a rating of 5 on a scale from 1-10. At
the end of their personal talk, Rupi Kaur said “Thank you for talking with me.” Rita Pierson, a
lifelong educator and speaker, said in her TED talk that “kids don’t learn from people they don’t
like” (Pierson, 2017). This reaction was repeated in Interview 9 with 117; he wanted to stay with
the researcher after the questions had concluded. 117 made the most progress with two of the
three books he had chosen through the AR apps. He read Ready Player One in one night, he
chose I Am a Seal Team Six Warrior: Memoirs of an American Soldier in Interview 6, and
finished the book by Interview 9. He asked to keep Hush, Hush to read and finish after the
completion of the study.
During the study, Percy Jackson and Captain Underpants stopped reading the book they
chose through the AR apps because their teacher had recommended a different book to.
Annabeth Chase stopped reading all books during the study and did not attempt to read a book
that she viewed through the AR apps. At the same time, she attempted to read a book her mother
suggested and her teacher suggested. Spiderman and Rupi Kaur both mentioned they loved
reading books that had been assigned to them by their teachers. In the orientation interview, both
mentioned that it made them want to read. Spiderman was currently reading A Child Called IT
and continued to read it for most of the study. Although he mentioned he wanted to read
Monster, the book he chose through the AR apps, the teacher-assigned A Child Called IT was his
preference to read during his free reading time. All seven high school level reluctant readers

81
reported that the book’s back cover descriptions helped them choose the book or that a book was
read, due to the recommendation of the teacher. After comparing all seven high school level
reluctant readers, a common theme emerged that human influence (teacher, school librarian,
researcher or parent) was more powerful than the AR apps.

Sub Theme C: Relevance for Reluctant Readers

Attendance of the seven high school level reluctant readers, engagement with Augmented
Reality apps, the ability to have time to read, and technical issues complicated the study.
Whittingham et al. (2013) experienced the same issues, with losing participants during his study
of audiobook engagement with reluctant readers. Although all seven high school level reluctant
readers highly recommended the AR apps for all readers, they varied in their post-experience of
the AR apps. None of the seven high school level reluctant readers used the AR apps when they
were available in the library. The Gaming Flaco did try to scan books in Sunwater’s temporary
school library prior to the AR apps system being available in the library. The Gaming Flaco was
the only student who did not miss any interviews or observations with the researcher and looked
forward to the meeting. When the absentee rate of the other high school reluctant readers was
mentioned to the principal, he said in response: “That is what makes a reluctant reader, a
reluctant reader. Attendance is an issue.”
Being part of this study was encouraged by the teachers, the school librarian, the
principal, and the researcher. In spite of the technical issues, attendance issues and engagement
of the AR apps, the seven high school level reluctant readers were successful in their use of the
AR apps. As evidenced during the observations, the seven high school level reluctant readers
might have initially tried the AR apps, but their engagement after the initial usage might have

82
been a struggle. The final results showed that out of the seven high school level reluctant readers,
the four high school reluctant readers who had the advantage of sustained silent reading were
highly successful. Whereas, the three high school reluctant readers struggled to find relevance of
the AR apps to suggest books they did not have time to read.
Nevertheless, all seven high school level reluctant readers rated the books picked by the
Augmented Reality apps with a rating of five or above. Annabeth Chase did not chose a book the
entire study. She was considered an outlier in the beginning of the study, but became a focal
point by the middle of the study. She reported after all three observations that she enjoyed the
AR apps and even pointed to the books she would have checked out. In Interview 2, Annabeth
Chase said, “I am reading two books already. One book recommended by my mother and
Nerve.”
She stated that she was reading Nerve after seeing the movie and wondered if the book
was better. During Interview 5, Annabeth Chase reported she was no longer reading the book
recommended by her mother and discontinued her reading of Nerve, as there was a new book the
teacher had the students reading. Also, Annabeth Chase reported that she was given time during
English class, but she was using her time to read the book given by the teacher. Although she
was given three books, which were influenced by two human recommenders and one visual
recommender, by the end of the study, she stated she had stopped reading all three books. She
was not reading anything at school or at home.
The other six high school reluctant readers showed the same pattern, unless given the
time in school to read or a certain book peaked their interest to read at home. The other six high
school reluctant readers showed progress with the book(s) they read, except when there was a
required reading for class (teacher recommender) or students forgot their books. Captain

83
Underpants was the most successful student, when reading. He continuously read books and
reported in every interview that he read during sustained silent reading. During Interviews 4 and
5, he reported he had left the book at his grandmother’s house and needed a book for silent
reading time. In Interview 4, he explained that he browsed the teacher’s classroom library and
found another book to read. When questioned about he found the book, Captain Underpants
explained, “I read the back of the book cover and it seemed like a good book.” Although he
retrieved his book from his grandmother’s house by Interview 5, he continued to read the book
chosen from the teacher’s classroom library through Interviews 5 and 6.
Only two students, 117 and The Gaming Flaco, finished the book that was selected
through the AR apps. Spiderman reported that he was reading his book, Monster, after Interview
6, but he needed to finish A Child Called IT. 117 reported in Interview 4 that he finished the
book in one night (Monday, October 24, 2016) at home, and this student does not have sustained
silent reading. 117 became the outlier, after Interview 4. He credited the AR apps with helping
him find a book that he enjoyed reading. The book he read was Ready Player One by Ernest
Clive. The researcher added this book to the 55 book-collection from previous experience as a
librarian, knowing that it would be of interest to reluctant readers. All seven high school level
reluctant readers gave positive feedback on the AR apps and its use for recommending books.
117 followed through with providing evidence of a finished book that AR could be a main
recommender for reluctant readers.
The main recommender continued to be human influence for relevance of reading. Keller
(1987) suggested that a strategy to find relevance is allowing the learner to have a choice to
pursue their work. The AR apps was a new choice the seven high school level reluctant readers

84
used to find reading materials, which could provide relevance to their reading for pleasure
experience.

Sub Theme D: Relevance to Support Engagement of Self-Selection of Reading

All seven high school level reluctant readers found the AR apps relevant as a book
selection tools that could be used in a school library. The Gaming Flaco remarked that he felt it
was unfair that the AR apps were not available to the entire student body. The Gaming Flaco
stated: “I feel this should be available to all students. I understand this is a study, but it would be
nice for all students to use.”
After five weeks of studying the seven high school level reluctant readers, the researcher
asked the seven high school level reluctant readers to rank the books they had read during the
current year (see Figure 9). Some of the high school reluctant readers included books they read
for class assignments or books they were currently reading, but noted they enjoyed them so much
they wanted to include them. Four of the high school reluctant readers were only able to name
one other book outside of the book they selected with the AR apps. Being high school reluctant
readers, this is an expected outcome.
In Figure 9, each of the seven high school level reluctant readers gave the researcher a
rating for each book, based on a scale from 1-10, 1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest.
The categories were based on the recommendation of the book: the AR apps, teacher, family
member, friend, movie, or self-selected. To be noted, the school librarian is considered a teacher,
so her data are intertwined with the teachers’ data. In Figure 9, the AR apps books rated no lower
than a 5 in interest. Please note that Annabeth Chase did not take a book from the researcher
during the study. Annabeth Chase rated other books she had read. She did note that she was

85
reading the book Nerve, because of the movie, which offers almost the same effect, as the AR
apps’ book trailers. The other high rating areas were a friend’s recommendation and self-selected
book.

Figure 9. Ranking of reading materials for the current year.

From the ratings and the in-depth discussion during interviews, especially during the
orientation interviews, each student described who influenced their decisions on what they read.
Annabeth Chase stated that the first book she ever remembered was her mother reading a picture
book to her and she was, at the beginning of the study, reading a book influenced by her mother.
Rupi Kaur mentioned her friend recommended a book to her and she said, “I went on the internet
and I searched around for that book. I watched the trailer on YouTube for Milk and Honey and I
liked it!”

86
Percy Jackson, Spiderman and Captain Underpants mentioned teacher recommended
books or relying on stories of a favorite book recommended by a teacher. The only student who
did not have a valued source for books was 117. He mentioned he read another book over the
year, but he could not remember the name of the book during the study. He could remember it
had to do with different dimensions. When the researcher asked how he found that book, 117
said, “I saw it somewhere and it looked cool.”
There was not a conclusive answer among all seven high reluctant readers, except there
was a common pool of recommenders. The pool of recommenders were all visual tools (AR,
YouTube, searching the internet, or a movie) or human influences (teachers, library helpers or
school librarians, friends or family members).

Theme 3: Longevity of AR Apps on Reluctant Readers

The seven high school level reluctant readers showed success during Observation 1 and
Observation 2 when they were asked to use the AR apps system to find books. This took place in
a private setting with the researcher giving the students an iPad and having them explore the
books. Yin (2014) titled this as a direct observation. In Observation 3, the seven high school
level reluctant readers were indirectly observed over the last three weeks of the study. They were
given the following directions by the researcher during interviews 7, 8 and 9:
Over the next few weeks, the AR apps system with an iPad will be available in the
school’s library. I put some of the books from the study down there and if you would like
more of a selection, let me know. If you would like to view the books, please just ask the
school’s librarian and she will let you into the room. She has a list of your names and
knows you are in the study.

87
Interview 9 was the last interview, but the researcher continued Observation 3 to give the
indirect observation three weeks. All seven high school level reluctant readers agreed they would
check out the AR apps system if they were in the library.
In the three weeks of this indirect Observation 3, none of the seven high school level
reluctant readers approached the school’s librarian to view the books. The Gaming Flaco
approached the school’s librarian and reported that he wanted, and tried, to scan books preceding
the indirect Observation 3. The AR apps were only available in the school library during the last
three weeks of the study for Observation 3, but the request shows The Gaming Flaco was
intrinsically motivated to continue to use the AR apps to help him find books to read for
pleasure. After comparing Observation 1 and Observation 2, the research question of the
engagement of the seven high school reluctant reader before and after use of the AR apps could
be considered high. When Observation 3 is compared with Observation 1 and Observation 2, the
after use of the AR apps could be considered low. Neumann (1986) explained that extrinsically
motivated engagement is hard to see, but we know when it is missing or we see it. Also
Schlechty (2002) stated that a student must be committed to a task and do it with enthusiasm to
give that task inherent value. The engagement with the AR apps was highly successful when the
seven high school level reluctant readers were extrinsically motivated to use the AR apps in a
private room with a dedicated device by meeting with the researcher. When the AR apps were
available the last three weeks in a private room in the temporary school’s library, none of the
seven high school level reluctant readers was intrinsically motivated to use the AR apps.
In Interview 9, 117, Rupi Kaur, Spiderman and Percy Jackson all asked that they be
allowed to keep the books they had checked out until they finish the books they chose through
the AR apps. 117 was reading the third book he chose through the AR app,s and both Spiderman

88
and Percy Jackson wanted to finish books given to them by their teachers before reading the
books they chose through the AR apps. Spiderman was reading Monster and reported really
enjoyed the book.
Table 3 gives a visual progression of the school’s quarter semester and how the seven
high school level reluctant readers moved through the timeframe of the study. Annabeth Chase
was the only student who did not attend Interview 9, although she was reported to be in school. If
a high school reluctant reader was absent one week, the researcher asked them about their
reading progress in the preceding week. Annabeth Chase had stopped reading any materials, and
Percy Jackson and Captain Underpants were influenced to read a certain book for pleasure based
on different factors. Rupi Kaur, Spiderman, The Gaming Flaco, and 117 were all currently
reading or had finished a book they selected through the AR apps. Each of the seven high school
level reluctant readers showed their motivation and engagement to read in different ways, but
their reasons supported the theory of the ARCS models that learners need choices to find
relevance.

89
Table 3
Progression of Reading for the High School Level Reluctant Readers

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

Augmented Reality apps in a school library will not be the solution for every student, just
as audiobooks, Playaways, QR codes and digital books are not for every student. These
technology tools add diversity to a school library’s book collection and could engage a small
segment of the population to read. Brill and Park (2008), Fellerer (2009), Yuen et al. (2011),
Whitchurch (2011), Chang and Liu (2012), Dunleavy and Mitchell (2012), Whittingham et al.
(2013), Gagnon (2016), and Hahn (2016) are conducting or have conducted research to show ow
haudiobooks, Playaways, QR codes, wayfinding technology in a school library, and augmented
reality for classroom use and textbooks can potentially be successful with different populations.
The current study was conducted to benefit school libraries and high school level reluctant
readers’ level of engagement to read for pleasure. In addition, this study tested the relevance of
AR and AR apps with seven high school level reluctant readers.
Attention, confidence and satisfaction cannot be considered in the ARCS instructional
model until relevance is met for reluctant readers. A reluctant reader who will use AR
technology in a high school library will want to know why it is relevant to use the AR apps to
find books. Keller (2009) clearly states that attention and relevance are the first two steps in the
ARCS model. Human influence was the most important finding. The successful experiences that
occurred during this study were from attention, arousal, or a spark of interest by the researcher, a
teacher, parent or friend. During indirect Observation 3, the seven high school level reluctant

91
readers did not have the arousal by the researcher or encouraging human influence to guide them
to find books with the AR apps. The same comparison can be based on sustained silent reading
(SSR) in regard to the four high school reluctant readers who had SSR continuously read
throughout the nine week study. The classroom teacher provided the attention, arousal, or spark
of interest to read. AR provided relevance for three of the seven high school level reluctant
readers by providing them an option of many different books and presented worth. Augmented
Reality has shown to be a beneficial tool for reluctant readers, but the level of attention or
arousal was caused by human influence.
Positive and negative results were found in this study, and many new questions emerged
for further research, as this study only explored AR in a small facet in a school library. For this
study, the research questions were
1. What are the differences of engagement in high school reluctant readers in finding
books to read before and after using an Augmented Reality tool?
2. How do high school reluctant readers find books that engaged their interest using an
Augmented Reality tool?
When this study began, it was stated by the researcher that AR could help a small
population and join the tools – such as audiobooks, QR codes and others – to help reluctant
readers. The AR apps did help the seven high school level reluctant readers find books within
their interest. However, the real influencers to read a book and to continuously keep reading
were three main factors: 1) the students needed time to read the books, 2) the main influencer
was still human influence and the back cover of the book, and 3) the book had to peak the
student’s interest. Relevance is combined in all three main factors. The seven high school level
reluctant readers needed a relevant reason or cause to read a book for pleasure. Even if they had

92
sustained silent reading or structured time to read, all seven high school level reluctant readers
either read, or did not read, anything that was not relevant to their interest, academic or personal
lives.

Engagement with the AR Apps

In the ARCS model for relevance, Keller (1997) explained engagement of a learner must
present the strategies of experience, worth, future usefulness, needs matching, modeling and
choices. In the orientation interview, only two of the high school reluctant readers had
experience with AR before the study, so AR was new to this population. In the future this study
should be conducted over an entire academic school year (32 weeks) to show more relevance or
long term effects and to give future study research participants extensive time to experience AR.
At the same time, the seven high school level reluctant readers found that they liked the
AR apps and expressed that the AR apps presented worth to their reading lives. Annabeth Chase
expressed positive views of the AR apps, but without sustained silent reading and without the
involvement of human influence that suggested her reading choices, she showed disengagement
from and frustration with the study. From her actions of skipping the last interview, comments in
Interviews 7 and 8, her non-choice of an AR apps book (Observation 1 and 2), her lack of visit to
the school’s library for Observation 3, and her expressed frustration with not having time to read
during the school day were evidence of her disengagement, possibly leading to not being able to
find relevance in the AR apps or reading for pleasure. 117 had similar frustrations, but he found
time to read at home and was one of the most successful students in the study. The source of
their frustration was not having sustained silent reading during the school day.

93
The Gaming Flaco was the most successful in using the AR apps of the seven high school
level reluctant readers. He voluntarily wanted to view books in the library with his personal
cellphone, although the AR apps was only available in the school’s temporary library during the
last three weeks of the study. Only The Gaming Flaco voluntarily chose to use the AR system
independently in Sunwater’s temporary school library. This could be described as high
engagement after using the AR apps, as he was intrinsically motivated without the researcher’s
influence. Whereas, the other six high school reluctant readers were extrinsically motivated to
use the AR apps during Observation 1 and Observation 2 by meeting with the researcher and
were not intrinsically motivated to allow the AR apps to influence their reading choices for the
last three weeks for Observation 3.
It was found in the Chapter 4, that human influence was a major force in the use of the
AR apps for the seven high school level reluctant readers in that the seven high school level
reluctant readers relied on the teacher, school librarian or parent’s recommendation of a book.
This finding could be dissected in further discussion that AR apps should be used as a
supplemental engagement tool, such as audiobooks, QR codes and many other school library
tools to engage reluctant readers. For example, Whittingham et al. (2013) used reading groups in
which the reluctant readers were engaged in the reading groups and used audiobooks as
supplemental tools to reading. Although the seven high school level reluctant readers showed
enjoyment and engagement in using the AR apps, the research shows that it is a supplemental
tool to human engagement.
Schlechty (2002) stated that a student must be committed to a task and do it with
enthusiasm to give that task inherent value. In the ARCS model, Ryan and Deci (2000) and
Keller (2010) found that participants want familiarity with what they are being asked to do and to

94
be intrinsically or extrinsically motivated to do a task. All seven high school level reluctant
readers showed no engagement in the indirect observation (Observation 3).
During the study, six of the high school reluctant readers found worth in the AR system,
future usefulness, and the choices the AR apps provided. From the orientation interview to
Interview 9, all seven high school level reluctant readers enjoyed the AR apps and expressed
their high interest for it to be used in the library for the future. 117 mentioned in Interview 9 that
“I would like the AR apps attached to every book in the library” and the other five other high
school reluctant readers echoed his recommendation.
The issues that arose in study and could be researched in depth in future studies stem
from sustained silent reading and the use of classroom libraries. All seven high school level
reluctant readers found worth in the system, but did it meet their needs? Should it have been
modeled with a classroom library and not the school library, with the teacher, rather than the
school librarian, being trained to use it with her students? Only The Gaming Flaco visited the
library at least two times during nine weeks. Spiderman, Percy Jackson, and Captain Underpants
mentioned a teacher giving them a book to read from a classroom library or they scanned
through the classroom library and chose a book. Lastly, the AR apps were not used for the last
three weeks in the temporary school’s library (private room), bringing up the point that possibly
the AR apps being in the school’s library did not meet the participants’ needs and the
consultation of the classroom teacher, who has sustained silent reading in the classroom, was
important.
Stated in Chapter 1, Thompson (2007) and Brinda (2011) found that many teachers were
unfamiliar with the different genre of books and relied on the genres they knew. 117 clearly
showed by reading Ready Player One in one night that he found a book he enjoyed and gave it a

95
rating of 10 on a scale of 1-10. He had only read one other book the entire year for pleasure and
could not remember the name of the book, but referred to it as “a different dimensions book.”
He did not have sustained silent reading and said he visited the library throughout the year, but
struggled to find time to visit during the nine weeks of the study. He chose Ready Player One
after viewing a book trailer of the book and completed the book in one night. He stated in
Interview 9: “My mother kept yelling at me to stop reading and to come eat dinner.” When
questioned by the researcher what made him read the book, he stated: “The video trailer looked
great, so I wanted to read it.”
117, after reading the book, choose two other books through the AR apps in Observation
2 when extrinsically motivated by meeting with the researcher. He continued to read and finished
I Am a Seal Team Six Warrior: Memoirs of an American Soldier. The Gaming Flaco finished his
book, Need, at the same time and was reading two other books he chose from the school’s
library. He had requested to use the AR apps, although the system was unavailable at that time.
Success was achieved with the AR apps book selection in these two case studies, and The
Gaming Flaco was highly successful in his involuntarily engagement with the AR apps. At the
same time, six of the high school reluctant readers choose books when extrinsically motivated by
meeting with the researcher and when time was provided to pick books.

Relevance in a School Library
Due to the school library being unavailable, this study was conducted in the principal’s
conference room and in Sunwater High School’s temporary library. As stated in Chapter 5, the
human influence and extrinsically motivation of the school librarian would be necessary to help
reluctant readers choose books. The human influence and extrinsic motivation by meeting with

96
the researcher cannot be ignored in this study. In a higher socioeconomic setting or in AR use
with non-reluctant readers, the results may be different, but the research shows that some of the
high school reluctant readers did engage with the AR apps and did enjoy using the AR apps, as
they stated in Interviews 6 and 8. The seven high school level reluctant readers were asked their
opinions of the AR apps twice to confirm their opinions of the AR apps.
Many school libraries are facing tight budgets and limited resources, but they must find
ways to motivate all readers to continue reading. Chen and Tsai (2012) stated that budget cuts
could push education to find new ways to educate students and, at the same time, engage them to
learn in a way that will enhance their learning over traditional methods. Also, Chen and Tsai
(2012) found that only basic instruction on the use of a library with augmented reality showed
high engagement. The current study showed similar results. Human influence (teacher, school
librarian and parents) is still a vital part of a student reading for pleasure. The AR apps appeared
to be a supplemental tool that libraries could use, but only when extrinsically motivated by
meeting with the researcher. Whitchurch (2011), Yuen et al. (2011), Dunleavy and Mitchell
(2012), Whittingham et al. (2013), and Mahadzir and Phung (2013) discovered that audiobooks,
QR codes, mobile devices and AR pop-up books for students have shown positive results on
their populations, but their studies were extrinsically motivated through meetings with the
researcher. AR apps could be a cost-effective supplemental tool that could be added to a school
library to help small segments enjoy reading for pleasure using audiobooks, QR codes and many
other technology tools.
The second part of this discussion deals with classroom libraries. This qualitative case
study was based on the school library, but during the study, some of the high school level
reluctant readers used their classroom libraries to find books to read for pleasure. Captain

97
Underpants and Percy Jackson used a classroom library to find books to read. Only The Gaming
Flaco used the school’s library on a regular basis. All three students had sustained silent reading,
but two of the three reluctant readers were not given time to visit the school’s library. Six of the
seven high school level reluctant readers did not have structured time to visit the library. Captain
Underpants chose his book, when he discontinued reading Junior Braves of the Apocalypse: A
Brave Is Brave, by searching through the classroom library. Percy Jackson was recommended to
read a book given to him by his teacher from her classroom library. The enjoyment of AR apps
was not expanded to where the seven high school level reluctant readers might pick a book.
Pilgreen (2000) stated that a successful sustained silent reading program should include a
classroom library. With AR apps, the technology must be available, not only in the school’s
library but also as an extension into the classrooms. If the students had visited the library, that
would have taken away from their sustained silent reading time. This research finding merges
sustained silent reading, reading for pleasure, and human influence (teacher, school librarian,
parents) for recommending books.

Recommendation for Future Research
Recommendation 1: AR Apps’ Full Functionality

During the orientation interview, the seven high school level reluctant readers were
unable to view the AR apps and begin to explore the books (Figures 10 & 11). Miranda,
Williams-Rossi, Johnson and McKenzie (2011) experienced the same blocking of certain
websites, wi-fi issues, and school district permission for access to wi-fi, when studying eReaders
with middle school level reluctant readers. For this study to be a success, the researcher had to

98
independently download each book trailer from YouTube using keepvid.com and upload them to
Aurasma and LayAR (Figures 10 & 11).

Figure 10. YouTube book trailer- Example 1

Figure 11. YouTube book trailer- Example 2

The book reviews from Goodreads.com worked perfectly, and they were not blocked by
the school district. The seven high school level reluctant readers found the videos to be the most
beneficial to them. Only 117 said that he enjoyed having the diversity of different ways to
connect with the book. The other seven high school level reluctant readers said they enjoyed the
videos only. Annabeth Chase and Spiderman pointed out that their dislike for the AR apps were
the technical problems. It is critical that the school district and the implementing school have
conversations about how to make the AR apps reliable. Although wi-fi bandwidth was not an
issue during this study, it is important that a school district and/or implementing school have
enough bandwidth to allow Aurasma, LayAR or any AR app to perform as soon as a book is
scanned by a student. Other issues a school district and/or implementing school should discuss
are the following:

99

•

Bandwidth

•

Blocking of YouTube

•

Blocking of Aurasma or LayAR

•

Personal device for student usage versus a dedicated iPad(s) for student usage

•

How students will connect to the Aurasma or LayAR apps

Success was found with a few of the high school reluctant readers, although the technical
and attendance issues and the personal cellphone use could have adversely affected to the
study. In Interview 9, six of the seven high school level reluctant readers stated they would
prefer a dedicated device for their viewing of the AR-recommended books and felt it should
be linked to as many books as possible.

Recommendation 2: School Library Usage

Due to the school library being closed and the school library being in high demand, it was
very hard to see the full effect of the AR apps in the school library. At the same time, a common
theme of the use of classroom libraries emerged with sustained silent reading. If AR apps were
implemented in a school’s library would it reach the full pool of reluctant readers. Captain
Underpants and Percy Jackson showed that they chose their reading materials from a classroom
library based on a back cover description or a teacher’s recommendation. Both Pilgreen (2000)
and Krashen (2006) suggested that a successful sustained silent reading program must have a
classroom library; AR apps and its accompanying technology must be studied in a classroom that
has a classroom library. Excluding 117, Annabeth Chase, and Rupi Kaur, who did not have
sustained silent reading in their schedules, the AR apps being available in the classroom might
have changed the results of their engagement with the AR apps and the books recommended to

100
them. Classroom libraries are filled with books or genres the teacher could be unfamiliar with,
and the AR apps could have helped the teacher help those who were unable to find time to visit
the school library.

Recommendation 3: Teacher Involvement

From the research and continuing the common theme from Recommendation 2, human
influence was a vital part of this study. Krashen (2006) suggested that reading for pleasure must
be constantly encouraged and reinforced by teachers and students alike to create a culture of
loving to read. The researcher found that engagement with reading for pleasure came in the form
of human influence. Percy Jackson finished the study by reading a book, Hunger Games:
Catching Fire, based on a teacher’s recommendation of. On the opposite side of the research,
Annabeth Chase did not chose a book but was influenced to read three books by her teacher, her
mother, and her viewing of a movie. Rupi Kaur and 117 were reading books, but the researcher
found that they might be reading the books based on the personality of the researcher. Although
both Rupi Kaur and 117 were successful in their progress of reading, both showed an interest in
the researcher by wanting to stay with him after Interview 9. The Gaming Flaco mentioned he
frequently references the book binder available in the library, which has synopses of the books
the school librarian recommends or those on the state’s award lists. These findings suggest that
human influence is a huge part of the AR apps success.
In fairness, the book binder, classroom libraries, and a movie are all supplemental tools
for a teacher or school librarian to help students read for pleasure. AR apps showed that it could
be a beneficial supplemental tool to help reluctant readers choose a book from a genre they might
enjoy. Further research is needed to see the scope of the teachers’ and school librarians’

101
influence. In Interview 9, many of the high school reluctant readers in the study stated they
would like the AR apps connected to as many books as possible. The seven high school level
reluctant readers said they would like it on as many books as possible. This leads to more
research on how teachers recommend books and why the reluctant readers would want AR apps
on every book in the library. This would be a huge undertaking by any library to connect as
many books as possible. The students felt they would like the largest selection of books rather
than being limited to a book or shelf of books.
This finding was very major of this study is that teacher involvement is very important.
Lifelong long readers are created by reading for pleasure. Krashen, 1993, 1995, 2006, Jenkins,
2009, Whitmire, 2010, and Allyn, 2011 found that students must be allowed to choose their
reading material without direction from the teacher or school librarian and must be allowed to
pick their own genre without influence from teachers or parents. However, in this study, all
seven high school level reluctant readers mentioned they were influenced to read a book over the
past year because a teacher, school librarian, parent family member or friend recommended a
certain book to them or they were not reading at all. In this study, the seven high school level
reluctant readers were given the AR apps and 55 books to choose from. Everyone except
Annabeth Chase voluntarily chose a book without human influence. That was a success for this
study, but for continued reading and for self-selected reading, the seven high school level
reluctant readers said they would like as many books as possible to be connected to the AR apps.
There would need to be future research to maintain the balance of human influence and selfselected reading with the AR apps to ensure that reluctant readers have as many choices as
possible when selecting their reading materials. This study was limited to 55 books from the
researcher’s influence and the American Library Association’s reluctant reader list, which was

102
made with professional librarians’ influence. After high school, high school reluctant readers
most likely need to be intrinsically motivated to continue reading for pleasure.

Recommendation 4: Gamers and the AR Apps

In Interview 9, the researcher asked 117 and The Gaming Flaco if they were gamers.
Both had chosen names based on video games and had expressed interest in gaming and the AR
apps in Interview 1. Both high school reluctant readers were highly comparable in their results of
reading for pleasure after using the AR apps and expressed high engagement with the AR apps.
Although 117’s enjoyment of the AR apps was extrinsically motivated by meeting with the
researcher, he did note that he did not have free time during the school day to read and that he
had academic tests that took precedence over reading for pleasure. 117 was still very successful
in finishing two of the books he chose through the AR apps. He asked to keep the book Hush,
Hush after the study had concluded. The Gaming Flaco differed slightly, as he had free reading
time (sustained silent reading) that he could use during the day to read and he could visit the
school library for new books.
This case study was based on reluctant readers, but the success of 117 and The Gaming
Flaco could have been due to their enjoyment of gaming. In an interview with Jim Hahn, he said:
“Augmented reality is a great tool that can bring new users, who might not have ever stepped
into a school library” (personal communication, 2016). Hahn (2016) continued that computer
science majors often look things up on the internet. He felt that augmented reality might bring
the computer science majors to the university library. In a personal interview with Dave Gagnon,
director of the ARIS project – an augmented reality gaming system, he stated that augmented

103
reality could be used in the school library. He expressed that it could help students find the books
they would like to read.
This study suggests that augmented reality in a school library could be useful for small
segments of the population that may not be interested in other conventional methods to help
them find books in a school library.

Recommendation 5: Sex and Race

Rupi Kaur was often absent and missed five interviews and an observation with the
researcher. She was very important to this study because reluctant readers typically have
academic issues, as stated by Krashen (1993, 1995, 2006). If a Google search is done for the
search terms “reluctant readers academic issues,” around 3 million results will be produced.
Although this was not ideal for a scholarly study, academic issues impede reluctant readers.
Including Rupi Kaur was important because Annabeth Chase was the only other female
in this study. The results of the study demonstrated that both females did not read a book and that
Annabeth Chase was the only participant who did not chose a book after using the AR apps. This
study’s focus was on reluctant readers, but the participants were Hispanic, freshmen and
predominantly male.
In a qualitative study, Creswell (2012) suggested that a qualitative study be a pool of
three to six study participants. This case study used seven high school level reluctant readers to
establish proper equality. The success was mainly found among the male students over the
female students. Rupi Kaur may have been influenced by the human influence of the researcher
or needing relevance before reading the material she chose, whereas Annabeth Chase stated she
was reading three books, which she did not complete. Annabeth Chase was influenced to read

104
the three books by her teacher, her mother, and after seeing a movie. There would need to be a
deeper study to test if female reluctant readers are more receptive to a human influencer over
technology recommendations.
For race, all seven high school level reluctant readers were of Hispanic origin, but that
was expected as the school population is over 50% Hispanic origin (IIRC, 2016). A more
heterogeneous group could produce different results, as could a higher socioeconomic status of
the students or a school district in a different part of the country. The researcher would like to
repeat this study at an urban high school with six high African American students, as Krashen
(2013) mentioned in a personal interview that low-cost technology could be the most beneficial
to low socioeconomic minority students. At the same time, the effect of AR apps on a student’s
motivation or relevance to read for pleasure should not change regardless of a student’s
demographics.

Conclusion

Researchers reading this study may have the opinion that seven high school level
reluctant readers is not a large enough study to know how or whether AR apps affect reluctant
readers in a school library. In the end, this study was conducted to find out if AR apps and their
adjoining technology could be beneficial to a small segment of students, essentially reluctant
readers. Reluctant readers are students who do not read for pleasure and are not motivated by the
recommenders available in school libraries and/or society. AR apps are another tool to help
reluctant readers read for pleasure. As we know from Krashen’s (1993, 1995, 2006) research,
reading for pleasure can help a child be academically success in the present or in the future or
may help them achieve a level of education and learning they never considered. Life-long

105
reading could open new doors for these readers. With many school libraries being the center of
for reading in a school, it could be the place to embrace this technology. Although AR apps
failed to help one high school reluctant reader, other issues and factors played an important role
in each of the seven high school level reluctant readers’ successes and failures. Rupi Kaur
showed her frustration at not having time to read during the school day. If she had structured
sustained silent reading, would the results have been different? From a few pages to finishing
two entire books, six of the high school reluctant readers were encouraged to read.
Future research will be needed to find the path of how AR apps can help girls, high
socioeconomic schools, and many more reluctant readers. Also, technical issues could be a
barrier for a school to begin the use of AR apps. A smaller research study can be conducted on
special populations, such as gamers, to study if AR apps would motivate gamers to read for
pleasure. The main recommendation for research is the combination of AR apps in classroom
libraries, sustained silent reading, and teacher involvement. Both Spiderman and Percy Jackson
were influenced to read books during their sustained silent reading time from their classroom
libraries with a teacher’s influence rather than the AR apps. Much research has been done on
reluctant readers and the influence of not reading for pleasure on their academic success. This
study poses a possible solution to help those reluctant readers read for pleasure.
During the study, 117 and The Gaming Flaco finished the books recommended by the
AR apps. In a school of 2,600 students, two students represents only .0007% of the school’s
population. 117, a student without any time to read during the day, took the time to read three
books during the study. He finished Ready Player One in one night. He finished I Am a Seal
Team Six Warrior: Memoirs of an American Soldier by the end of the study and was continuing
to read Hush, Hush. When the researcher explained that the study was coming to an end, he

106
observed 117’s sadness. The researcher said, “You can keep the books until you are done reading
them and turn them in to the school librarian whenever you finish with them.” 117 smiled at the
researcher. The Gaming Flaco showed the same reaction. Even Rupi Kaur, who reported in the
final interview that she had only read a couple of pages, had the same reaction as 117. All three
students held an AR apps recommended book. Of these three cases, these three students found
relevance, whether through the AR apps or human influence. AR apps could continue to help
these students find books in the future. The relevance will come from the human influence to use
AR to find books. With AR apps, we could help reluctant readers step forward academically and
read for pleasure.