EXAMINING MIDDLE SCHOOL TEACHER PRACTICES AND ATTITUDES REGARDING
TEACHING INFORMATION LITERACY SKILLS
by
Erin Catherine Shaw

A Dissertation
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Education

Major: Instruction and Curriculum Leadership

The University of Memphis
May 2017








ProQuest Number: 10633188





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10633188
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Dedication
To Jeff
Thank you so much for having faith in me and giving me the chance to pursue my dream.
I couldn’t have done this without your love and support.
To Joseph, Thomas and Lonnie
Always believe in yourselves and trust in the good Lord to provide you with the
opportunities to achieve your dreams! I hope you know how much you boys mean to me.

ii

Acknowledgments
I would like to first thank the members of my committee, Dr. Deborah Lowther, Dr. Clif
Mims, Dr. Lee Allan, and Dr. Nancy P. Gallavan. Dr. Deborah Lowther has been especially
gracious and helpful to remain with me while I finished and always put me back on track when I
derailed. I would also like to say a special thank you to Dr. Clif Mims, for inviting me to begin
the journey at the University of Memphis and for encouraging me throughout the process. I owe
a huge debt of gratitude to Dr. Rachelle Miller for being my statistics guru to help make sense of
all those pesky numbers. In addition, I want to give a shout out to my colleagues and friends at
the University of Central Arkansas, Dr. Stephanie Huffman, Dr. Jeff Whittingham, Dr. Nancy P.
Gallavan, and my friend on this journey, Dr. Tracy McAllister, all of whom were my
cheerleaders with “dinner and a dissertation” nights. To my family, I say thank you for your
encouragement and patience. My husband and boys have learned to fend for themselves - they
were always fed and I like to think they had clean socks but I wouldn’t swear to it… My parents,
Dan and JoAnn O’Shea, helped out more times than I imagined-thank you for moving to
Arkansas when you did! My mother-in-law, Judy Shaw helped tremendously with the kids (and
the house cleaning). And, to my sister, Morgan, you have been my conscience to push me to
finish, thank you. To the rest of my family and friends who have supported me-I love you and I
thank you as well. And, to my glorious God and Centerville United Methodist Church family, I
give thanks for the prayers answered.

iii

Abstract
Shaw, Erin C., Ed.D. The University of Memphis, May 2017. Examining Middle School
Teacher Practices and Attitudes Regarding Teaching Information Literacy Skills. Major
Professor: Deborah Lowther, Ph.D.

This study examined practices and attitudes towards teaching information literacy skills
(ILS) of 30 teachers from two rural middle schools. Responses to a pre- and post-survey
provided data to examine three research questions after participants completed an Information
Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers:
1. Does knowledge of ILS instruction influence projected teaching practices of participants?
a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy (IL) tasks during past
as compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided ILS instruction for past research projects as compared to
projected provision for future research projects?
2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward ILS instruction?
3. What do participants report as reasons for including and for not including ILS when
teaching middle school students?
Significant differences were seen between pre- and post-survey responses regarding ILS
student tasks and instruction. Question 1 outcomes revealed significant changes regarding
required ILS student tasks, with key changes evidenced for evaluating the information solving
process; defining the problem; identifying appropriate resources; and evaluating the product or
performance. Question 2 results revealed significant changes regarding increased teacher belief
in instructing students to evaluate resources for validity and citing sources to avoid plagiarism; a

iv

shift in teacher attitudes regarding who should teach ILS and in which courses it should be
taught, with notable shifts for art, music, and mathematics. The findings suggest most
participants recognized the value of including ILS in instruction and requiring students to
complete ILS tasks to increase research skills.
Participant open-ended responses for question 3 suggest a belief in the importance of ILS and
the inclusion of ILS in all subject areas, with less agreement regarding ILS for math and physical
education. Participants expressed a need for professional development to appropriately include
ILS instruction and student tasks for future research projects. Implications include areas such as
instructional design for intervention, professional development for current teachers, and training
for future educators.

v

Table of Contents
Chapter

Page

1 Introduction
Statement of the Problem
Research Purpose
Research Questions
Significance
Definition of Terms

1
2
4
4
5
6

2 Review of Literature
Information Literacy
Overview of Information Literacy
Methods of Teaching Information Literacy Skills
Teaching Information Literacy Skills in Middle School
Teaching Information literacy skills in Literacy Courses
Teaching Information Literacy Skills in Non-Literacy Courses
Teacher Perceptions of Information Literacy and Research Skill Instruction
Use of Technology to Support Information Literacy
Key Benefits and Challenges of Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Benefits of Using Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Challenges of Using Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Literature Review Conclusion

8
8
9
10
12
14
14
15
16
19
20
21
23

3 Methodology
Research Questions
Research Design
Site of Research
Population and Participants
Materials
Instruments
Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
Procedures
Recruitment of Participants
Implementation of Intervention
Data Collection
Data Analysis
Limitations
Delimitations
Biases

25
25
26
27
28
29
32
33
34
35
35
36
37
37
40
41
41

4 Results
Research Question 1
Research Question 1.a
Research Question 1.b

42
43
43
46

vi

Research Question 2
Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
Paired Samples t-test Outcomes
Research Question 3
Reasons to Include Information Literacy Skills
Reasons to Not Include Information Literacy Skills
Additional Comments Regarding Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Results Summary
5 Discussion
Research Question 1
Evaluating the information solving process
Defining the problem
Identifying appropriate resources
Evaluating the product or performance
Lowest level of change
Summary and Recommendations
Research Question 2
Attitudes regarding student’s information literacy skills
Attitudes regarding who should teach information literacy skills
Attitudes regarding computer skills needed for research projects
Attitudes regarding inclusion of research projects
Summary and Recommendations
Research Question 3
Reasons to include information literacy skill instruction
Reasons to not include information literacy skill instruction
Additional comments on information literacy skill instruction.
Summary and Recommendations
Implications
Instructional Design for Intervention
Professional Development for Current Teachers
Training for Future Educators
Recommendations for Future Research
Current Participants
Students
Future Educators
Conclusion
References
Appendices
A.
B.
C.
D.

49
49
50
51
53
54
57
61
64
67
69
69
70
70
72
73
73
75
76
77
78
80
83
85
85
89
90
92
93
94
94
95
95
95
96
97
97
101

Pre-intervention Teacher Survey
Post-intervention Teacher Survey
IRB Approval
Approval Letters

vii

119
121
123
124

E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Teacher Email Invitation
126
Consent to participate in a Research Study
127
Open-Ended Responses: Reason(s) to Include Information Literacy Skills
129
Open-Ended Responses: Reason(s) to Not Include Information Literacy Skills 131
Open-Ended Responses: Additional Comments
133

viii

List of Tables
Table

Page
1.

Participant Information (N = 30)

29

2.

Pre- versus Post-Intervention Teacher Survey: Comparison of Item Stems

35

3.

Research Questions by Data Analysis and Data Source

39

4.

Require Information Literacy Tasks: Pre- Survey vs. Post- Survey Results

45

5.

Require Information Literacy Tasks: Paired Sample t-test/Cohen’s d Results

46

6.

Information Literacy Skills Instruction: Pre- Survey vs. Post- Survey Results

48

7.

Information Literacy Skills Instruction: Paired Sample t-test/Cohen’s d Results 48

8.

Attitudes Toward Information Literacy Skills: Pre- vs. Post- Survey Results

9.

Attitudes Toward Information Literacy Skills: Paired Sample t-test/Cohen’s d 53

10.

Open-Ended Response Summary: For what reason(s) would you include
information literacy skills?

57

Open-Ended Response Summary: For what reason(s) would you not include
information literacy skills when teaching middle school students?

60

11.

12.

52

Open-Ended Response Summary: Please add any additional comments you would
like to share regarding information literacy skill instruction for your middle
school students.
63

ix

Chapter 1
Introduction
The focus of this research study was to examine middle school teachers’ attitudes
towards and use of technology-supported information literacy skill instruction before and after
completing an instructional intervention that introduced information literacy skill instruction and
demonstrated a specified approach called the Big6 Model. This study is significant because
educational standards have been adopted to reflect a more student-centered learning
environment. This new learning environment places an emphasis on information literacy and the
completion of research projects implemented in a variety of classrooms in an effort to improve
preparation of middle school students for successful learning in high school and college leading
to careers in the advancing information age. The Association for College and Research Libraries
(ACRL) (2000) defined information literacy as a set of abilities requiring individuals to
“recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate and use
effectively the needed information” (p. 2). Much of the recommended change in middle school
classrooms has occurred through a shift in educational philosophy associated with the Common
Core Curriculum, which has been adopted by 43 states (Academic Benchmarks, 2015). With a
focus on deeper, more meaningful learning, curriculum standards are more project-based
concentrating on student performance especially using research projects (National Governors
Association Center for Best Practices [NGA] & Council of Chief State School Officers
[CCSSO], 2010). Thus, the authors (NGA & CCSSO, 2010) of the Common Core State
Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy in History/Social Science, and Technical
Subjects explain:

1

To be ready for college, workforce training, and life in a technological society, students
need the ability to gather, comprehend, evaluate, synthesize, and report on information
and ideas, to conduct original research in order to answer questions or solve problems,
and to analyze and create a high volume and extensive range of print and non-print texts
in media forms old and new. (NGA & CCSSO, 2010, p. 4)
Although middle school students need information literacy skill instruction, the majority
of middle school students do not receive regular information literacy and research skill
instruction in middle school (Asselin, 2005; Fitzpatrick & Meulemans, 2011; Purcell et al.,
2012). Results of various studies suggest that middle school teachers may be unprepared to lead
this instruction in information literacy skills with their students (Purcell et al., 2012; Williams &
Wavell, 2007). As Asselin (2005) noted “those outside of the library field are largely unaware of
how to guide the instruction of information literacy” (p. 34). Teachers are facing challenges
assisting students with the most effective ways to access and synthesize information. Therefore,
information literacy skill instruction needs to be taught to teachers.
Statement of the Problem
Middle school students are expected to conduct technology-supported research based on
the current initiatives and academic standards across the country including the Common Core
Standards, the College, Career and Civic Life C3 Framework for Social Studies State Standards,
the Next Generation Science Standards, and various other state standards (NCSS, 2013; NGA &
CCSSO, 2010; NGSS, 2013). Therefore, information literacy skills are necessary for current
middle school students. The introduction of the Common Core Standards has created a shift in
traditional classroom instruction from one of teacher-based to more student-centered with an
emphasis on inquiry skills or more specifically information literacy skills. The typical middle

2

school student is now expected to conduct several research related tasks rather than gain
information through conventional lecture-based coursework; however, many middle school
teachers are not equipped to effectively instruct students in the research process, resulting in
students unable to conduct research through a process using information literacy skills (Islam &
Murno, 2006; Varlejs, Stec, & Kwon, 2014).
Traditionally, research papers have been assigned in an English (or literacy) class, but
now middle school teachers of all subject areas are being required to incorporate research
projects to promote the inquiry and information literacy skills necessary to employ the new
standards (Phillips & Wong, 2010). With any skill, middle school students need guidance and
instruction in effectively being able to perform those skills successfully and efficiently.
However, many middle school teachers, particularly in non-literacy based content areas, struggle
to manage the research process and teach information literacy skills with middle school students
(Colwell, Hunt-Barron, & Reinking, 2013).
A trending shift in the instruction of information literacy skills tends to lead to an
integration of technology, especially the Internet, into the learning process. With the expanse of
information on the Internet, middle school students need to learn not just how to navigate the
information but also the ways to use it effectively and ethically to demonstrate their learning.
Consequently, meaningful technology integration (i.e., goal oriented, meaningful research
projects, appropriate technology tool instruction and guidance for the students and/or authentic
needs based technology instruction) needs to be learned by the teacher for the teacher to
effectively incorporate online research and information literacy skills (Ertmer & OttenbreitLeftwich, 2010). Teachers are facing challenges assisting students with the most effective ways
to access and synthesize information, two key components to information literacy.

3

Research Purpose
The purpose of this research study was to examine the practices and attitudes of middle
school teachers toward technology-supported information literacy skill instruction. This study
provides a framework to incorporate a professional development intervention for middle school
teachers to learn the procedures to incorporate the Big6 Model into information literacy skill
instruction for their students in all subject areas including art, computer applications,
Environmental and Spatial Technology (EAST), health, literacy, mathematics, music, physical
education, science, and social studies.
Research Questions
The problem and purpose of the study were addressed with the following research
questions.
After participants complete the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School
Teachers:
1. In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects
as compared to projected provision for future research projects?

4

2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers?
3. After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
Significance
This study may benefit both middle school teachers and middle school students. With the
introduction of the Common Core Standards, classrooms are shifting to a student-centered
environment, one with more discovering and synthesizing of information for a deeper
understanding of concepts. However, technology and information literacy skills may not be
taught because many middle school teachers assume their students already know how to use the
computer, surf the web, and communicate via social media, (Van Deursen & Van Diepen, 2013).
In addition to assuming students understand how to use a computer, when a research method
such as the Big6 Model is introduced, many middle school teachers also assume middle school
students have information literacy skills. Information literacy skills are (as defined by the
Association for College and Research Libraries) a set of abilities requiring individuals to
“recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use
effectively the needed information” (ACRL, 2000) to manage the research project, which is not
always the reality (Al-Aufi & Al-Azri, 2013). Consequently, many of today’s middle school
students are at a disadvantage to achieve success as they progress to higher academic institutions
unless they are taught information literacy and research skills. Fitzpatrick and Meulemans
(2011) state, “In our current information-driven society, a critical aspect of education for

5

students is the development of information literacy” (p. 142). Middle school teachers need to
become proficient in instructing their students in the steps necessary for conducting effective
research. Specifically, teaching information literacy skills to students at the middle school level
is critical to ensure that students utilize their skills most effectively (Julien & Barker, 2009). The
ability to separate the research process into manageable pieces is necessary for students to learn
how to organize and synthesize information (Curcic, 2011). Middle school students may then be
more prepared to achieve in high school and college having acquired information literacy skills
to locate and access information efficiently and effectively. Therefore, the findings from this
study have the potential to benefit not only the middle school teachers but also the middle school
students.
Definition of Terms
For this research study, the following operational definitions apply:
Big6 Model
The Big6 Model is a widely known and a widely-used approach to teaching 21st century
information and technology skills that integrates information search and use skills along with
technology tools in a systematic process to find, use, apply, and evaluate information for specific
needs and tasks (Eisenberg, Murray, & Bartow, 2014).
Digital Literacy
“Digital Literacy is the ability to use information and communication technologies to
find, evaluate, create, and communicate information, requiring both cognitive and technical
skills” (American Library Association, 2013, p. 2).

6

Information Literacy
Information literacy is a set of abilities requiring individuals to “recognize when
information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed
information” (Association for College and Research Libraries, 2000).
Intervention
The term “intervention” refers to a self-paced instructional unit treating a single topic as
the focus of learning.

7

Chapter 2
Review of Literature
Through a shift in educational philosophy toward the Common Core Curriculum adopted
by many U. S. states, a focus on deeper, more meaningful learning exists; therefore, curriculum
standards are more project-based with an emphasis on student performance. The trending shift
in instruction and learning is toward a student-centered, technology-rich environment based on
exploration of topics for discovery of content rather than a traditional lecture-based classroom.
With the expanse of information on the Internet, students need to learn not just ways to navigate
the information but also how to use it effectively and ethically to demonstrate their learning;
succinctly, students need information literacy skills. However, many of today’s teachers either
lack information literacy skills themselves and/or are unfamiliar with strategies to teach
information literacy to their students. This research examined middle school teachers’ practices
and attitudes toward using technology-supported information literacy skill instruction. The
literature supporting this research is focused on these topics: information literacy skill
instruction, use of information literacy skill instruction in middle school, teacher attitudes toward
information literacy skill instruction, use of technology to support information literacy, and key
benefits and challenges of using information literacy skill instruction.
Information Literacy
According to the Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL) (2000),
information literacy is defined as a set of abilities requiring individuals to “recognize when
information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed
information” (p. 2). An overview of information literacy and methods of information literacy
skills instruction is discussed in the next section.

8

Overview of Information Literacy
Students use information literacy skills – to some degree - any time they locate
information to solve a problem or answer a question. This often is the case for middle school
students who are completing more research-based activities as teachers adhere to rigorous
curriculum standards (Troia & Olinghouse, 2013). Requiring students to conduct research is
challenging, especially when the students have not been instructed in effective information
literacy strategies supported with technology (Colwell et al., 2013). This lack of information
literacy skills is seen in a study of 24 students who were asked to conduct online research on a
specified topic (Julien & Barker, 2009). Two additional studies report that students used
primitive search strategies that included inserting the questions or query directly in the search
box of an Internet browser, which yielded poor results (Colwell et al., 2013; Julien & Barker,
2009). Similar patterns are seen when considering information literacy skills of high school
students. When librarians at 19 high schools were interviewed regarding their perceptions of
college-bound seniors’ information literacy skills, the overall comments suggested that most
students lacked requisite research skills despite efforts of the librarians to work with teachers and
students to increase information literacy (Varlejs et al., 2014). At least two studies implied that
middle and high school teachers often assume their students know how to use the computer, surf
the web, and communicate via social media, and therefore do not emphasize the teaching of
technology and information literacy skills (Kuhlemeier & Hemker, 2007; Van Deursen & Van
Diepen, 2013).
In addition to assuming students understand how to use a computer, when a research
method such as the Big6 model is introduced, teachers also assume the students have acquired
information literacy skills, which is not always the reality as found by Al-Aufi and Al-Azri

9

(2013) when 550 undergraduate students were surveyed on information literacy skills using the
Big6 model as a reference. Consequently, many of today’s students are at a disadvantage to
achieve success as they progress to higher academic institutions unless they are taught
information literacy and research skills. Fitzpatrick and Meulemans (2011) state, “In our current
information-driven society, a critical aspect of education for students is the development of
information literacy” (p. 142). Despite the adoption of the common core initiative, our students
are not college and career ready when it comes to performing information literacy skills (Gross
& Latham, 2012).
Specifically teaching research skills to students at the middle school level is critical to
ensure that students utilize their information literacy skills most effectively (Julien & Barker,
2009). The ability to separate the research process into manageable pieces is necessary for
students to learn how to organize and synthesize information, which is a critical component of
information literacy skill knowledge (Curcic, 2011). According to Dempsey (2003) and Mokhtar
et al. (2009), effective strategies that teach a student to begin with a broad topic and successfully
focus on a single topic, are information literacy skills that can last a lifetime, which is creating a
lifelong learner rather than someone dependent on others for information.
Methods of Teaching Information Literacy Skills
Six well-known models are available for teaching information literacy skills. Bucher’s
(2000) comparison of the six information literacy skill models revealed that all models were
focused on helping students internalize ways to solve an information literacy problem, but used
different steps to achieve the goal. The six models are discussed here:
Information problem-solving skills. The American Association of School Librarians
created the first model in 1994 called Information Problem-Solving Skills. This model is based

10

on seven steps, with some including vague language. The steps are: (1) Define the need for
information, (2) Initiate the search strategy, (3) Locate the resources, (4) Assess and comprehend
the information, (5) Interpret the information, (6) Communicate the information, and (7)
Evaluate the product and the process. Overall the steps are conducive to separating an
information literacy problem into manageable pieces.
Information seeking. The second model is Information Seeking. This model was
created in 1993 by Kuhlthau and also includes seven steps. This model is unique in that it
includes feelings in the description. The steps are: (1) Initiation (contemplating the task and
possible topics and uncertainty), (2) Selection (selecting a topic; optimism), (3) Exploration
(encountering inconsistency and improbability; confusion), (4) Formulation (forming a focused
perspective), (5) Collection (gathering and extending; satisfaction or disappointment), (6)
Presentation (connecting and extending; satisfaction or disappointment), and (7) Evaluation.
Information skills for electronic resources. The third model is Information Skills for
Electronic Resources and it includes only three steps specifically for using electronic sources.
The steps are: (1) Presearch activities, (2) Search for information, and (3) Interpret information.
Pappas created this model in 1995.
FLIP It! FLIP It! is the fourth model. This model was introduced in 1999 by Yucht and
includes four steps designed specifically for 10- to 14-year-old students. The steps, which also
are an acronym for the “FLIP It!” name are as follows: (1) Focus on the topic, (2) Locate
resources that are appropriate, (3) Investigate the resources and implement the findings, and (4)
Produce the results for Intelligent Thinking.
Pathways to knowledge. Harada and Tepe created a fifth model called Pathways to
Knowledge in 1998. This model includes six steps with the first step being vague in calling the

11

step (1) Appreciation. The rest of the steps are (2) Presearch, (3) Search, (4) Interpretation, (5)
Communication, and (6) Evaluation.
Big6 model. The sixth and final strategy is the Big6 Model, which serves as the
foundational model for this research. The researchers who are attributed with the seminal use of
Big6 as a framework for middle level information literacy skill instruction are Eisenberg and
Berkowitz in 1996. The steps for the Big6 Model for students include: 1) Task Definition, 2)
Information Seeking Strategies, 3) Location and Access, 4) Use of Information, 5) Synthesis, and
6) Evaluation.
Although several research strategies to be used with middle school students have been
created, the Big6 Model is the most commonly used research strategy and warrants further
examination. According to Eisenberg (2003) the Big6 Model is “both a set of essential life skills
and a process” (p. 13). This method has been found to instill problem-solving skills into
students, which are beneficial in all aspects of learning (Lin, Yaw-Huei, & Wen, 2014; Murray,
2003). Students are better able to communicate effectively and solve information problems
efficiently using the Big6 Model (Eisenberg et al., 2014). Finally, this model frames the process
for information problem solving or inquiry and provides a strategy for teaching information
literacy regardless of the classroom level- six steps for upper students and “The Super Three” for
elementary school students (Hughes, 2003).
Teaching Information Literacy Skills in Middle School
Effectively teaching information literacy skills is a necessity in educating today’s
students (Gill, 2003; Huggins, Ritzhaupt, & Dawson, 2014). According to Farmer (2003)
information literacy standards have been included in higher education in various contexts
beginning as early as 1995. The American Association of School Librarians (AASL) developed

12

a list of formal information literacy standards for entering K-12 teachers (ACRL, 2000). The
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) approved the AASL
document in 1995; however, it was not until 2002 that NCATE Professional Standards for the
Accreditation of Schools, Colleges and Departments of Education included information literacy
in NCATE standards (NCATE, 2002). The NCATE Standard 1: Candidate Knowledge, Skills,
and Professional Dispositions, published in 2002 and revised in 2008, specifically addresses
“content, pedagogical and professional knowledge, skills and dispositions necessary to help all
students learn” (NCATE, 2008, p.17). An explanation from NCATE of the standard specifies
that incoming teachers should be able to, “appropriately and effectively integrate computer and
information literacy in instruction to support student learning” (NCATE, 2008, p. 17). In July
2013, NCATE consolidated with The Teacher Education Accreditation Council (CAEP, 2013).
TEAC standards indicated that teacher candidates should be able to demonstrate knowledge of
learning on their own and be able to transfer this knowledge to develop lifelong learners (TEAC,
2011). From this consolidation, the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation
(CAEP) was created. New accreditation standards provided by CAEP were supposed to begin in
2016 to hold teacher preparation programs accountable to the new guidelines. The new
guidelines include standards with the expectation that teacher candidates have the knowledge to
teach information literacy skills. CAEP Standard 1 states:
Providers ensure that candidates apply content and pedagogical knowledge as
reflected in outcome assessments in response to standards of Specialized
Professional Associations (SPA), the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards (NBPTS), states, or other accrediting bodies (e.g., National Association
of Schools of Music – NASM). (CAEP, 2015, p. 3)

13

Throughout the English Language Arts Writing Standards is a section called “Research to
Build and Present Knowledge” at all grades in the middle school level where students are to,
“gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms
effectively; assess the credibility and accuracy of each source; and quote or paraphrase the data
and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for
citation” (NGA & CCSSO, 2010, p. 41).
Teaching Information Literacy Skills in Literacy Courses
Teacher preparation programs in the English/Language Arts subject area use a variety of
standards to incorporate best practices in literacy development, including the National Writing
Project, the Standards for the English Language Arts, the Interstate Teacher Assessment and
Support Consortium (InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards, the Common Core State
Standards Initiative, and the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (CAEP, 2015).
As seen in these standards, the expectation is for literacy courses to introduce and use a research
skill instruction process, as these courses are the ones that most often require students to produce
a research paper (NCATE, 2008). Even though the expectation is for the literacy classroom to
formally introduce the research process, all content areas should be involved in teaching research
writing as a process (Troia & Olinghouse, 2013).
Teaching Information Literacy Skills in Non-Literacy Courses
In reviewing the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (2015a & 2015b),
several subject areas are encouraged to include information literacy skill instruction in practice.
For example, the Adolescence and Young Adult Social Studies NBPTS Standard (for teachers of
students ages 14-18+) II Developing Social Understanding, Engagement, and Civic Identity
states:

14

Accomplished teachers prepare students to be reflective thinkers and decision makers.
Teachers employ a variety of activities to engage students with content, including
reasoning, disciplined inquiry, and conceptual understanding. For example, teachers
might assign students to survey their communities and determine the needs of a particular
group, such as senior citizens, teenagers, or preschoolers. Students then identify a
problem, research possible solutions, and develop a cost-benefit analysis of long- and
short-term effects… (NBPTS, 2015b, p. 24)
A second example of the expectation of teachers knowing how to teach information
literacy skills is found in the NBPTS Health Standard III Promoting Skills-Based Learning.
“Combining these skills with a variety of credible sources allows students to address health
issues at many levels, from personal to global. Teachers pose real-world situations that allow
students to synthesize knowledge and analyze possible solutions. Referring to a local health
concern, such as secondhand smoke, for instance, teachers might challenge students to research
and propose options to lessen the associated health threats” (NBPTS, 2015a, p. 32).
In addition to the National Board Standards, various state standards also include
information literacy components. The overview of the middle level science standards includes
direct expectations for students regarding “obtaining, evaluating, and communicating
information” (NGSS, 2013, p.4).
Teacher Perceptions of Information Literacy and Research Skill Instruction
Today’s classrooms lack information literacy skill instruction according to the perception
of many education students. A lack of knowledge of information literacy skills was reported
from 70 education majors as the main barrier in incorporating information literacy skills into
created lesson plans (Stockham & Collins, 2012). A deficiency of information literacy skills has

15

also been shown to be associated with little or no collaboration between the school librarian and
the classroom content area teacher (Bucher, 2000). Oftentimes information literacy instruction is
viewed as the responsibility of the librarian because the classroom teacher is focused on
imparting content specific information without realizing the need for the students to learn to
synthesize and process material encountered. Varlejs et al. (2014) note, “Perhaps underlying
both sets of obstacles is a general failure of schools to promote information-literacy integration
with the curriculum and to give students real and sufficient opportunities to learn from
information” (p. 18).
Use of Technology to Support Information Literacy
The use of technology to support information literacy can be referred to as digital
literacy, or “the ability to use information and communication technologies to find, evaluate,
create, and communicate information, requiring both cognitive and technical skills” (American
Library Association, 2013, p. 2). However, before students can become digitally literate,
teachers must acquire the knowledge and skills to implement technology supported lessons that
include meaningful research projects requiring student use of appropriate technology tools and
provide effective instruction and guidance for the students to develop these skills (Ertmer &
Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010).
The availability of mobile devices and access to technology affects information literacy
skill acquisition and instruction. Information literacy skill instruction for 21st century students
needs to identify and incorporate outcomes that lead to teaching digital literacy skills to produce
functioning citizens in a mobile society (Anderson-Story, Dow, Kane, & Ternes, 2014). The link
between information literacy and digital literacy is described in the following statement, “…
Information Literacy requires digital literacy to access appropriate online research sources, and

16

Information Literacy gives further context to the evaluation skills developed by digital
literacy…” (American Library Association, 2013, p. 14). According to Bulger, Mayer and
Metzger (2014), it is believed that knowing how to search on the Internet does not ensure digital
literacy. Students in the digital age still need classic information literacy skills, particularly how
to select and integrate information from multiple sources (Colwell et al., 2013). Furthermore,
communicating information is a critical component in today’s 21st century classroom
environment; therefore, additional technology tools are used for this task (Eisenberg &
Berkowitz, 2011).
Technology is used to support information literacy through a variety of ways. In
conjunction with the Big6 model, using technology to support information literacy is evidenced
in the following steps of the model: task definition, information seeking, location and access, use
of or engagement with information, and synthesis.
Use of technology for task definition. During task definition of a research project, the
task is defined by identifying needed information. Often, students are asked to create questions
and central ideas that need to be located. The most often used method for middle school students
is a brainstorming technique supported with the use of a digital mind map or graphic organizer
where concepts are branched from a central idea (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011). Online graphic
organizers allow a visual representation of ideas that are easily shared with others (Heinen,
Leone, Fairchild, Cushenbery, & Hunter, 2015).
Use of technology for information seeking. Information seeking strategies involve
student consideration of possible sources, development of a plan to locate and assess the
credibility and relevance of sources (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011). Since students frequently
use online sources, such as websites, databases, blogs, and wikis, teachers should require

17

students to determine the authenticity and relevance of the information, as stated in the Common
Core State Standard ELA/Literacy writing standard 6.8 (NGA & CCSSO, 2010, p. 44). Results
from a study examining the ways that 23 middle school students evaluated web-based
information when given an information problem solving task revealed that students explicitly
evaluated information during only 24% of the web page views (Walraven, Brand-Gruwel, &
Boshuizen, 2009). The authors commented, “Students have trouble evaluating information and
do not have a critical attitude towards information on the WWW” (Walraven et al., 2009, p. 25).
Use of technology to locate and access of information. Location and access of
information are expected when students are required to find information sources to help with
answering their informational need (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011). This step often involves
using various forms of technology, such as an online public access catalog (e.g., library online
search tool), Internet browser search engines, and electronic reference materials such as
encyclopedias and databases to locate relevant information. In a study conducted by Julien and
Barker (2009) investigating the ways that high-school students find and evaluate scientific
information, results from 84 students revealed that 59% of the resources used to complete a
research assignment were technology based. When 24 of the original students were interviewed,
the majority perceived the Internet (i.e., Google) to be the most relevant source of information
(Julien & Barker, 2009). However, to “research” or gather information, the students generally
only used keyword searches rather than Boolean operator techniques, which would have enabled
them to locate information more efficiently (Julien & Barker, 2009).
Use of technology to “use” or engage with information. Using information in
information literacy is when the student engages with the information by reading, listening or
viewing the information and extracts only relevant data (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011).

18

Technology is used when students read, listen to, view, or download online information into an
application such as a word processor to take notes, create outlines, and/or keep track of
information (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011). Students can also engage with information through
the use of mind mapping tools such as Inspiration or Webspiration (Aydin, 2013) and
community editing applications such as Google docs (Locklear & Kent, 2015), or Zoho Writer
(Ramig, 2010). One major concern in relying on technology for online reading is that many
middle school students lack key reading strategies employed by skilled readers such as looking
for evidence to support main ideas, or summarizing their learning after reading a website (Zhang
& Duke, 2008).
Use of technology for synthesis. Synthesis of information is when information is
organized into a format that may be communicated to other people (Eisenberg & Berkowitz,
2011). Within the process of synthesizing information, students often use word processing
software to produce a written paper or report including a properly cited information sources used
(Ramig, 2010). In addition to a word processor, a variety of applications are used to synthesize
information into multimedia presentations that are often posted for online access (Eisenberg &
Berkowitz, 2011). In presenting and publishing information in an online format, students tend to
more clearly write and more carefully evaluate information sources if they know their writing
will be shared publicly or even with just peers (Forte, 2015).
Key Benefits and Challenges of Information Literacy Skill Instruction
For more than a decade, information literacy skills instruction has typically been
administered solely by a school librarian as a topic outside of the regular academic curriculum
(Dempsey, 2003; Varlejs et al., 2014); however, the topic was found to be infrequently taught by
librarians (Islam & Murno, 2006). This discovery is concerning, as students with no or limited

19

information literacy/research skills, most often locate information from unreliable and inaccurate
sources (Foo et al., 2014). Generally students use intuition to determine if information is reliable
rather than critically examining the source (Walraven et al., 2009). Students believe if they
locate information on the Internet, then the information is accurate and reliable (Heil, 2005;
Julien & Barker, 2009). Once middle school students locate information, they are often unable
to synthesize the information found, which leads to ineffective student research products (Foo et
al., 2014). Additionally, research suggests students from elementary to post-graduate schools
lack crucial information literacy and information technology skills (Chu, Tse, & Chow, 2011;
Walton & Archer, 2004). A discussion of key benefits and challenges of using information
literacy skill instruction is presented in the next section.
Benefits of Using Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Creating lifelong learners who are college and career ready is the goal of today’s
educational institutions. Using information literacy skill instruction provides many benefits to
students that are able to find and use information efficiently and effectively in a digital society.
Many studies are available to verify the benefits of using information literacy skill instruction.
One study by Yeh, Hsu, Chuang, and Hwang (2014) used an Online Information Management
Interface to scaffold instruction for 28 middle school students in using online information
problem solving skills effectively. The results showed benefits in locating and accessing
information more effectively for the participating students.
Hsieh, Dawson, Hofmann, Titus, and Carlin (2014) suggest the method for teaching
information literacy skills does not seem to be relevant, as long as instruction takes place;
however, evidence shows that the most effective strategy for incorporating information skills is
to focus on developing keyword searches and phrases to narrow the focus of information needed

20

(Walton & Archer, 2004). This skill set will carry over long after the students are out of school
(Murray, 2003). The incorporation of information literacy and research skills is thought to
benefit all students especially if taught in context in content area classrooms rather than in
isolation of the school library (Heil, 2005).
This study used the Big6 model due to the related student benefits. One of the benefits is
that the Big6 Model has an entire website of learning resources devoted to instructing teachers to
use the model. Resources for learning the Big6 Model and ways to implement it include the
Big6 Handbook, onsite instruction, recorded webinars, articles and even sample lessons among
other resources.
In addition to the resources available for teaching the Big6 model, several research-based
reasons support choosing this model. According to Eisenberg (2003) the Big6 Skills is “both a
set of essential life skills and a process” (p. 13). This method has been found to instill problemsolving skills in students, which are beneficial in all aspects of learning (Lin et al., 2014; Murray,
2003). Additionally, use of The Big6 Model has resulted in students being better able to
communicate effectively and solve information problems more efficiently (Eisenberg et al.,
2014).
Challenges of Using Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Information literacy skills are not taught in every classroom for a variety of reasons.
Among these challenges are: a lack of standards and assessments for information literacy skills, a
belief the skills are not important as compared to standardized test skills, a belief that teaching
information literacy skills is not a teacher responsibility, insufficient professional development
focused on ways to teach information literacy, and a belief that information is not needed as
information is already easy to access via a variety of technology tools.

21

Lack of standards and assessments. Insufficient guidelines for methods to teach or
assess information literacy skills play a large part in the lack of information literacy skills
included in today’s classrooms (Prado & Marzal, 2013). Mokhtar and Majid (2014) suggest that
schools often emphasize information and communication technology infrastructure and general
technology literacy skills rather than information literacy skills.
Not the responsibility of teachers. Teachers of non-literacy based courses are expected
to include research projects that require student use of literacy skills, such as ways to identify a
question, locate, evaluate, synthesize, and communicate information (Hsu, Wang, & Runco,
2013). However, a study involving 32 middle school teachers showed that more than 70%
reported high information and communication technologies (ICT) literacy confidence and
moderate familiarity with new literacy skills, but rarely practiced new literacies in their
classrooms, as they were not perceived as relevant to their subject area (Hsu et al., 2013).
Insufficient professional development. Other challenges exist in the structure of
professional development for teachers to learn to teach effective information literacy and
research skills, especially when using technology (Lawless & Pellegrino, 2007). Teachers must
have the time and support after professional development takes place and the professional
development must be relevant to the skills students need for higher achievement (i.e., research
and information literacy skills) (Polly & Hannafin, 2010). Also, if the professional development
is not deemed relevant, teachers will not implement the new skill instruction or technology
(Lester, 2003). An accountability factor must also be included. As Reinhart, Thomas, and
Toriskie (2011) further agree that a lack of information literacy skill instruction for teachers is
also a barrier to incorporating instruction into the classroom.

22

Easy access to information. According to Al-Aufi and Al-Azri (2013) some of the
barriers of any research method but especially the Big6 strategy include the “quick and
uncontrolled flow of information, the diversity of its channels, and the increasing level of
scholarship productivity as a result of advancing ICT [Information Computer Technology]” (pp.
344-345). Students have access to much information and do not know appropriate ways to
process it nor do they have the skills to determine the relevance of the information located (AlAufi & Al-Azri, 2013; Yeh et al., 2014). Another challenge to teaching information literacy
skills and research strategies is the tendency of students to revert to previous, ineffective search
strategies the students have used in the past rather than learning the new skills and strategies
when instruction is only a one-time occurrence (Colwell et al., 2013).
Literature Review Conclusion
This review of literature reveals that effective instruction of information literacy skills is
necessary in today’s schools. The introduction of the Common Core standards and the 21st
Century Skills for students has increased the need for students to think critically and to use
information ethically and responsibly, which is the foundation of information literacy. However,
research suggests that middle school students are not proficient in performing the information
literacy skills necessary to be college and career ready (Gross & Latham, 2012; Varlejs et al.,
2014).
Several models for teaching information literacy skills can be applied to separating the
research process into manageable steps (Bucher, 2000). Some key steps in the models require
students to define their information needs, formulate key questions, and locate, evaluate, and use
information a variety of online as well as non-digital resources (Bucher, 2000; Thomas, Crow, &

23

Franklin, 2011). The models also include a step for students to learn the ethical use of
information, such as copyright and plagiarism (Bucher, 2000; Thomas et al., 2011).
Although a variety of models can be used to teach information literacy skills, many
middle school teachers do not necessarily use a model because they assume the research process
was taught in a previous class (Probert, 2009). Additionally, studies by Allen (2007) and
Kolowich (2011) found that teachers at both K-12 and higher education institutions assume that
because most students are proficient with technology and Internet searching, students do not
need formal information literacy instruction. Similarly, Williams and Wavell (2007) found that
teachers tend to view information literacy as a separate subject, and consequently fail to
incorporate information literacy skills and knowledge into the content areas they teach.
Implications from this review of literature support this research, that examined middle
school teachers’ practices and attitudes toward technology-supported information literacy skill
instruction regarding the influence of an instructional intervention focused on ways to use the
Big6 model to teach information literacy skills will result in positive changes.

24

Chapter 3
Methodology
The introduction of the Common Core Standards has created a shift in traditional K-12
classroom curriculum and instruction from one that is teacher-based to one that is more studentcentered with an emphasis on inquiry skills or more specifically information literacy skills.
Specifically, the typical middle school student is now expected to conduct several research
related tasks rather than gain information through conventional lecture-based coursework;
however, many middle school teachers are not equipped to effectively develop curriculum and
instruct students in the research process and most middle school students do not understand how
to conduct research through a process using information literacy skills (Varlejs et al., 2014).
This investigation of attitudes and proposed actions of middle school teachers responsible for
teaching information literacy skills will contribute to the literature and advance middle school
teaching and learning. This chapter presents the methodology used for the research. Included
are the research questions, research design, participants, site of research, materials, instruments,
procedures, data collection, data analysis, limitation, delimitations, and bias/subjectivities.
Research Questions
The focus of this research study was to examine middle school teachers’ attitudes
towards technology-supported information literacy skill instruction and their past and projected
use of technology-supported information literacy skill instruction. Data were collected before
and after participants completed an instructional intervention that introduced information literacy
skill instruction and demonstrated a specified approach called the Big6 Model. The following
research questions guided the study.

25

After participants complete the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School
Teachers:
1. In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects
as compared to projected provision for future research projects?
2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers?
3. After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
Research Design
This study utilized a descriptive quantitative research design and relied on the results of
two researcher-developed survey instruments. This research design was selected as quantitative
research studies collect numeric data that can be analyzed statistically (Mertler, 2015).
Additionally, descriptive studies can be used to help understand trends in behaviors and attitudes
(Adams & Lawrence, 2014). For this study, attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction were gathered from the online Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey and the online Post-

26

Intervention Teacher Survey. Specifically, online surveys are considered to be the most
appropriate data collection instrument for this study as data can be collected with minimal time
and cost involved (Davies & Hughes, 2014). Because pre- and post-intervention survey
information was used, the study also included a comparative analysis of the data gathered to
examine attitudes of middle school teachers toward information literacy skill instruction before
and after participation in an online instructional intervention.
Site of Research
The research study was conducted in two school districts. District 1 is located in a rural
town with a population of approximately 4,000 people. The district includes one middle school
that offers instruction in core content courses (literacy, mathematics, science, and social studies)
as well as other courses such as art, computer applications, EAST, health, music, and physical
education. The middle school has approximately 570 students in the 6th and 7th grades with
about 52% of the student population classified in 6th grade and 48% classified as 7th graders. All
of the 29 full time teachers hold bachelor’s degrees and 16 have Master’s degrees.
District 2 is also located in a rural area with a population of approximately 3,000 people.
There is one middle school in this district that offers instruction in core content courses (literacy,
mathematics, science and social studies) as well as other courses such as art, computer
applications, health, music, and physical education. The total student enrollment of the middle
school is approximately 309 students in grades 5, 6, and 7, with about 35% of the population
classified as 6th grade and 33% as 7th grade. All of the 23 full-time 6th and 7th grade teachers
hold bachelor’s degrees and 12 have Master’s degrees.

27

Population and Participants
The study population consisted of 52 middle school 6th and 7th teachers from the two
participating school districts. Teachers in the population instruct in at least one of the following
content areas (art, computer applications, EAST, health, literacy, mathematics, music, physical
education, science, and social studies). Gender distribution for the population was 87.00%
female as opposed to 13.00% male teachers, while the ages ranged from 22 to 63 years old. One
of the teachers identified as minority. All teachers were native English speakers.
Of the 52 teachers in the population who received email invitations to participate in the
study, a total of 30 completed the study. Table 1 presents data regarding subject areas primarily
taught, years as a certified teacher, and number of yearly student research projects. As seen,
there were 10 subject areas reported by the 30 participants. The most common subjects were
science (20.00%), literacy (16.67%), computer applications, and social studies, both reported by
four participants. Three participants indicated their primary area of teaching was music, as did
three who reported mathematics as their subject. The least represented subjects were Music (2
participants), and health, P.E., and EAST, each represented by one participant. Over 80%
(83.33%) of the participants, indicated they had been a certified teacher for 6 or more years, with
over half (56.67%) reporting 9+ years, and 26.67% reporting from 6-8 years. Only five
participants had five or fewer years as a certified teacher. The majority (66.67%) of the
participants reported assigning from 1-2 research projects per school year, with 26.67% requiring
3 or more projects. Two of the 30 (6.67%) indicated they did not require students to complete a
research project.

28

Table 1
Participant Information (N = 30)
Item
 Which subject do you primarily teach? (Select
one)





For how many years have you been a certified
teacher?

How many research projects do you typically
require your students to complete in a year:

Response Choices
Science

n
6

%
20.00%

Literacy

5

16.67%

Social Studies

4

13.33%

Computer Applications

4

13.33%

Art

3

10.00%

Math

3

10.00%

Music

2

6.67%

Health

1

3.33%

P.E.

1

3.33%

EAST

1

3.33%

0-2 years

3

10.00%

3-5 years

2

6.67%

6-8 years

8

26.67%

9 + years

17

56.67%

0

2

6.67%

1-2

20

66.67%

3-4

6

20.00%

5 or more

2

6.67%

Materials
The Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers was based on the
Big6 model (Eisenberg et al., 2014) and designed and implemented using the Morrison, Ross,
Kemp, and Kalman (MRKK) (2010) model for instructional design. The MRKK model is
grounded in current instructional design trends that account for the latest cognitive psychological
research and a constructivist approach. In this approach, nine elements combine both behavioral
and cognitive philosophies to create interactive learning programs (Morrison et al., 2010). Using

29

this instructional design model, the researcher implemented nine independent elements to create
and refine an instructional intervention that will be used for this study. The design process began
by identifying the instructional problem and conducting a needs assessment, which demonstrated
a need for information literacy skill instruction for the middle school teachers who completed the
instructional intervention. Based on the adult learner characteristics, it was determined that a
self-paced online intervention created in an online platform called Versal would be the best
method to deliver the instruction.
The intervention was structured around the following four objectives; the term “learner”
refers to the middle school teacher completing the intervention:
1. Given a list of definitions of information literacy skill tasks, the learner will select the
term defined with 100% accuracy.
2. Given statements of information literacy skill tasks, the learner will determine the
accuracy of statements with a true/false answer with 100% accuracy.
3. Given each of the steps in the Big6 Model, the learner will be able to sequence the steps
in logical order with 100% accuracy.
4. Given scenarios of examples of research projects, the learners will identify the one that
exhibits the best example of the Big6 Model with 100% accuracy.
The intervention content was divided into three modules: Module 1 - Information
Literacy, which is a pre-instructional module to ensure a basic understanding of information
literacy; Module 2: Information Literacy Skill Instruction; and Module 3: Big6. The opening
screen of Module 3 Big6 is seen in Figure 1.

30

Figure 1. Screenshot of Module 3 Big6

Each module presented information and strategies, examples of application, and
opportunities for self-assessment related to information literacy skill instruction with middle
school students. Teaching scenarios relevant to current middle school teaching experiences were
used to present real-world examples. This module helped middle school teachers make personal
and professional connections to the information in order to improve their abilities to relate the
new material to their current teaching. The self-paced intervention provided opportunities for

31

individual practice and immediate feedback, which helped to clarify concepts and clear up
misconceptions. The intervention was designed to last 60 min or less.
The instructional intervention objectives, content, and activities were developed and
refined using a three-phase formative evaluation process consisting of a subject matter expert
review, one-to-one trials, and small group testing with the target audience of middle school
teachers. Results of the final testing were positive in that participants who completed the
Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers successfully achieved the
intervention objectives and reported positive comments regarding the overall effectiveness of the
intervention.
Instruments
Two data collection instruments were used to survey participants prior to their use of the
instructional intervention and after completion of the instructional intervention. The two
instruments were researcher-developed and included the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey and
the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey. The choice to use researcher-developed surveys was
made after review of validated instruments (Gross & Latham, 2007; Hutchison & Reinking,
2011), which would not have yielded appropriate data to fully address the research questions for
this study. Content validity was addressed by developing survey items based on research
associated with middle school information literacy skill instruction specifically including the
Big6 research model, as seen in the literature review, and through field-testing and revision of
items during intervention development. Cronbach’s alpha was conducted to examine internal
consistency or reliability of the two instruments, as associated with the research questions.
Reliability statistics are reported for the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey and the PostIntervention Teacher Survey below.

32

Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey
The Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey (see Appendix A) was used to collect data before
participating middle school teachers completed the intervention. The survey began by asking
participants three questions related to their teaching. The first question was, “What subject do
you primarily teach?” for which participants were asked to “select one” from nine options: art,
music, P.E., S\science, social studies, mathematics, literacy, computer applications, and EAST.
Next, was, “For how many years have you been a certified teacher?” The response choices were
in three-year increments from 0-2 to 9+ years. The last question was, “How many research
projects do you typically require in a year?” which had four response options: 0, 1-2, 3-4, 5, or
more.
The remainder of the survey was divided into three sections comprised of 32 items that
inquired about different aspects of literacy skill instruction. Section 1 included items 1 - 8, and
asked the participants the following question, “How often do you require your students to do the
following tasks when completing a research project?” Participants were directed to use the
following scale to record their responses: 1 = Never, 2 = Occasionally, and 3 = Frequently. The
Section 1 Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for internal consistency for items 1 – 8 was α = .756,
which is considered as “acceptable” reliability (George & Mallery, 2003).
Section 2 included items 9-17, which contained the following item stem: “I provided my
students specific instruction and/or strategies to do the following tasks when they completed past
research projects.” Participants were asked to record their responses to the nine items using a 3point Likert-type scale with these choices: 1 = Never, 2 = Occasionally, and 3 = Frequently.
Cronbach’s alpha for these nine items was considered as “good” (α = .898) (George & Mallery,
2003).

33

The survey concluded with 15 items in Section 3, which asked participants to, “Indicate
your level of agreement with the following statements regarding information literacy skills.”
Participants were instructed to record their responses using the following 3-point Likert-type
scale of agreement: 1 = Disagree, 2 = Neutral, and 3 = Agree. The Cronbach’s alpha for the final
fifteen items was considered as “excellent” (α = .917) (George & Mallery, 2003). The survey
ends with these comments, “Thank You for Completing the Survey! Enjoy learning about
Information Literacy Skill Instruction!”
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
Final data were collected through the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey, which was
completed at the conclusion of the instructional intervention. The survey was comprised of 25
Likert-type scale items and 3 open-ended items grouped into four sections (see Appendix B). As
seen in Appendix A and B, Sections 1 and 2 of the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey included
the same items as the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey, but used different stems for the survey
items, whereas Section 3 used the same item stem and items (see Table 2). Section 4 included
three open-ended items asking participants to describe reasons they “would” and reasons they
“would not” include information literacy skills when teaching middle school students. The final
open-ended item provided an opportunity for participants to add any additional comments
regarding information literacy skill instruction for middle school students. The survey ended
with the following comments, “Thank You for Participating! Hope you enjoyed learning more
about Information Literacy Skill Instruction!”
Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for internal consistency associated with the three sections
were similar to results for the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey items. For Section 1, items 1-8,
the Cronbach’s alpha would be considered “acceptable” at α = .718 (George & Mallery, 2003).

34

Sections 2 and 3 elicited more acceptable reliability coefficients for the items involved.
Cronbach’s alpha for the 9 items in Section 2 was considered as “good” (α = .851), as was the
Cronbach’s alpha for the final 15 items in Section 3, which was also considered as “good” (α =
.885) (George & Mallery, 2003).
Table 2
Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey versus Post-Intervention Teacher Survey: Comparison of Item
Stems by Survey Section
Survey
Section

Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey
Item Stems

Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
Item Stems

1

How often do you require your students
to do the following tasks when
completing a research project?

How often do you plan to require your
students to do the following tasks when
completing future research projects

2

I provided my students specific
instruction and/or strategies do the
following tasks when they completed past
research projects:

I plan to provide my students specific
instruction and/or strategies do the
following tasks when they complete
future research projects:

3

Indicate your level of agreement with the
following statements regarding
information literacy skills:

Indicate your level of agreement with the
following statements regarding
information literacy skills:

Procedures
This study involved two primary procedures, recruitment of participants and
implementation of intervention. Both procedures are described in the next section.
Recruitment of Participants
Upon approval from The University of Memphis Institutional Review Board (Appendix
C) and the two proposed research sites (Appendix D), teachers in the population for this study
were recruited from two middle schools located in two school districts. The criteria for
participation included any full time, certified middle school 6th and/or 7th grade teacher in one of

35

the following content areas: art, computer applications, EAST, health, literacy, mathematics,
music, physical education, science, and social studies. Study invitation emails were sent to the
population of 52 middle school teachers through the posted e-mail address on each public
District website. The email invitation included information about the purpose of the study, a
request to participate, and a link to the online instruments and intervention (see Appendix E).
Implementation of Intervention
Participants accessed the instructional intervention via the hyperlink included with the
invitation email. The intervention, Information Literacy Skill Instruction for Middle School
Teachers, was administered as a self-paced, online environment using Versal as the platform,
which was accessible on any computer or device with access to Google Chrome or Safari as the
web browser.
The intervention began with the Consent Form (Appendix F), followed by the PreIntervention Teacher Survey (Appendix A). The intervention proceeded into an introduction of
the intervention with an overview of the three distinct modules. Next, each of three distinct
modules was accessed. The first module provided information on information literacy and
research skill vocabulary. The second module instructed the participant in appropriate
information literacy skill instructional strategies for middle school teachers. The third module
specifically detailed the Big6 Model. Participants were able to navigate at their own pace;
participants had the option to revisit information such as the screencast videos in the second and
third modules. Additionally, participants could go forward or backward throughout the
intervention. Participants were able to access supplemental practice activities as often as wanted
and/or needed. Upon completion of the three modules, each participant then completed the PostIntervention Teacher Survey (Appendix B) prior to exiting the intervention. Completion of the

36

Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey, the intervention, and the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
took approximately 60 min or less.
Data Collection
Data were collected using two instruments developed through Google Forms: PreIntervention Teacher Survey and Post-Intervention Teacher Survey. The surveys were
embedded in the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers. The PreIntervention Teacher Survey was taken before the participants began the intervention and the
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey was taken after the participants completed the intervention.
Quantitative survey data populated a web-based spreadsheet in Google Sheets. The data were
then imported into Microsoft Excel and SPSS software for data analysis. The responses to the
three open-ended items were downloaded from the Google spreadsheet and imported into Excel
for analysis of trends. All data remained confidential and stored on a secure and private
computer system.
Data Analysis
Major goals in data analysis are to organize and summarize the gathered data using
descriptive (Lodico, Spaulding, & Voegtle, 2010) and inferential statistics (Long, 2012) to
address the proposed research questions. Results from the Likert-type scale items on the PreIntervention Teacher Survey and Post-Intervention Teacher Surveys were first analyzed with
descriptive statistics that involved the calculation of frequencies, percentages, mean scores, and
standard deviations. According to Creswell (2014), observing both measures of central
tendencies and measures of dispersion will provide a clearer description of the results.
Inferential statistics were used to address Research Questions 1, 1a, 1b, and 2. Specifically,
paired-sample t-tests were conducted to compare data from the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey

37

and Post-Intervention Teacher Survey to identify any differences and determine if the mean of
the differences is statistically significant (Adams & Lawrence, 2014; Hedberg & Ayers, 2015).
For example, as seen in Table 3, overall pre-intervention and post-intervention mean scores from
Items 1 – 8 were compared using paired-sample t-tests to determine “What changes, if any, are
seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency that they required students to complete
information literacy tasks during past as compared to projected requirements for future research
projects?”
The data analysis for Research Question 3 consisted of using descriptive coding and
categorizing of participant responses to the three open-ended questions on the Post-Intervention
Teacher Survey (see Table 3). The purpose of the open-ended items was “to encourage
participants to elaborate on their experiences and definitions” (Creswell, 2012, p. 398). Analysis
of the open-ended responses for each question involved three key steps: 1) read through all
responses to gain an idea of potential grouping; 2) code data into small units through taking
individual statements and comparing it to all other pieces of data, either similar or different; and
3) sort into categories using “a similarity-based ordering of data” (Maxwell & Miller, 2008, p.
465). The number of responses per category was tabulated and reported in table format and
example direct quotes of participant responses were included to contextualize the findings.

38

Table 3
Research Questions by Data Analysis and Data Source
Research Questions

Data
Analysis
Paired
t-test

Data Source: Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey and Post-Intervention Teacher
Survey Items

1b. What changes, if
any, are seen in
participant selfreports regarding the
frequency that they
provided
information literacy
skills instruction for
past research
projects as compared
to projected
provision for future
research projects?

Paired
t-test

Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey: I provided my students specific instruction and/or
strategies do the following tasks when they completed past research projects:
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey: I plan to provide my students specific
instruction and/or strategies do the following tasks when they complete future
research projects:
Scale: Never, Occasionally, Frequently
9. Define the problem and identify requirements of the problem.
10. Identify the most appropriate and accurate resources
11. Locate and access information
12. Use keyword and other online search strategies such as Boolean logic
13. Extract and engage with information (i.e. read, hear, view, touch)
14. Organize information from multiple sources
15. Create a product or performance
16. Evaluate the product or performance
17. Evaluate the information solving process

2. What changes, if any,
are seen in
participant attitudes
toward information
literacy skill
instruction after
completion of the
Information Literacy
Skill Intervention for
Middle School
Teachers?

Paired
t-test

Pre- and Post-Intervention Teacher Survey Indicate your level of agreement with
the following statements regarding information literacy skills:
Scale: Disagree, Neutral, Agree
18. Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills.
19. Librarians rather than teachers should teach information literacy skills.
20. Students should complete several research projects each year.
21. Students should complete research projects in literacy classes.
22. Students should complete research projects in mathematics classes.
23. Students should complete research projects in science classes.
24. Students should complete research projects in social studies classes.
25. Students should complete research projects in art and music classes.
26. Students should complete research projects in physical education classes.
27. Students should complete research projects in health classes.
28. Students should know how to synthesize multiple information sources.
29. Students should know how to evaluate the validity of resources.
30. Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid plagiarism.
31. Students should have computer skills for research projects.
32. Teachers should have computer skills needed to teach students how to
complete research projects.

1a. What changes, if
any, are seen in
participant selfreports regarding the
frequency that they
required students to
complete
information literacy
tasks during past as
compared to
projected
requirements for
future research
projects?

Pre- Intervention Teacher Survey: How often do you require your students to do
the following tasks when completing a research project?
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey: How often do you plan to require your students
to do the following tasks when completing future research projects?
Scale: Never, Occasionally, Frequently
1. Define the research problem/task prior to beginning the project?
2. Use only specific resources selected by the teacher?
3. Individually, or in a small group, identify the best resource(s) to use for the
research project?
4. Use print resources?
5. Use online databases as information sources?
6. Present research findings/information using digital resource. (PowerPoint,
Glogster, Kidblog, etc.)?
7. Present research findings/information using print resource (e.g., research
paper, speech with notes, poster, etc.)?
8. Use paraphrasing and citations to avoid plagiarism?

(table continues)

39

Table 3 (Continued)
Research Questions

Data Analysis

3. After completion of
the instructional
intervention, what
do participants
report as reasons for
including and for not
including
information literacy
skills when teaching
middle school
students?

Descriptive
coding and
categorization

Data Source: Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey and PostIntervention Teacher Survey Items
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey Please use the space provided
to write your responses to the following items:
1.

For what reasons would you include information literacy skills
when teaching middle school students?

2.

For what reasons would you not include information literacy
skills when teaching middle school students?

Limitations
There were four primary limitations with this study. The first limitation was that the
study was conducted in two similar locations. The two middle schools were both in rural areas
and had comparable student populations, thus data represent one environment. This limits
generalizability of the findings to other middle school settings. A second limitation was the
possible bias due to the relationship of the researcher to the participants. The researcher is a
member of the middle school faculty of one research site and has worked with the participants
for approximately twelve years. A third limitation relates to the use of researcher-developed
instruments created specifically for this proposed study; therefore, the results may not be
applicable to different settings and participants. Finally, demand characteristic was a fourth
limitation. Demand characteristic refers to “participants being aware of what the researcher is
trying to investigate, or anticipates finding, and what this implies for how participants are
expected to behave” (McCambridge, de Bruin, & Witton, 2012, p. 1).

40

Delimitations
Two delimitations exist for this study. The first delimitation is that the researcher has
chosen to study middle school teachers instead of middle through secondary teachers. Although
secondary teachers may typically require more research projects, the critical development of
information literacy skills by students is at an earlier age, hence the decision to study middle
school teachers. A second delimitation is the decision to primarily focus on one model: The
Big6 Model. Although other models exist, this decision was based on research indications that
the Big6 Model is one of the easiest to employ and use with middle school students.
Biases
The researcher has been a member of the faculty for the proposed middle school study
site for the past 12 years as the school library media specialist. As such, the researcher will need
to contain biases toward responses to information literacy skill instruction to a minimum.

41

Chapter 4
Results
This research was conducted to examine middle school teacher practices and attitudes
regarding teaching information literacy skills. The following research questions guided data
collection and analysis after participants completed the Information Literacy Skill Intervention
for Middle School Teachers:
1. In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects
as compared to projected provision for future research projects?
2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers?
3. After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
This chapter contains findings with relevant tables from descriptive and inferential
analyses of data associated with Research Questions 1 and 2. One open-ended item was used to
address the benefits, or reasons for including information literacy skill instruction and one open-

42

ended item was used to solicit perceptions of challenges, or reasons for not including information
literacy skill instruction for Research Question 3. The final open-ended item provided
participants the opportunity to add any additional comments regarding information literacy skill
instruction. Participant responses to the three open-ended items are discussed and supported
with summary tables of participant responses. Complete records of participant responses with
categorizations are found in Appendices G through I.
Research Question 1
In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
The purpose of question 1 was to examine the overall influence of the instructional
intervention on teachers projected teaching practices. Two sub-questions (1a and 1b) were used
to address this overall item.
Research Question 1.a
What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency that
they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as compared to
projected requirements for future research projects?
Data from eight items on the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey (Pre-Survey) and the same
items on the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey (Post-Survey) were used to address Research
Question 1a. Specifically, both descriptive and inferential analyses were conducted to examine
participant self-reported responses regarding the frequency with which participants required
students to complete information literacy tasks during past and future research projects.
Participants recorded responses using a three-point scale: 1 = Never; 2 = Occasionally; and 3 =
Frequently. Descriptive data are presented for the two instruments, followed by the presentation
of the paired samples t-test outcomes.

43

Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey. On the Pre-Survey when participants were asked,
“How often do you require your students to do the following tasks when completing a research
project?” responses yielded a moderate range of frequency for the eight information literacy
tasks. Specifically, as seen in Table 4, the mean scores for the eight “Pre” items ranged from a
low of 1.57 to a high of 2.43. Regarding the tasks most often used, nearly 60% (56.67%) of the
participants reported that they “Frequently” required their students to “Use online databases as
information sources” and “Present research findings/information using digital resource,” when
completing research projects. Conversely, 60.00% of the participants reported that they “Never”
required their students to “Individually, or in a small group, identify the best resource(s) to use
for the research project?”
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey. After completing the intervention, the participants
were asked, “How often do you plan to require your students to do the following tasks when
completing future research projects?” Participant responses associated with the eight
information literacy tasks are presented in the “Post” rows of Table 4. As seen, the mean scores
for “Post” items are directionally higher than the “Pre” mean scores for each of the information
literacy tasks. Of note, 26 of 30 participants (86.67%) as compared to 17 (56.67%) participants
on the Pre-Survey indicated they would “Frequently” require students to “Use online databases
as information sources.” Similarly, 83.33% (post) as compared to 50.00% (pre) of the
participants reported they would require their students to “Define the research problem/task
prior to beginning the project,” for future research projects. The least reported task was, “Use
only specific resources selected by the teacher,” which received a Pre-Survey (63.33%) to PostSurvey (6.67%) change in participants selecting a rating of “Frequently.” This change reveals a
positive shift in thinking due to the reversed nature of the question.

44

Paired Samples t-test Outcomes. Prior to conducting the inferential analyses, data from
Item 2 on the Pre-Survey and Post-Survey were reversed, as the item was written to yield a
negative response. As seen in Table 5, results of the paired-samples t-test that compared
participant response in Section 1 of the Pre-Survey (M = 2.02, SD = 0.447) and Post- Survey (M
= 2.51 SD = 0.265) revealed a significant difference (t (30) = -8.337, p = .000). The Cohen’s d (1.348) effect size suggests the practical value of the difference is very large (Ellis, 2010).
Table 4
Require Information Literacy Tasks: Pre- Survey vs. Post- Survey Results
Pre-Survey: How often do you require your students to do the
following tasks when completing a research project?
Post-Survey: How often do you plan to require your students to
do the following tasks when completing future research
projects?

1. Define the research problem/task prior to
beginning the project?

Never
1
Survey
PrePost-

2. Use only specific resources selected by the
teacher?

Occasionally
2

Frequently
3

Total
Response
s

n
(%)
10
(33.33%)

n
(%)
5
(16.67%)

n
(%)
15
(50.00%)

n
(%)
30
(100.00%)

1
(3.33%)

4
(13.33%)

25
(83.33%)

SD

M

0.898

2.16

30
(100.00%)

0.476

2.80

Pre-

7
(23.33%)

4
(13.33%)

19
(63.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.841

2.40

Post-

1
(3.33%)

27
(90.00%)

2
(6.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.320

2.03

3. Individually, or in a small group, identify the
best resource(s) to use for the research
project?

Pre-

18
(60.00%)

7
(23.33%)

5
(16.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.761

1.57

Post-

1
(3.33%)

8
(26.67%)

21
(70.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.537

2.67

4. Use print resources?

Pre-

7
(23.33%)

16
(53.33%)

7
(23.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.683

2.00

Post-

2
(6.67%)

18
(60.00%)

10
(33.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.573

2.27

Pre-

7
(23.33%)

6
(20.00%)

17
(56.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.830

2.33

Post-

0
(0.00%)

4
(13.33%)

26
(86.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.340

2.87

Pre-

4
(13.33%)

9
(30.00%)

17
(56.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.716

2.43

Post-

0
(0.00%)

6
(20.00%)

24
(80.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.400

2.80

Pre-

13
(43.33%)

10
(33.33%)

7
(23.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.792

1.80

Post-

3
(10.00%)

18
(60.00%)

9
(30.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.600

2.20

Pre-

14
(46.67%)

7
(23.33%)

9
(30.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.860

1.83

Post-

2
(6.67%)

10
(33.33%)

18
(60.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.618

2.53

5. Use online databases as information sources?

6. Present research findings/information using
digital resource. (PowerPoint, Glogster,
Kidblog, etc.)?
7. Present research findings/information using
print resource (e.g., research paper, speech
with notes, poster, etc.)?
8. Use paraphrasing and citations to avoid
plagiarism?

45

Table 5
Require Information Literacy Tasks: Paired Sample t-test and Cohen’s d Results
Pre-Survey
Past Projects
M
SD

2.02

0.447

Post-Survey
Future Projects
M
SD

2.51

0.265

n

T

df

d

p

30

-8.337

29

-1.348

.000

Research Question 1.b
What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency that
they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects as
compared to projected provision for future research projects?
Data from nine items on the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey (Pre-Survey) and the same
items on the Post-Intervention Teacher survey (Post-Survey) were used to address Research
Question 1b through descriptive and inferential analyses of self-reported responses. Participants
used a 3-point scale (1 = Never; 2 = Occasionally; and 3 = Frequently) to report the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past and future research projects.
The Pre-Survey and Post-Survey results for items 9 through 17 are presented in the following
sections.
Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey. As seen in Table 6, the Pre-Survey mean scores for
items 9 – 17 varied greatly in that the lowest was 1.20, whereas the highest was 2.43. When
examining the information literacy skills instruction most often provided for past research
projects, 60.00% of the participants indicated they “Frequently” taught students how to “Create
a product or performance.” There was a considerable decrease in frequency when looking at the
remaining information literacy skills instruction, as only approximately 30% of the participants
reported “Frequently” teaching students how to “Organize information from multiple sources”
(33.33%), or to “Evaluate the product or performance” (30.00%). The results also revealed that

46

the majority of the participants “Never” provided instruction regarding how to “Evaluate the
information solving process” (83.33%).
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey. After the intervention, participants were asked to
indicate how often they plan to provide instruction for the same information literacy skills as
presented on the Pre-Survey. When comparing mean scores from the Pre-Survey to the PostSurvey, once again the Post-Survey scores were directionally higher (Table 6). For example, the
lowest mean score for the Pre-Survey was M = 1.20, whereas it was M = 2.43 for the PostSurvey, representing a 1.23 difference. The gap between the highest mean scores was smaller
(0.44) in that the Pre-Survey highest mean was 2.43 and the Post-Survey mean was 2.87. Nearly
90% (86.67%) of the participants indicated they would “Frequently” provide instruction for
future research projects to help students “Define the problem and identify requirements of the
problem” and “Create a product or performance.” Similarly, 83.33% planned to “Frequently”
teach students how to “Identify the most appropriate and accurate resources” during future
research projects. The two tasks receiving the lowest percentage of participants who indicated
they would “Frequently” provide instruction for future research projects were: “Evaluate the
information solving process” (50.00%), and “Extract and engage with information” (53.33%).
Paired Samples t-test Outcomes. As seen in Table 7, results of the paired-samples t-test
that compared participant response to Section 2 items on the Pre-Survey (M = 1.81, SD = 0.557)
with the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey (M = 2.67 SD = 0.350) revealed a significant
difference (t (30) = -12.230, p = .000). The Cohen’s effect size (d = -1.848) suggests the
practical value of the difference is very large (Ellis, 2010).

47

Table 6
Information Literacy Skills Instruction: Pre- Survey vs. Post- Survey Results
Pre-Survey: I provided my students specific instruction
and/or strategies do the following tasks when they
completed past research projects:
Post-Survey: I plan to provide my students specific
instruction and/or strategies do the following tasks when
they complete future research projects:

9.

Define the problem and identify
requirements of the problem (in the
research project).

10. Identify the most appropriate and
accurate resources.

11. Locate and access information.

12. Use keyword and other online search
strategies such as Boolean logic.
13. Extract and engage with information
(i.e., read, hear, view, touch).

14. Organize information from multiple
sources.

15. Create a product or performance.

16. Evaluate the product or performance.

17. Evaluate the information solving
process.

Never
1

Occasionally
2

Frequently
3

Total
Responses

n
(%)
8
(26.67%)

n
(%)
15
(50.00%)

n
(%)
7
(23.33%)

n
(%)
30
(100.00%)

Post-

1
(3.33%)

3
(10.00%)

26
(86.67%)

Pre-

14
(46.67%)

12
(40.00%)

Post-

0
(0.00%)

Pre-

SD

M

0.706

1.97

30
(100.00%)

0.453

2.83

4
(13.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.699

1.67

5
(16.67%)

25
(83.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.373

2.83

12
(40.00%)

12
(40.00%)

6
(20.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.748

1.80

Post-

1
(3.33%)

9
(30.00%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.547

2.63

Pre-

15
(50.00%)

10
(33.33%)

5
(16.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.745

1.67

Post-

1
(3.33%)

9
(30.00%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.547

2.63

Pre-

13
(43.33%)

11
(36.67%)

6
(20.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.761

1.77

Post-

3
(10.00%)

11
(36.67%)

16
(53.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.667

2.43

Pre-

8
(26.67%)

12
(40.00%)

10
(33.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.772

2.07

Post-

0
(0.00%)

10
(33.33%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.471

2.67

Pre-

5
(16.67%)

7
(23.33%)

18
(60.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.761

2.43

Post-

0
(0.00%)

4
(13.33%)

26
(86.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.340

2.87

Pre-

18
(60.00%)

3
(10.00%)

9
(30.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.900

1.70

Post-

1
(3.33%)

9
(30.00%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.547

2.63

Pre-

25
(83.33%)

4
(13.33%)

1
(3.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.476

1.20

Post-

1
(3.33%)

14
(46.67%)

15
(50.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.562

2.47

Survey
Pre-

Table 7
Information Literacy Skills Instruction: Paired Sample t-test and Cohen’s d Results
Pre-Survey
Past Projects
M
SD

1.81

0.557

Post-Survey
Future Projects
M
SD

2.67

0.350

n

T

df

d

p

30

-12.230

29

-1.848

.000

48

Research Question 2
What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy
skill instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for
Middle School Teachers?

Research Question 2 was addressed with data from fifteen items on the Pre-Intervention
Teacher Survey (Pre-Survey) and the same items on the Post-Intervention Teacher Survey (PostSurvey). Again, both descriptive and inferential analyses were utilized to examine participant
self-reported responses regarding various attitudes toward information literacy skill instruction
before and after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School
Teachers. Participants recorded responses using a three-point scale of agreement where 1 =
Disagree; 2 = Neutral; and 3 = Agree. The Pre-Survey and Post-Survey results for items 18 – 32
are presented below.
Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey
When participants were asked to, “Indicate your level of agreement with the following
statements regarding information literacy skills,” responses reflected a fairly diverse range of
agreement. As seen in Table 8, items 21-27 focused on participant agreement regarding students
completing research projects in the following classes: literacy, mathematics, science, social
studies, art and music, physical education, and health. Although all (100%) of participants
responded that they “Agree” “Students should complete research projects in literacy classes,”
there were lower levels of agreement for the remaining subject areas. For example, participant
agreement fell between “Neutral” and “Agree” for science (M = 2.57), social studies (M = 2.43),
health (M = 2.30), and art and music (M = 2.20), but between “Disagree” and “Neutral” for
physical education (M = 1.67) and mathematics (M = 1.73).

49

When looking at participant responses to the remaining items, the highest levels of
agreement were reported for “Students should have computer skills needed for research
projects,” (M = 2.93), and “Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid
plagiarism” (M = 2.87). In contrast, the item for which participants reported the lowest level of
agreement was, “Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills,” (M = 2.40).
Post-Intervention Teacher Survey
Subsequent to the completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers, participants completed the Post-Survey. When asked, to indicate their level of
agreement with items 21-27, which focused on students completing research projects in the
seven different content area classes, the mean scores were all moderately higher than the PreSurvey scores (Table 8). The greatest difference, which was only 0.40, was seen for “Students
should complete research projects in mathematics classes,” (Pre-Survey M = 1.73; Post-Survey
M = 2.13) and, “Students should complete research projects in art and music classes,” (PreSurvey M = 2.20; Post-Survey M = 2.60).
Results for the remaining items used to assess participant attitudes toward information
literacy skills instruction also revealed moderate Pre-Survey to Post-Survey increases in levels of
agreement. The greatest increase in mean scores (0.47) was seen for, “Teachers should know
how to teach information literacy skills,” (Pre-Survey M = 2.40; Post-Survey M = 2.87). The
next largest increase (0.30) was reported for, “Students should complete several research
projects each year,” (Pre-Survey M = 2.53; Post-Survey M = 2.83). There were also a couple of
items for which minimal Pre-Survey to Post-Survey difference occurred as a high level of
agreement was reported on both instruments. The least difference was for, “Students should
have computer skills needed for research projects,” (Pre-Survey M = 2.93; Post-Survey M =

50

2.97). Next was, “Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid plagiarism,” (PreSurvey M = 2.87; Post-Survey M = 2.97).
Paired Samples t-test Outcomes
Prior to conducting the inferential analyses for this section, data from Item 19 on the PreSurvey and Post-Survey were reversed, as the item was written to yield a negative response. As
seen in Table 9, results of the paired-samples t-test that compared participant response to Section
3 items on the Pre-Survey (M = 2.43, SD = 0.434) and Post- Survey (M = 2.69 SD = 0.299)
revealed a significant difference (t (30) = -4.360, p = .000). The Cohen’s effect size (d = -0.680)
suggests the practical value of the difference is medium in strength (Ellis, 2010).

51

Table 8
Attitudes Toward Information Literacy Skill Instruction: Pre- Survey vs. Post- Survey Results
Disagree
1

Neutral
2

Agree
3

Total
Responses

n
(%)
4
(13.33%)

n
(%)
10
(33.33%)

n
(%)
16
(53.33%)

n
(%)
30
(100.00%)

Post-

0
(0.00%)

4
(13.33%)

26
(86.67%)

Pre-

9
(30.00%)

5
(16.67%)

Post-

8
(26.67%)

Pre-

Pre- and Post-Survey: Indicate your level of agreement with the
following statements regarding information literacy skill
instruction:

18. Teachers should know how to teach
information literacy skills.

19. Librarians rather than teachers should teach
information literacy skills.

20. Students should complete several research
projects each year.

21. Students should complete research projects in
literacy classes.

22. Students should complete research projects in
mathematics classes.

23. Students should complete research projects in
science classes.

24. Students should complete research projects in
social studies classes.

25. Students should complete research projects in
art and music classes.
26. Students should complete research projects in
physical education classes.

27. Students should complete research projects in
health classes.

28. Students should know how to synthesize
multiple information sources.
29. Students should know how to evaluate the
validity of resources.

SD

M

0.712

2.40

30
(100.00%)

0.340

2.87

16
(53.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.883

2.23

15
(50.00%)

7
(23.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.706

1.97

3
(10.00%)

8
(26.67%)

19
(63.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.670

2.53

Post-

1
(3.33%)

3
(10.00%)

26
(86.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.453

2.83

Pre-

0
(0.00%)

0
(0.00%)

30
(100.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.000

3.00

Post-

0
(0.00%)

0
(0.00%)

30
(100.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.000

3.00

Pre-

15
(50.00%)

8
(26.67%)

7
(23.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.814

1.73

Post-

6
(20.00%)

14
(46.67%)

10
(33.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.718

2.13

Pre-

4
(13.33%)

5
(16.67%)

21
(70.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.716

2.57

Post-

0
(0.00%)

5
(16.67%)

25
(83.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.373

2.83

Pre-

4
(13.33%)

9
(30.00%)

17
(56.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.716

2.43

Post-

0
(0.00%)

7
(23.33%)

23
(76.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.423

2.77

Pre-

7
(2.333%)

10
(33.33%)

13
(43.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.792

2.20

Post-

2
(6.67%)
17
(56.67%)

8
(26.67%)
6
(20.00%)

20
(66.67%)
7
(23.33%)

30
(100.00%)
30
(100.00%)

0.611

2.60

0.830

1.67

Post-

11
(36.67%)

8
(26.67%)

11
(36.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.856

2.00

Pre-

5
(16.67%)

11
(36.67%)

14
(46.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.737

2.30

Post-

2
(6.67%)

8
(26.67%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.611

2.60

Pre-

0
(0.00%)

8
(26.67%)

22
(73.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.442

2.73

Post-

0
(0.00%)

3
(10.00%)

27
(90.00%)

30
(100.00%)

0.300

2.90

Pre-

0
(0.00%)

7
(23.33%)

23
(76.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.423

2.77

Post-

0
(0.00%)

1
(3.33%)

29
(96.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.180

2.97

Survey
Pre-

Pre-

(table continues)

52

Table 8 (continued)
Disagree
1

Neutral
2

Agree
3

Total
Responses

n
(%)
1
(3.33%)

n
(%)
2
(6.67%)

n
(%)
27
(90.00%)

n
(%)
30
(100.00%)

Post-

0
(0.00%)

1
(3.33%)

29
(96.67%)

Pre-

0
(0.00%)

2
(6.67%)

Post-

0
(0.00%)

Pre-

Post-

Pre- and Post-Survey: Indicate your level of agreement with the
following statements regarding information literacy skill
instruction:

30. Students should know how to cite sources
used and avoid plagiarism.

Survey
Pre-

31. Students should have computer skills needed
for research projects.

32. Teachers should have computer skills needed
to teach students how to complete research
projects.

SD

M

0.427

2.87

30
(100.00%)

0.182

2.97

28
(93.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.249

2.93

1
(3.33%)

29
(96.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.180

2.97

0
(100.00%)

10
(33.33%)

20
(66.67%)

30
(100.00%)

0.471

2.67

0
(0.00%)

5
(16.67%)

25
(83.33%)

30
(100.00%)

0.373

2.83

Table 9
Attitudes Toward Information Literacy Skill Instruction: Paired Sample t-test and Cohen’s d
Results
Pre-Survey
Past Projects
M
SD

2.43

0.434

Post-Survey
Future Projects
M
SD

2.69

0.299

N

t

df

d

p

30

-4.360

29

-0.680

.000

Research Question 3
After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
In order to examine middle school teacher attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction, participants were asked to respond to two open-ended questions regarding reasons to
include and reasons to not include information literacy skill instruction. The final open-ended
item provided participants an opportunity to add any additional comments regarding information
literacy skill instruction. Participant responses to the three items are discussed and summarized
in tables in the following sections and a complete record of participant responses with associated
categorizations is found in Appendices G through I.

53

Reasons to Include Information Literacy Skills
All 30 participants responded when asked, “For what reasons would you include
information literacy skills when teaching middle school students?” When examining the
responses, several participants included more than one category of reasons for including
information literacy skills. Specifically, while slightly over one-third (36.7%) of the participants
wrote a response that included a single key reason, approximately two-thirds of the participants
wrote responses reflecting from two to five different reasons (Table 10). Overall, there were a
total of 57 unique responses representing 11 categories of reasons for including information
literacy skills when teaching middle school students (Appendix G).
Three categories stand out as “reasons to include information literacy skills when
teaching middle school students”. The first category was for students to understand the research
process, which was noted by 12 responses, and represented 21.1% of the total responses. This
category is reflected in the following responses:


For students to better understand the research process and how to use information more
effectively.



Students will need these skills to be successful, both in high school and in the real world.
They must be aware of the proper ways to complete research tasks with credible evidence
and complete citations/references.



To help students define their topic, assess information, synthesize information from
multiple sources, and self-assess and peer assess which will ultimately develop their
researching skills.



Better understanding of the research process, which is very helpful in science especially.

54

The second “reason to include” represented by 17.5% of the responses was building skills
for high school and college, as seen in the following example responses:


Students need to have these skills to complete assignments for High School & College.



It's better when they get to college to know how to find answers and info. on their own.



It will help them be college and career ready and become lifelong learners.



It will help them if they go to college.
The third most common category for “reasons to include” was finding information as

noted by nine responses, representing 15.8% of the total responses. Sample responses include:


Kids learn how to find information better.



I would include information literacy skills because it will enable them to become
independent learners and not reliable on others for information.



Helps them to know how to research and find information quicker.



It makes finding information easier when the kids have a process- LOVE the Big6!
Less common responses included use of information at 5 participant responses (08.8%)

and were always paired with at least one other category. For example, one participant stated, “It
will help them learn to solve problems using information they find”. And another participant
response was, “To help all students be more confident users and finders of information. It will
help them be college and career ready and become lifelong learners.”
Two of the responses (03.5%) regarding reasons to include information literacy skills
were classified as “miscellaneous” due to the content not aligning with other categories. These
responses are below:


I would use information literacy skills to research methods that other countries do
certain math skills.

55



My students need to see how to find information in books still. They used to know
how to use an index but don't seem to know how to do that anymore. They all want to
use the internet all the time.

Finally, one participant response included information that categorized it as helping
students become independent learners. The response was “I would include information literacy
skills because it will enable them to become independent learners and not reliable on others for
information.”

56

Table 10
Open-Ended Response Summary: For what reason(s) would you include information literacy
skills when teaching middle school students?
Reason Categories

Number of Responses

Percent of Responses*

Understand the research process

12

21.1%

Build skills for high school and college

10

17.5%

Find information

9

15.8%

Use information

5

08.8%

Completion of projects

4

07.0%

Develop problem solving skills

4

07.0%

Develop lifelong learners

4

07.0%

Build 21st Century skills

3

05.3%

Build skills for future careers

3

05.3%

Miscellaneous (Build future research skills
for math resources; Using non-digital
resources)

2

03.5%

Become independent learners

1

01.8%

Total Responses**

57

Sample Responses:


For students to better understand the research process and how to use information more effectively.



Students need to have these skills to complete assignments for High School & College. Well completed
research projects will have all these things included



Information literacy skills help students become lifelong users of information.



To teach students how to be more literate in a technological society and help become ready for college
and careers in the future.



Kids can learn how to find information if they are taught information literacy skills- maybe they will do
better in college?!



It makes finding information easier when the kids have a process- LOVE the Big6!

Note. * Sorted highest to lowest percentage; **Total by number of responses per participant: Single response/reason category =
11; two reason categories = 15; three reason categories = 2; four reason categories = 0; five reason categories = 2.

Reasons to Not Include Information Literacy Skills
Nearly 100% (96.7%) of the participants, or 29 of the 30 provided a written response
when asked, “For what reasons would you not include information literacy skills when teaching
middle school students?” Of those 15 (51.7%) wrote a response that could be grouped into one

57

category, while responses from 14 (48.3%) participants represented two different categories,
which resulted in a total of 43 responses that represent nine categories (see Table 11). A
complete list of participant responses with associated categories is found in Appendix H and a
discussion of key findings is below.
The category most frequently reported as “reasons to not include information literacy
skills when teaching middle school students,” was not enough time, as noted by 13 participant
responses, which represented almost one-third (30.2%) of the responses. This category is
reflected by the following responses:


Not enough time since I only have kids for 9 weeks.



Lack of time and lack of technology resources.



Not enough time to teach all the parts of research- they should know it by the time
they are in 7th grade.



Time- I always assume students know how to do things so I don't plan enough
time to teach the skills.

The second “reason to not include” represented by 10 or 23.3% of the responses was
actually that there is no reason to not include information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students. Seven of the 10 simply recorded, “No reason” or “None.” Other examples
include: “There are really no good reasons I can think of, unless we don't have time to cover
information literacy skills amongst the many other standards we have.” and “None, other than
many students already seem to have the skills necessary to navigate the resources.”
The third item that participants reported as a “reason to not include” information literacy
skills was “students should already have the skills,” as indicated by 10 survey participants, which

58

represents 23.3% of the overall responses. Examples of survey feedback regarding “students
should already have the skills” include:


They should already know how to complete a research project by 7th grade and
the literacy teachers do a lot of the instruction by the time we research
mathematicians.



Not enough time to always get it done in a semester (my class only meets for a
semester). Plus, the kids should know how to find information on the internet so I
shouldn't have to teach that all the time.

Less frequent categories included 4 participants who reported lack of technology as a
“reason to not include information literacy skills…” as seen in their responses: “Sometimes can't
get technology (mobile labs),” “Lack of time and lack of technology resources,” “Lack of
technology in my classroom,” and “If I wanted to use technology there aren't always computers
available.” And, two participants indicated that the literacy teachers should teach information
literacy skills. For example, one survey participant stated: “Students should already know how
to research since they do it in literacy and they are in 7th grade.”
Finally, 9.3% of the survey responses represent four unique reasons. The four responses
include: “Never learned how to teach the skills. Need more help in teaching topics and skills to
kids,” “I really don't always want to bug the librarian to get books together- I'd rather have
computers or laptops,” “The Common Core Standards do not suggest or recommend that we do
information literacy skills in math,” and “I didn't think I had to teach them where to look.”
The key concerns or “reasons to not include information literacy skills when teaching
middle school students,” as reported by participants, were “not enough time,” “students should
already have the skills,” “lack of technology” and “skills should be taught by the literacy

59

teachers.” However, over 20% of the responses indicated there were no “reasons to not include”
regarding information literacy skills when teaching middle school students.
Table 11
Open-Ended Response Summary: For what reason(s) would you not include information literacy
skills when teaching middle school students?
Reason Categories

Number of Responses

Percent of Responses*

Not enough time

13

30.2%

None/No reason

10

23.3%

Students should already have the skills

10

23.3%

Lack of technology

4

09.3%

Should be taught by literacy teachers

2

04.7%

Didn’t learn how to teach research skills

1

02.3%

Don’t want to inconvenience the librarian

1

02.3%

Not in the standards

1

02.3%

Not my responsibility

1

02.3%

Total Responses**

45

Sample Responses:


Never learned how to teach the skills. Need more help in teaching topics and skills to kids.



Lack of technology in my classroom- I really don't always want to bug the librarian to get books togetherI'd rather have computers or laptops



Time is often a factor- I think they should know many of the skills beforehand.



The Common Core Standards do not suggest or recommend that we do information literacy skills in math.
The required skills to be taught in math is so abundant that there is not time to teach all that we have to
teach and also do research.



No time to teach how to do specific things. I forget they don't know everything about the Internet and
research.



I thought students knew how to research and fidn information on the web- I didn't think I had to teach
them where to look.

Note. * Sorted highest to lowest percentage; **Total by number of responses per participant: Single response/category = 15;
two categories = 14; no response = 1.

60

Additional Comments Regarding Information Literacy Skill Instruction
The response rate for this final open-ended item, “Please add any additional comments
you would like to share regarding information literacy skill instruction for your middle school
students,” was 93.3% representing 28 out of 30 participants. Of those responses 16 participants
(53.3%) wrote a response that could be grouped into one category, while responses from 7
(23.3%) participants represented two different categories, and five participants (16.7%) provided
responses, which were grouped into 3 categories. This resulted in a total of 45 responses that
represent fifteen categories (see Table 12). A complete list of participant responses with
associated categories is found in Appendix I, and a discussion of key findings is below.
The most frequently reported response to the open-ended question was categorized as
“Teachers should share responsibility of information literacy skill instruction,” represented by 7
responses (15.5%) from participants. Example shared responsibility comments included:


If all teachers use the same process for research projects the students would be
better equipped to finish projects.



I like the idea of every subject area sharing the duty of teaching information
literacy since it often falls on the librarian and/or the literacy teachers.



I'm glad everyone has a shared literacy responsibility for research- instead of just
literacy handling a research paper.

The second most frequently reported category of responses was “Skills are necessary” as
shown by six (13.3%) survey responses. Examples included: “These skills are a must for
students!” and “Teaching research to middle school students is a difficult and time consuming
process, but it is worth the investment because students are developing skills that can potentially
last a lifetime.”

61

Three categories garnered five responses each. The first category was “Need help/PD to
teach information literacy,” demonstrated in statements such as:


I need help teaching the kids because they had so many questions I can't answer.



I think professional development should be provided to non-literacy teachersmaybe even by the literacy teachers so everyone teaches the same process.

The second category with 5 responses was actually “None, NA, or Nothing.” And the
third category was “All teachers should use same process for information literacy skills/Big 6.”
Some additional categories, but less popular were, “Desire to integrate Information
literacy into teaching,” “No time to teach all skills,” “Not my responsibility,” “Should be taught
by literacy teachers and/or librarian,” “Students should already have the skills,” and “Students
have inadequate information literacy skills.” The final four categories were unique and each
represented by one response: “Already teach information literacy skills,” “Seems to be
administrative decision,” “Should teach in Elementary grades,” and “TESS driven to try new
practices using technology.”
In summary, most survey respondents to the open-ended question “Please add any
additional comments you would like to share regarding information literacy skill instruction for
your middle school students” concluded the survey with a positive comment regarding
information literacy skill instruction. Other respondents provided a recommendation to include
professional development opportunities to assist teachers with information literacy skill
instruction while a few respondents did not add an additional comment. A few responses
concluded that students should already have the skills and that there wasn’t enough time to teach
all skills, which were similar responses to the other open-ended questions.

62

Table 12
Open-Ended Response Summary: Please add any additional comments you would like to share
regarding information literacy skill instruction for your middle school students.
Reason Categories

Number of Responses Percent of Responses*

Teachers should share responsibility of information
literacy skill instruction

7

15.5%

Skills are necessary

6

13.3%

Need help/PD to teach information literacy

5

11.1%

None/NA/Nothing

5

11.1%

All teachers should use same process for information
literacy skills/Big 6

5

11.1%

Desire to integrate Information literacy into teaching

3

06.6%

No time to teach all skills

2

04.4%

Not my responsibility

2

04.4%

Should be taught by literacy teachers and/or librarian

2

04.4%

Students should already have the skills

2

04.4%

Students have inadequate information literacy skills

2

04.4%

Already teach information literacy skills

1

02.2%

Seems to be administrative decision

1

02.2%

Should teach in Elementary grades

1

02.2%

TESS driven to try new practices using technology

1

02.2%

Total Responses**

45

Sample Responses:






If all teachers use the same process for research projects the students would be better equipped to finish
projects.
Never thought that anyone should have to do research projects except literacy- I need help teaching the
kids because they had so many questions I can't answer.
Teaching research to middle school students is a difficult and time consuming process, but it is worth the
investment because students are developing skills that can potentially last a lifetime.
Students learn how to find things on the world wide web but it doesn't make them good digital citizens.
They need a lot of information in locating appropriate information that is valid. And, teachers need to
know how to use the computer resources to help the students rather than turning them loose.
I like the Big6 model- breaks research down into a manageable process- kind of reminds me of the
scientific method.

Note. * Sorted highest to lowest percentage; **Total by number of responses per participant: Single response/reason category =
16; two reason categories = 7; three reason categories = 5; no response = 2.

63

Results Summary
This research examined the self-reported past and projected use of and attitudes towards
information literacy skill instruction of 30 middle school teachers. The teacher participants
completed the Information Literacy Skill Instruction for Middle School Teacher intervention and
the Pre- and Post-Intervention Teacher Surveys. Below is a summary of the key survey findings
as associated with the Research Questions.
The purpose of Research Question 1 was to examine, “In what ways, if any, does
knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence projected teaching practices of
participants?” Two sub-questions were used to address Question 1:
1. a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
1. b What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects as
compared to projected provision for future research projects?
The results revealed a significant positive shift in participants’ projected teaching practices after
completing the instructional intervention. Specifically, the responses on the Pre-Intervention
Teacher Survey were more frequently reported as Never and Occasionally, regarding their
frequency of requiring information literacy skill tasks to be completed by middle school students
and including information literacy skill instruction. Following the intervention, the participants
Post-Teacher Intervention Survey responses were significantly different in that the majority of
the participants responded they would Frequently require most of the information literacy skill
tasks and information literacy skill instruction in future research projects.
Research Question 2 focused on, “What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes
toward information literacy skill instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill

64

Intervention for Middle School Teachers?” Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey responses were
fairly widespread on subject area responsibilities of teaching information literacy skills.
However, all participants believed that literacy teachers should teach the skills, whereas varying
levels of agreement were seen for other subject areas, - with the least agreement seen for
mathematics and physical education. Participant responses to the remaining items indicated that
there was a high level of agreement that students should have computer skills and should be able
to cite sources to avoid plagiarism; however, prior to the intervention, many participants did not
agree that teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills, because the librarian
should mainly teach the skills.
Post intervention responses, showed a shift in the content area responsibilities for
teaching information literacy skills. The highest transitions were in the areas of mathematics, art
and music classes. Results for the remaining items had varied levels of increases, the greatest
increase was in the belief that teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills and
the lowest increase in agreement was in the areas of students knowing how to use computers and
knowing how to cite sources to avoid plagiarism.
Lastly, Research Question 3, addressed two areas: “After completion of the instructional
intervention, what do participants report as reasons for including and for not including
information literacy skills when teaching middle school students?” The first area, which
solicited open-ended responses from participants for what they believed were reasons to include
information literacy skill instruction when teaching middle school students, yielded mainly
positive responses. For instance, responses included the belief that students need to understand
the research process; information literacy skill instruction will help build skills for high school
and college; and the skills will assist students with finding information. The second area

65

examined middle school teachers’ reasons to not include information literacy skill instruction.
Two of the most frequent categories of responses from participants included a lack of time and
the belief that students should already possess the skills. In addition, almost 1/3 of survey
participants indicated that there was no reason to not include information literacy skill
instruction.
Concluding data analysis occurred when participants were asked to add any additional
comments regarding information literacy skill instruction. The most frequent responses reflected
participant attitudes that all teachers should share the responsibility of teaching information
literacy skills and the necessity of information literacy skills for middle school students. Positive
comments also were made toward teachers using the same information literacy skill process,
with some suggesting the Big6 and mentioning professional development.
Final discussion of the research questions and survey results will commence in Chapter 5.
As will implications of current practices and recommendations of future studies regarding
information literacy skill instruction for middle school teachers.

66

Chapter 5
Discussion
The purpose of this research study was to examine the practices and attitudes of middle
school teachers toward information literacy skill instruction. The introduction of the Common
Core standards and a shift in traditional instruction methods from that of teacher-centered to
students-centered has encouraged the need for information literacy skill instruction. “Many
school teachers are not information literate themselves, and even when curricular mandates are in
place, information literacy instruction is typically not tested, and so is given short shrift” (Julien,
2016, p. 129). Requiring students to conduct research is challenging, especially when the
students have not been instructed in effective information literacy strategies supported with
technology (Colwell et al., 2013).
Thirty middle school teachers participated in the study, which began with completion of a
pre-intervention teacher survey followed by a targeted intervention to provide information
literacy skill instruction strategies and information, then culminated with a post-intervention
teacher survey. The intervention was designed based on a needs assessment, and was proven
effective through formative evaluation measures.
The subsequent pre- and post-survey responses provided data to examine three research
questions after participants completed the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers:
1. In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?

67

a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects
as compared to projected provision for future research projects?
2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle
School Teachers?
3. After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
The results revealed that the instructional intervention was effective in shifting
participants proposed teaching practices for future research projects. The findings also showed
significant, however modest changes in teacher attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction, in particular regarding responsibility for teaching the skills and in what subject areas
students should receive the instruction. The participant open-ended responses suggest a belief
that information literacy skills are important for student academic success as well as success in
future careers. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss findings and recommendations as they
relate to the research questions and relevant literature. Also presented are implications,
limitations, areas of future research, and an overall summary.

68

Research Question 1
In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
1. a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?
1. b What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects as
compared to projected provision for future research projects?
Research Question 1 was developed to determine in what ways, if any, did knowledge of
information literacy skills instruction influence projected teaching practices of participants. The
underlying premise was participants would gain new knowledge from completing the
Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers intervention, which might in
turn influence changed teaching. Two sub-questions were used to examine the influence of the
intervention on projected student engagement in information literacy tasks and projected
inclusion of information literacy skills instruction.
Significant and positive differences were seen between pre- and post-survey responses
regarding student tasks and information literacy skills instruction. Notable changes that suggest
transformational shifts in projected teaching practices were seen with regard to the following
areas: 1) evaluating the information solving process; 2) defining the problem; 3) identifying
appropriate resources; and 4) evaluating the product or performance. In contrast, the lowest level
of change was requiring students to use print resources. A discussion of each area is presented
below.
Evaluating the Information Solving Process
There was a dramatic pre- (M = 1.20) to post (M = 2.47) increase in the number of
participants who indicated they plan to include specific instruction and/or strategies for students
69

to, “Evaluate the information solving process” when they complete future research projects.
This change is promising as it not only supports and aligns with Common Core and curriculum
standards that require students to evaluate processes and products, but also helps students master
self-reflection and deepen independent learning (Lenz, Wells, & Kingston, 2015; TerrazasArellanes, Knox, Strycker, & Walden, 2016).
Defining the problem
Notable Pre- to Post-changes were also observed regarding the information literacy task
of defining the problem. For example, the number of participants who indicated they would
frequently teach students how to define the research problem increased from 7 to 26 on the PostSurvey. Similarly, the number who reported they would frequently require students to complete
this task during future research projects increased from 15 to 25; suggesting a shift in recognition
of this important information literacy component. Support for use of this strategy is seen in a
study involving 54 middle school students who used the process of brainstorming and defining
the problem prior to beginning a research project (Herring, 2006). Results revealed that through
this preparation students gained a better understanding of the research process (Herring, 2006).
A subsequent study involving 21 middle school students resulted in similar positive findings
(Herring, 2009). However, when Donham and Remke (2016) conducted a study involving 50
teachers, results showed that the participants infrequently allowed their students to explore a
topic to determine what is unknown, thus reinforcing the need for teacher professional
development in this area.
Identifying appropriate resources
The area of identifying and citing appropriate resources encompasses using online
databases and keyword/Boolean search strategies, as well as paraphrasing and citation

70

techniques. There was a substantial pre- (M = 1.57) to post (M = 2.67) increase in the number of
participants who indicated they plan to require students to “… identify the best resource(s) to
use…” when completing future research projects. The participants also demonstrated a similar
increase (pre- M = 1.67; post M = 2.83) when indicating they plan to prepare students for future
research projects by teaching them how to “Identify the most appropriate and accurate
resources.” According to Martinez, McGrath, and Foster (2016), it is important for students to
identify their own relevant sources, as the process fosters student demonstration of independent
learning and deeper learning competency.
Using online databases and keyword/Boolean search strategies. Another significant
shift in projected student tasks and instruction occurred in the areas of “Use online databases as
information sources,” and “keyword and Boolean logic.” Although over half of the participants
reported they “Frequently” required students to use online databases prior to completion of the
intervention, this percent changed to nearly 90% after the intervention was completed. A
corresponding 50% increase was seen in the percent of teachers who reported they would teach
students to use “keyword and Boolean logic” for future research projects. Julien and Barker
(2009) suggest teachers often realize that use of a database does not always mean a user is
proficient in locating appropriate information in an accurate and efficient manner. Being able to
locate digital information independently is considered a scaffold to acquiring lifelong learning
skills necessary to achieve success in college and the work force (U.S. 21st Century Workforce
Commission, 2000).
Paraphrasing and citation techniques. A third significant shift in pre-survey versus
post-survey information literacy skill task requirements was for students to “Use paraphrasing
and citations to avoid plagiarism.” The Pre-Survey showed that nearly 50%, or 14 participants

71

“Never” required students to paraphrase and cite resources, whereas after the intervention, which
included a screencast demonstrating a clear need for this requirement, the number reporting
“Never” decreased to only 2 participants. These outcomes correlate with findings from a
treatment-control study that investigated the effects of direct instruction for synthesis and
paraphrasing on student research papers (Lundstrom, Diekema, Leary, Haderlie, & Holliday,
(2015). The student papers of the treatment group were assessed as higher quality than for those
of the control group (Lundstrom et al., 2015). Lundstrom et al. (2015) stated the “findings
indicate a continued need for teaching synthesis, but also for revising scaffolds, such as the
intervention used in this study…” (p. 74). The skill of paraphrasing continues to be a weak area
in college bound students, which supports the importance of better preparing middle school
students to successfully paraphrase information from multiple resources (Fitzgerald, 2004;
Owen, 2010).
Evaluating the product or performance
The final area for which participants displayed a noteworthy shift was with regard to
teaching students how to “Evaluate the product or performance.” Again, when looking at the
number of participants indicating they would “Never” teach this skill, the Pre-Survey included
18, while the number on the Post-Survey dropped to only 1 participant with a “Never” response.
McMillan and Hearn (2008) propose that student use of self-assessment and evaluation skills can
increase student motivation and achievement. Additionally, Eisenberg et al., (2014) demonstrate
the importance of the information literacy skill of evaluation by showing how this task supports
the following standards: Common Core College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for
Writing (NGA & CCSSO, 2010; Common Core Standards for Mathematical Practice (CCSSI,
2010); Standards for the 21st-century Learner (AASL, 2007), and NETS-S (ISTE, 2007).

72

Lowest Level of Change
The area revealing the lowest level of change was requiring students to use print
resources. The overall Pre-Survey mean score was 2.00, indicating participants “Occasionally”
required students to use print resources. The Post-Survey mean score was 2.27, showing very
little change in projected future practices. These results are consistent with studies suggesting
that teachers and middle school students prefer to use online sources as opposed to print
resources (Colwell et al., 2013; Julien & Barker, 2009). This type of thinking began nearly 20
years ago with the introduction of the Internet, which started a transformation in school library
instruction of information literacy skills (Carey, 1998). Additionally, use of the Internet changed
information searches from “How do I find information in a limited number of resources?” to
“How do I choose information that is most appropriate for my needs from a seemingly unlimited
number of resources?” (Carey, 1998, p. 2). Therefore, the shift from paper to digital resources
needs to be supported with classroom instruction as information literacy skills are required in
many content areas due to standards revisions and the Common Core adoption by 43 states
(Academic Benchmarks, 2015).
Summary and Recommendations
Research Question 1 was focused on examining how knowledge of information literacy
skills instruction influenced projected teaching of information literacy skills and/or requiring
students to complete information literacy tasks. The outcomes revealed significant and positive
changes regarding student tasks and information literacy skills instruction, with key changes
evidenced for: 1) evaluating the information solving process; 2) defining the problem; 3)
identifying appropriate resources; and 4) evaluating the product or performance. The findings
with previous research suggesting that effective professional development can have a positive

73

impact on teaching practices (Penuel, Fishman, Yamaguchi, & Gallagher, 2007; TerrazasArellanes et al., 2016). In a study of 15 middle school teachers, Terrazas-Arellanes et al. (2016)
reported similar findings of effective professional development as were revealed in this study:
In order to teach students effective strategies for proficient navigation of the online
environment, today’s teachers must continually engage in high-quality, research-based
professional development. For teachers, quality professional development can mean the
difference between engaging students in superficial use of technology tools and a deep
transformation of how students and teachers interact to compile information that supports
a deeper understanding of complex issues. For students, having a teacher who has been
well prepared to teach in a digital learning environment can change passive into active
learning. (p. 336)
Recommendations. In an effort to build on the positive outcomes seen in relation to
Research Question 1, the following recommendations are provided. According to Bayer (2014),
professional development must be relevant, explorative, interactive, and demonstrated in both
group and individual settings to be truly effective. Since this study revealed positive changes in
projected teaching practices and attitudes as the result of completing an informative intervention,
a key recommendation is to provide teachers with a similar form of professional development to
initiate change. However, to achieve long-lasting and effective changes, teachers need time and
on-going relevant support to integrate new instructional practices into every day teaching and
learning (Polly & Hannafin, 2010). For example, the professional development should focus on
areas such as specific strategies to teach how to evaluate the information solving process. A
second recommendation is to model how to define a problem to show a specific informational
need. Third, would be to include strategies and hands-on practice demonstrating how to locate

74

appropriate resources specifically online databases and how to use keyword/Boolean search
strategies. In addition, the professional development should offer techniques in paraphrasing and
citing sources to avoid plagiarism. Allowing hands-on practice is a more effective method to
affect teaching practices, therefore, offering training, which utilizes sample research tasks for the
teachers to actively practice the strategies they will be using to teach students will be the most
optimal form of professional development.
Research Question 2
What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy
skill instruction after completion of the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for
Middle School Teachers?

Research Question 2 was developed to determine in what ways, if any, did knowledge of
information literacy skills instruction influence participant attitudes toward information literacy
skills. Again, the underlying premise was participants would gain new knowledge from
completing the Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers intervention,
which may influence the attitudes toward the possession of information literacy skills by
students, the responsibility of teaching information literacy skills to middle school students, and
the technology skills needed for research projects.
Overall, some significant and positive differences were seen in the attitudes toward
information literacy skills, but not as extensive as RQ1, which focused on current versus
projected practices. It is easier to influence practices rather than attitudes since the importance
and expectations of information literacy skills was already high (Neumann, 2016; Snyder, 2016).
Noteworthy shifts in attitudes occurred in the following areas: 1) attitudes regarding student’s
information literacy skills; 2) attitudes regarding who should teach information literacy skills; 3)

75

attitudes regarding skills needed for research projects; and 4) attitudes regarding inclusion of
research projects.
Attitudes Regarding Student’s Information Literacy Skills
Items assessed to identify attitudes regarding the information literacy skills of middle
school students focused on whether students should evaluate and cite resources and whether
students should synthesize information. Participants demonstrated a high level of agreement that
students should have these skills on the pre-intervention survey so little change was seen on the
post-intervention survey.
Students should evaluate and cite resources. Evaluating the validity of resources and
citing sources for plagiarism are necessary skills (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011; Huggins et al.,
2014; Mokhtar & Majid, 2014). The abundance of information has created a critical need for
students to learn how to evaluate resources for bias and how to use cite sources to avoid
plagiarism according to questionnaire results from 47 librarians and 97 teachers in the middle
grades (Asselin, 2005). This is corroborated in a study of over 2,000 middle school and high
school teachers, which proposed “the vast majority of these teachers say a top priority in today’s
classrooms should be teaching students how to judge the quality of online information” (Purcell
et al., 2012, p. 2). For this study, participants showed their attitude of agreement that “students
should know how to evaluate the validity of resources” by a high pre-intervention mean score of
2.77. After completion of the intervention, the mean score rose to 2.97, representing 29 of 30
participants who agreed this is a necessary information literacy skill for middle school students.
A less significant shift was seen for the item that asked participants if they agreed
“Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid plagiarism.” This item had an even
higher pre-intervention mean score of 2.87, while the post-intervention mean score was 2.97.

76

Again, all but 1 participant indicated agreement that students should possess this information
literacy skill. The prevalence of plagiarism is evidenced at various levels of students. For
example, a study of 48 undergraduate students who found that 67% of students surveyed would
intentionally plagiarize the works of others and that 50% of the students engaged in or knew
someone who engaged in Internet plagiarism (Jones, 2011). A survey of 8 high school teachers
concluded that students believe there is anonymity on the Internet so they are likely to plagiarize
without feeling remorse (Walter, 2008). And, Snyder (2016) found that when middle school
students were taught digital citizenship skills, their teachers reported plagiarism decreased.
Looking at research reports, students need training in plagiarism avoidance if they are to become
respectable digital citizens.
Students should synthesize information. Synthesizing information is a difficult
information literacy skill for many students (Lundstrom et al., 2015; Purcell et al., 2012; Thomas
et al., 2011). However, many teachers expect students to be able to perform this task in research
related assignments (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010; Purcell et al., 2012). These findings
were reflected in the current study in that prior to the intervention the majority of participants
(73.33%) agreed that students should possess the skill of synthesizing information. After
participants completed the intervention, an even a larger percentage (90.00%) were in agreement
with the necessity of important student skill.
Attitudes Regarding Who Should Teach Information Literacy Skills
Information literacy skill instruction has been viewed to be the responsibility of librarians
for decades; however, a shift is beginning to develop to a belief that teachers should teach
information literacy skills (Asselin, 2005; Probert, 2009; Snyder, 2016; Williams & Wavell,

77

2007). The results for this study reflected this trend of librarians as well as classroom teachers
being responsible for teaching information literacy skills to middle school students.
Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills. The largest pre- to
post intervention change occurred when asking participants their level of agreement with the
statement, “Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills.” Initially, only about
half (53.33%) of the teachers agreed. After the intervention, nearly 90% (86.67%) agreed. This
outcome varies from other studies that suggest teachers are often reluctant to incorporate
information literacy skill instruction because they believe it is a separate subject from what they
teach (Feng & Ha, 2016; Probert, 2009; Williams & Wavell, 2007; Williamson, McGregor, &
Archibald, 2010).
Librarians rather than teachers should teach information literacy skills. Similar to
the previous pre-intervention outcome, approximately half (53.33%) of the participants
responded that they agreed, “Librarians rather than teachers should teach information literacy
skills.” Once again, a change was seen in this attitude after the intervention in that less than onefourth (23.33%) reported agreement. This positive shift in thinking is consistent with trends in
which teachers assume greater responsibility for teaching student information literacy skills
(Heil, 2005; Troia & Olinghouse, 2013). Typically, librarians have been the sole providers of
information literacy skill instruction (Dempsey, 2003; Varlejs et al., 2014). The inclusion of
research activities into more content areas confirms the need for teachers to incorporate
information literacy skill instruction (Feng & Ha, 2016; Troia & Olinghouse, 2013).
Attitudes regarding computer skills needed for research projects
Computer use for research projects is an expectation in current middle school classrooms
(Alvermann, 2008; Ladbrook & Probert, 2011). Consequently, students and teachers are using

78

computers and other devices to access information and create products to share (Kuhlthau,
Maniotes, & Caspari, 2015; Ladbrook & Probert, 2011). Both students and teachers are expected
to be proficient with the use of computers for educational purposes; therefore there was little
change in mean scores for this area (Cavas, Cavas, Karaoglan, & Kisla, 2009; Foo et al., 2014).
Teachers should have computer skills needed for research projects. Pre- to postintervention responses showed a slight rise in the mean score from 2.67 to 2.83 pertaining to
participant agreement that “teachers should have computer skills needed for research projects.”
Comparable findings were revealed when Ladbrook and Probert (2011) surveyed 24 teachers to
examine attitudes of providing information literacy help and online assistance to students. The
survey responses indicated teachers agreed it would be helpful to assist students with these
digital skills in the future (Ladbrook & Probert, 2011). However, many teachers don’t
necessarily feel comfortable providing the computer skills necessary because their technological
pedagogy is lacking and they believe that students already have the necessary skills for online
research (Hsieh et al., 2014; Hsu et al., 2013).
Students should have computer skills needed for research projects. In contrast to the
moderate participant agreement that teachers should have computer skills needed for research
projects, there was nearly unanimous agreement that students need these same skills. These
findings are not surprising considering the influence and usage of digital devices by today’s
youth. It is common thinking among teachers that middle and secondary students should already
know how to use a computer to search and locate information (Cavas et al., 2009; Hsieh et al.,
2014; Klomsri & Tedre, 2016). However, just because a student possesses information and
computer technology skills does not make them information skill literate in locating relevant
resources (Klomsri & Tedre, 2016).

79

Attitudes Regarding Inclusion of Research Projects
In general, most participants agreed that middle school students should complete several
research projects each year, with the number increasing from 19 to 26 after the intervention.
Support and justification for this thinking may be found in national curriculum standards, that
since 1994, “all focus on lifelong learning, the ability to think critically, and the use of new and
existing information for problem solving” (Eisenberg, Lowe, & Spitzer, 2004, pp. 73). Although
the current standards for core subject areas, e.g., mathematics, English language arts, history,
physical education, health, science, and arts include information literacy tasks, some areas such
as English language arts and science incorporate the information literacy tasks more thoroughly
(Lundstrom et al., 2015).
Including research projects in core subject areas. Participants were asked to indicate
the level of agreement for students completing research projects in four core subject areas:
literacy, mathematics, science, and social studies. The outcomes were mixed, with literacy
receiving the highest level of agreement and mathematics the lowest. A discussion of the
findings for the four areas is below.
Literacy. Unanimous agreement was seen in the area of “students should complete
research projects in literacy classes” in that 100% of the participants responded, “Agree” on
both the pre-survey and the post-survey. Traditionally, literacy class or English Language Arts
class has been the subject area for research papers to be completed (Troia & Olinghouse, 2013).
Thus, the findings from this study verify participant awareness of students completing research
projects in literacy classes.
Mathematics. In contrast to literacy, participants demonstrated a low level of agreement
that “Students should complete research projects in mathematics classes,” with little change

80

between pre- (7 agree) to post-intervention (10 agree) data. Traditionally, research projects have
been completed in literacy classes rather than mathematics classes. However, with the
introduction of common core, current mathematics standards include elements of information
literacy instruction and problem solving (CCSSI, 2010), yet teachers are often reluctant to
embrace the change of including research projects and information literacy skill instruction for
mathematics classes (Nilsen, 2012).
Science. The participants were more inclined to agree that research projects should be
completed in science class, as seen in the relatively high mean scores (pre = 2.57; post = 2.83).
Middle school science is a core area with many opportunities for conducting investigations, and
finding information on various scientific topics and careers based on Arkansas state standards
and national standards (ADE, 2005; NGSS, 2013). Therefore, conducting research projects in
science class is an expectation for many current middle school teachers (Colwell et al., 2013;
Hsu et al., 2013; & Lin et al., 2014).
Social Studies. Social studies also had more participants indicate that research projects
should be conducted in this core area than mathematics. The post mean score at 2.77 was not
quite as high as science but overall was large in number and the mean difference was one of the
larger numbers at .34. National social studies standards have included some form of research
project or information solving problem since being adopted in 2013 (NCSS, 2013). According to
studies, social studies can and should offer an authentic learning environment because it will
help students see the point behind completing work such as locating information through inquiry
research projects to learn about various events in history and current government (Cydis, 2015;
Shih, Chuang, & Hwang, 2010).

81

Including research projects in non-core subject areas. Participants were also asked to
indicate the level of agreement for students completing research projects in three non-core
subject areas: art and music, health, and physical education. Moderately positive outcomes were
seen for art and music and health, while responses for physical education were directionally
lower. A discussion of each area follows.
Art and Music. Art and music had one of the largest rises in mean score from pre-survey
2.20 to 2.60 for the post-survey. This change is matched in mean score increase for mathematics
but the overall beginning and end mean score was significantly higher in both events for art and
music. National Education Goals were signed into law in 1994 by President Clinton which then
paved the way to the update of subject area standards to “all focus on lifelong learning, the
ability to think critically, and the use of new and existing information for problem solving”
(Eisenberg et al., 2004, pp. 73). Therefore, current art and music middle school standards at the
state level include research project tasks that involve investigations and comparisons of
information located and synthesized by the students (ADE, 2014a; ADE, 2014b). In addition, in
2016, the Arkansas Department of Education introduced 6-12 Disciplinary Literacy Standards
for Fine Arts, which clarify the role of literacy:
While these standards support literacy (reading and writing), they do not take the place of
content standards in fine arts; instead, they support content acquisition through reading
and provide opportunities to demonstrate learning through writing. Developing literacy
skills becomes a shared responsibility across all content areas as each discipline provides
reading and writing instruction as appropriate for its domain. (ADE, 2016b, p. 2)
Health. Again, beginning in 1994 with the National Education Goals, standards in
noncore subject areas changed. Health education standards were combined with physical

82

education at the state level and included research in standard guidelines in the middle school
levels (ADE, 2011). After completion of the intervention, two-thirds (66.67%) of the
participants in the current study indicated that research should be conducted in health classes,
representing a 20% increase. National standards for health also include research and information
literacy skill tasks (National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, 2015a).
Physical Education. Post-survey data revealed only 11 participants agreed “students
should complete research projects in physical education classes.” This was the lowest level
agreement across all core and non-core content areas. These findings are not surprising as they
are consistent with state physical education standards, which even though they include the word
“research” in the standards, the specific physical education standards do not specifically address
“research” (ADE, 2011).
Summary and Recommendations
The purpose of Research Question 2 was to examine in what ways, if any, knowledge of
information literacy skills instruction influenced attitudes toward the possession of information
literacy skills by students, the responsibility of teaching information literacy skills to middle
school students, and the technology skills needed for research projects. The outcomes revealed
significant and positive changes evidenced for 1) increased teacher belief in the importance of
students being able to evaluate resources for validity and to cite sources to avoid plagiarism; 2) a
shift in teacher attitudes regarding who should teach information literacy skills, which shifted
from the librarian being the sole source to classroom teachers sharing this responsibility; and 3) a
positive change in teacher attitudes regarding the courses in which students should complete a
research project, with the greatest shifts seen for art and music and mathematics classes.

83

However, agreement for including research projects in mathematics only increased from
“disagree” to slightly more than “neutral.”
Recommendations. In an effort to build on the positive shifts in attitude, as reflected in
Research Question 2 outcomes, the following recommendations are provided. Again,
professional development would be the key to improving teacher attitudes toward incorporating
information literacy skill instruction. Particularly, subject area specific professional
development that engages teachers with an actual research project using the Big6 model, which
could be incorporated into each subject area’s classroom. By providing content specific, handson professional development, teachers will be more apt to support the topic being introduced.
Based on this research, information literacy skills were believed to be necessary, but the actual
instruction of the skills was where the main breakdown occurred. Having middle school teachers
locate valid resources for research topics in their own content areas would allow them to
discover the process of locating, evaluating and using resources following the Big6 model.
Teachers who are familiar with concepts and ideas from their subject area will better realize the
information overload experienced by their students. Facilitated experiences such as these should
give the teachers an idea of how to sift through resources to determine validity. In addition,
guiding teachers through the appropriate process of citing resources will better prepare them to
teach students these important skills. This form of professional development will encourage
teachers to share the responsibility of information literacy skill instruction and will also
encourage the inclusion of research projects in various subject areas rather than specifically in
literacy classes only. Such professional learning would also supply teachers with a common
language with which to discuss and teach the research process across the curriculum.

84

Research Question 3
After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?

Research Question 3 was developed to determine reasons current middle school teachers
include and do not include information literacy skills in instruction. Again, the underlying
premise was for participants to gain new knowledge from the intervention, which would increase
participant belief that information literacy skills are necessary in instructional practices. A
variety of reasons to include and not include information literacy skills into instruction were
reported. The majority of participants responded to the open-ended questions with at least one
reason to include and one reason not to include the skills. The most common responses for
reasons to include information literacy skill instruction represented two primary categories: 1)
builds current student research skills; and 2) builds skills for the future. Whereas, the two key
reasons for not including information literacy skill instruction were: 1) lack of time, and 2) belief
students already had these skills. Discussion of these findings is below.
Reasons to Include Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Responses indicate that the majority of participants believe the most important reasons to
include information literacy skills into instruction were to build current student research skills
such as: understanding the research process, finding information, using information and
completing research projects. The participants also reported it was important to include
information literacy skill instruction as a way to help prepare students for the future by building
problem-solving and lifelong learner skills as well as helping students become high school,
college, and career ready.

85

Builds current student research skills. Middle school curriculum exposes students to
the inquiry process early in elementary schools due to the inclusion of the Common Core
standards into current curriculum (NGA & CCSSO, 2010). Entering middle school, students are
expected to possess basic research and technology skills, but many lack proficiency in key areas
of the research process and/or technological skills to support completion of research projects
(Bulger et al., 2014; Yeh et al., 2014). Therefore, as seen in participant responses, it is important
for middle school teachers of core and non-core subjects to integrate information literacy skills
into instruction to help students build necessary research skills.
Understand the research process. Almost half of the participants responded that
understanding the research process was a reason to include information literacy skills into
instruction. This aligns with studies that indicate information literacy skill instruction will assist
students with understanding the research process, especially when using a set method or model
(Eisenberg et al., 2014; Hsieh et al., 2014; Mokhtar et al., 2009).
Find information. A total of nine responses indicated that finding information was a
reason to include information literacy skills into instruction. Inquiry based instruction is on the
rise in middle school classrooms, especially in the areas of math and science, which encourages
students to locate information in order to solve a problem or to address a specific need (Kuhlthau
et al., 2015; Lai & Jen, 2015). Therefore, the outcomes from this study align with research
suggesting that finding relevant and current information is a need for middle school students
(Purcell et al., 2012).
Use information. Using information was not as popular of a response as a reason to
include information literacy skills, but it was still mentioned in five of the open responses. Use
of information includes the concept of synthesizing and as mentioned in RQ2, synthesizing is a

86

difficult task for many students to complete without proper instruction and therefore should be
included (Lundstrom et al., 2015; Purcell et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2011).
Completion of projects. A final noteworthy response, which will help students build
current research skills, was mentioned in four responses as the completion of projects. Middle
school students have an abundance of information at their fingertips and are increasingly being
required to complete research projects in more than one subject area; thus providing
opportunities to demonstrate information literacy skill proficiency (Colwell et al., 2013; Lin et
al., 2014; NGSS, 2013).
Prepare students for the future. In addition to building current research skills,
responses from this study mentioned that information literacy skills should be included because
they also help prepare students for the future. Future skills include problem solving skills,
helping students become lifelong learners, helping students become high school and college
ready and eventually leading to helping students become career ready for the 21st century
workforce.
Problem solving skills. Today’s classrooms are building on 21st century ideas that
student learning should be based on student discovery and inquiry rather than rote memorization
(Cash, 2017; Geisinger, 2016). This includes creating students who are capable of using critical
thinking skills such as problem solving to collaborate and demonstrate learning rather than
simply memorizing facts (Cash, 2017; Kuhlthau et al., 2015). In four of the open responses
problem-solving skills was mentioned as a reason to include information literacy skills in
instruction of middle school students. According to Lin et al. (2014) the Big6 Model has been
found to instill problem-solving skills in students, which are beneficial in all aspects of learning.
Additionally, experts identify use of the Big6 Model to result in students being better able to

87

communicate effectively and solve information problems more efficiently (Eisenberg et al.,
2014). Thus, the findings from this study and others lend credence to using the Big6 Model as
the method to incorporate information literacy skills into middle school teacher’s instructional
practices.
Lifelong learners. Four participant responses indicated that lifelong learning was a
reason to include information literacy skills into the instruction of middle school students. This
coincides with research by Feng and Ha (2016) who propose that an additional benefit of
developing problem solving skills is that lifelong learning skills of finding information to solve a
problem are established. Chang (2012) identified information literacy as the critical ability to
solve problems and to effectively communicate and interact with others. Information literacy
can help individuals to become lifelong learners who identify acquiring knowledge and
information as a fun experience, which motivates them to continue learning (Chang, 2012; Feng
& Ha, 2016).
High school and college ready. The second highest area of reasons to include
information literacy skills into instruction was to build skills so that students are high school and
college ready. A total of 10 responses (17.5%) indicated that this is a reason to include the skills
in instruction. Data from 103 graduating seniors indicated 81% of the students were not
information literate and would struggle when they move from a semi-structured high school
environment with limited amounts of information to a more unstructured higher education setting
with unlimited information (Smith, Given, Julien, Ouellette, & DeLong, 2013). Including
information literacy skill instruction in elementary and middle grades will better ensure the
ability of high school students to move on to college with the necessary research skills (Donham
& Rehmke, 2016; Gross & Latham, 2012). Feng and Ha (2016) suggest to be college ready,

88

students should be critical evaluators of information who are able to apply information literacy
skill tools to effectively search and use a variety of types of information. Teaching students how
to apply information literacy skills to design informational research projects encourages them to
transform information resources and utilize teamwork to complete challenging higher level tasks
(Murphy, Shelley, White, & Baumann, 2011; Weidert, Wendorf, Gurung, & Filz, 2012).
Career ready. Three participant responses indicated that building skills for future careers
was a reason to include information literacy skills when teaching middle school students. When
Anderson-Story et al. (2014) asked a group of employers what skills employees should have for
using digital resources, the employers wanted “new hires who: 1) know reliable reference
sources; 2) do not rely on simply search engine inquiry that stops at the first page of a website; 3)
are able to use published evidence to make and support claims, and 4) make a solid case for
actions” (p. 4). Results showed that “employers want employees who are confident, cautious,
careful, accurate and highly reliable communicators using multimedia” (Anderson-Story et al.,
2014, p. 4). These are similar to the research expectations for middle school students as
expressed by the participants from this study. Likewise, responses from Head’s (2012) research
identified that employers prefer employees who are able to incorporate the speed of technology
with the communication skills necessary for face-to-face interaction. Employers want workers
who have the “ability to 1) systematically evaluate research sources; 2) critically read and
analyze research sources; 3) synthesize large volumes of content and extract quality information;
and 4) implement an iterative research strategy by framing questions” (Head, 2012, p. 20).
Reasons to Not Include Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Although student benefits were mentioned during the reasons to include information
literacy skills into instruction, the 30 participants in this research study provided 43 responses for

89

reasons to not include information literacy skills into instruction, with 10 of the responses being
“no reason” or “none.” Of the remaining 33 comments, the majority fell into two categories,
lack of time and a belief that students should already possess the skills.
Lack of time. The majority of participant responses for reasons to not include
information literacy were a lack of time. This response represented almost one-third (30.2%) of
the reasons to not include. Williams and Wavell (2007) conclude that middle school teachers
view information literacy skills as separate from the curriculum therefore, this would make
teachers view the instructions as extra and therefore, not able to fit into the instructional time
allotted.
Belief that students already possess information literacy skills. Several participant
responses indicated that middle school students already possess information literacy skills so
they did not need to be included in instruction. Recent research suggests that there is a
misconception of what many are calling today’s student’s - digital natives - in that although they
are experienced with multiple forms of technology, students are not automatically information
literate (Forte, 2015; Julien, 2016).
Additional Comments on Information Literacy Skill Instruction
Over 90% of study participants added at least one final comment regarding information
literacy skill instruction. Three significant categories were seen in the responses. The first
category was the belief that teachers should share responsibility of teaching information literacy
skills. A second was that students need information literacy skills, and a third category was that
teachers need help or professional development to teach information literacy skills.
Teachers should share responsibility of teaching information literacy skills. With the
shift from traditional teacher-centered classrooms and especially the introduction of Common

90

Core, a trend occurred to incorporate literacy into various content areas besides specifically
literacy (ADE, 2016a; Hsu et al., 2013). As an example, Arkansas, the location of study, has
adopted a set of disciplinary literacy standards for grades 6-12 in virtually every subject area
(ADE, 2016a, 2016b). This may explain why the most common “additional comment” was that
middle school teachers should share the responsibility of teaching information literacy skills
rather than leaving it strictly for the literacy classes.
Students need information literacy skills. The second most identified final comment
was that students need information literacy skills and was indicated by 6 (13.3%) of the
responses. Although information literacy skills are sometimes considered soft skills because
they aren’t directly assessed on standardized tests, the skills are necessary to help assist students
become college and career ready for the future (Julien, 2016; Snyder, 2016). As mentioned in
reasons to include information literacy skills into instruction, information literacy skills build
critical thinking skills to help create lifelong learners and problem solvers who are ready for
college (Feng & Ha, 2016). A requirement for information literacy skill tasks is essential to
educating students in being effective finders and users of information, which is considered as
critical to become lifelong learners who are more college and career ready (Kuhlthau et al.,
2015).
Teachers need help/PD to teach information literacy skills. Finally, the third most
often reported final comments (5 responses) indicated a need for additional training or
professional development with five also mentioning the need for using a shared process such as
the Big6. A national survey on teaching writing to middle school students suggests that the
middle school students learn best when vocabulary is consistent and instructional processes are
the same (Graham, Capizzi, Harris, Hebert, & Morphy, 2014). However, a lack of knowledge of

91

information literacy skill instruction seems to be the norm for current practicing teachers (Julien,
2016). Therefore, relevant professional development that provides essential instruction to
demonstrate a structured research process to be used with students can be beneficial (Thomas et
al., 2011). Consequently, because the Big6 model can be incorporated into any subject area, it is
considered a viable structured research method to be used to instruct middle school teachers in
how to teach information literacy skills to middle school students (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 2011;
Lin et al., 2014).
Professional development poses challenges for teachers to learn to teach effective
information literacy and research skills, especially when using technology, particularly if the
teachers do not view the professional development as relevant to their teaching practices
(Lawless & Pellegrino, 2007; Martinez et al., 2016). Therefore, to impact teacher practice with
information literacy instructional strategies, current research implies that teachers must
experience the new strategies from both instructor and learner perspectives (Terrazas-Arellanes
et al., 2016). In this way, participants who complete the professional development gain
knowledge and confidence with both the content and the technology in their classrooms.
Summary and Recommendations
The purpose of Research Question 3 was to identify specific reasons to include and
reasons to not include information literacy skills into instructional practices of middle school
teachers. The most popular reasons to include the skills was to benefit students by building
current skills such as students understanding the research process, finding and using information,
and completing projects. Also, preparing students for the future by improving problem solving
skills and assisting the students to be lifelong learners. Additionally, participants identified

92

including information literacy skills, as better preparing students for high school, college, and
being career ready for the future.
Reasons to not include information literacy skills included a lack of time to teach the
skills and a belief that students are already information literate and able to locate and access
information for research projects. Overall additional comments suggested that participant
attitudes after the intervention were that teachers should share the responsibility of teaching
information literacy and agreement that students need information literacy skills. However,
teachers also indicated they need training in how to teach the skills and were aware that a defined
method such as the Big6 would be beneficial when striving to achieve shared responsibility.
Recommendations. With the shift from a teacher-centered classroom to studentcentered, middle school teachers may not have the information literacy skill background
knowledge to know what or how to teach the skills necessary to complete research. Hence, the
most evident recommendation based on this research is a need for professional development to
assist middle school teachers to incorporate information literacy skills into instruction using the
Big6 or similar model. The professional development would need to be structured so teachers
could experience the information from both a learner’s and a teacher’s perspective; and should
be hands-on and subject specific for each teacher to see relevance for their own classroom.
Implications
For this study, implications will be discussed in three areas: instructional design for
intervention, professional development for current teachers, and training for future educators.
Although research projects are required, the pre-survey results showed few teachers reporting
they required students to complete information literacy skill tasks or that they included
instruction of information literacy skills. After the intervention, the participant’s attitudes

93

indicated that information literacy skill instruction would occur with greater frequency in future
teaching practices.
Instructional Design for Intervention
If middle school classrooms continue the trend of inquiry-based learning, which require
information literacy skills in virtually every subject area, current instructional practices will need
to change in middle schools. This research study suggests that offering teachers an online
intervention that includes differentiated methods of delivery, such as information literacy
vocabulary and authentic research examples, could be a technique that is able to shift attitudes
and impact future practice. The intervention in the current study was developed through a
research-based MRKK (2010) design model, which included formative evaluation processes
revealing effective outcomes. Specifically, results reflected positive shifts in teacher attitudes,
which potentially may affect instructional practices.
Professional Development for Current Teachers
Professional development is the norm for the incorporation of new instructional strategies
into current teachers’ practices (Gulamhussein, 2013; Yoon, Duncan, Lee, Scarloss, & Shapley,
2007). Although one-time workshops are the most prevalent model for delivering professional
development, research has shown that the majority of the workshops do not change teacher
practice nor increase student achievement (Yoon et al., 2007). Therefore, this study offered a
form of professional development in a self-paced, online environment which allowed for
flexibility and convenience for the participants to learn at one’s own pace and allowed for visual,
auditory, and textual information to be incorporated into the instruction. According to Koehler
and Mishra (2005), teachers should be taught technology in the format where the technology is
used to build content matter and the pedagogy style of the teacher, in other words,

94

“Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge” (TPACK). When teachers implement a
TPACK approach, the focus shifts from techno-centric to content-centric instruction and students
emerge with a deeper level of meaningful learning. Therefore, in this study, professional
development, in the form of an instructional intervention, served to instruct the participants using
an integrated approach to the instruction. Instruction in the intervention included pedagogical
strategies to use with middle school students (6th and 7th grades), content area strategies, and
technological strategies for including research skill instruction with middle school students.
Training for Future Educators
Professional development for current practicing teachers has been identified as a
necessity to ensure that teachers include information literacy skills into instruction. To avoid
future gaps in information literacy skill instruction, this study could further imply that including
information literacy skill instruction into future educators’ training would be beneficial for
instructional practices when they do enter the classroom. This would diminish the need for
potential professional development in the same area.
Recommendations for Future Research
A variety of future research studies could be conducted to further examine information
literacy skill instruction, intervention design, and educational practice development. Some of the
areas to be studied include 1) current participants, 2) students, and 3) future educators.
Current Participants
One of the unanswered questions, which could be answered by a future study, would be
to follow up with the current participants to determine if projected instructional practices
changed to include more information literacy skill task instruction and requirements. A second
future research study could include interviews to determine what information literacy skill

95

instruction current participants were taught in preparation for teaching. Were they exposed to
technology such as online databases and how to present findings? Some questions to ask could
include: Were they taught how to research information using a structured format? Were they
taught to format a paper? What types of research projects have they been assigning? It would
also be interesting to explore teacher perceptions regarding the types of professional
development that would provide the greatest level of support when integrating information
literacy into their instruction.
In addition, it would be useful to conduct additional analyses on the results from the
current study in order to further explore teacher perceptions and attitudes toward information
literacy based on participant profiles. For example, it would be important to determine the
influence of subject area taught on attitude toward information literacy instruction and inclusion
of technology into research. Furthermore, data could be examined to determine whether the
number of years as a certified teacher had any influence on information literacy skill task
requirements and inclusion of instruction into reported teaching practices. Another question
could be related to the influence of subject area taught and years taught on the number of
research projects students typically complete during a school year.
Students
A future study of information literacy skill instruction using middle school students
would also be of interest. Significant discrepancies may occur if one were to compare the
perceived information literacy skill instruction from the student perspective to that of the teacher.
Comparing what the teachers report to student perceptions on current information literacy skill
tasks and instruction may offer opportunities to provide focused professional development in
areas of needed intervention.

96

Future Educators
A final area for future study would be in the area of future educators. Determining the
degree to which teacher preparation programs include information literacy skill into instructional
practices would provide enlightening information for future mentor teachers when the new
teachers enter the work force. It would be useful to also investigate content area methodology
courses to identify how and to what degree information literacy is incorporated into required
curriculum and student teaching practices, and identify any differences between subject areas.
Conclusion
With the continued inclusion of research projects and information literacy skill tasks
required by today’s middle school standards, middle school teachers have been tasked with
incorporating information literacy skill instruction into their teaching. Informational research
tasks are proven to be helpful in increasing the critical thinking skills of students to help in future
academic endeavors; however, many teachers lack the necessary skills to teach information
literacy. This study examined practices and attitudes of 30 middle school teachers towards
teaching information literacy skills. Participants were teachers from two rural middle schools.
Responses to a pre- and post-survey provided data, which examined three research questions
after participants completed an Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School
Teachers:
1. In what ways, if any, does knowledge of information literacy skills instruction influence
projected teaching practices of participants?
a. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they required students to complete information literacy tasks during past as
compared to projected requirements for future research projects?

97

b. What changes, if any, are seen in participant self-reports regarding the frequency
that they provided information literacy skills instruction for past research projects
as compared to projected provision for future research projects?
2. What changes, if any, are seen in participant attitudes toward information literacy skill
instruction after completion of the intervention?
3. After completion of the instructional intervention, what do participants report as reasons
for including and for not including information literacy skills when teaching middle
school students?
Research Question 1 focused on examining how knowledge of information literacy skills
instruction influenced projected teaching of information literacy skills and/or requiring students
to complete information literacy tasks. Outcomes revealed significant changes regarding student
tasks and information literacy skills instruction, with key changes evidenced for evaluating the
information solving process; defining the problem; identifying appropriate resources; and
evaluating the product or performance.
The purpose of Research Question 2 was to examine in what ways, if any, knowledge of
information literacy skills instruction influenced attitudes toward the possession of information
literacy skills by students, the responsibility of teaching information literacy skills to middle
school students, and the technology skills needed for research projects. The outcomes revealed
significant changes regarding increased teacher belief in the importance of students being able to
evaluate resources for validity and to cite sources to avoid plagiarism. Also evident was a shift
in teacher attitudes regarding who should teach information literacy skills, which shifted from
the librarian being the sole source to classroom teachers sharing this responsibility. A positive
change was seen in teacher attitudes regarding the courses in which students should complete a

98

research project, with the greatest shifts seen for art, music, and mathematics. Ultimately,
participants recognized the value of including information literacy skills in instruction and
requiring specific research tasks for students to increase research skills.
The final question, Research Question 3, asked participants to identify specific reasons to
include and reasons to not include information literacy skills into their instructional practices.
The most popular reasons to include the skills were helping students understand the research
process, helping them find and use information, and to complete research projects. Also,
preparing students for the future by improving problem-solving skills and assisting the students
to be lifelong learners were mentioned as reasons to include information literacy skills.
Additionally, participants identified including information literacy skills, as better preparing
students for high school, college, and being career ready for the future.
Reasons to not include information literacy skills included a lack of time to teach the
skills and a belief that students are already information literate and able to locate and access
information for research projects. Overall, the additional comments were positive. Two notable
categories for participant’s additional open-ended comments were that teachers should share the
responsibility of teaching information literacy and agreement that students need information
literacy skills. However, several participants also indicated a desire for training in how to teach
information literacy skills and were aware that a defined method such as the Big6 would be
beneficial when attempting to achieve a shared responsibility of teaching information literacy
skills.
Since this study revealed positive changes in projected teaching practices and attitudes as
the result of completing an informative intervention, a key recommendation is to provide
teachers with a similar form of professional development to initiate change. Allowing hands-on

99

practice is a more effective method to affect teaching practices, therefore, offering follow-up
training, which utilizes sample research tasks for the teachers to actively practice the strategies
they will be using to teach students will be the most optimal form of professional development.
Ideally, subject area specific professional development that engages teachers with an actual
research project using the Big6 or similar model, which could be incorporated into each subject
area’s classroom would be the most effective. By providing content specific, hands-on
professional development, teachers will be more apt to support the topic being introduced.
Findings from this study have implications for the instructional design of interventions,
professional development for current teachers, and training for future educators. Although
research projects are required in most subject area standards, pre-intervention survey results
showed few teachers reporting they required students to complete information literacy skill tasks
or that they included instruction of specific information literacy skills. However, after
completion of the intervention, overall participant attitudes indicated that information literacy
skill instruction would occur with greater frequency in future teaching practices. Future research
could follow-up with the current participants to explore ways the ILS intervention influenced
teaching practices, with specific emphasis on possible subject area differences. Other research
could examine the proficiency of librarians and literacy teachers with regard to teaching
information literacy skills and preparing future teachers to integrate these skills into teacher
education programs.

100

References
Academic Benchmarks (2015). Common core state standards adoption map. Retrieved from
http://academicbenchmarks.com/common-core-state-adoption-map/
Adams, K., & Lawrence, E. (2014). Research methods: Statistics and applications. Thousand
Oaks CA: Sage Publications.
Al-Aufi, A., & Al-Azri, H. (2013). Information literacy in Oman’s higher education: A
descriptive-inferential approach. Journal of Librarianship and Information
Science, 45(4), 335-346.
Allen, S. M. (2007). Information literacy, ICT, high school, and college expectations. Knowledge
Quest, 35(5), 18.
Alvermann, D. E. (2008). Why bother theorizing adolescents' online literacies for classroom
practice and research? Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 52(1), 8-19.
American Association of School Librarians (AASL) (2007). Standards for the 21st century
learner. Retrieved from
www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/aasl/aaslproftools/learningstandards/AASL_LearningStandar
ds.pdf
American Library Association (ALA) (2013). Digital literacy, libraries, and public policy:
Report of the Office for Information Technology Policy’s Digital Literacy Task Force.
Retrieved from
http://www.districtdispatch.org/wpcontent/uploads/2013/01/2012_OITP_digilitreport_1_
22_13.pdf

101

Anderson-Story, J., Dow, M., Kane, C., & Ternes, C. (2014). Bridges to the future: Teaching
information literacy across standards, institutions, and the workforce. Kansas Library
Association College and University Libraries Section Proceedings, 4(1), 4.
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2011). K-8 Physical education and health
curriculum framework. Retrieved from
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/PE%20Health/Physical_Education_and_Health_K_8.pdf
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2005). K-8 Science curriculum framework [Online].
Retrieved from
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/Science/science_k_8_011006.pdf
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2016a). Grades 6-12 disciplinary literacy standards.
Retrieved from
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/Disciplinary_Literacy/Disciplinary_Literacy_Standards_071816.p
df
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2016b). Grades 6-12 disciplinary literacy standards:
Resource for fine arts. Retrieved from
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/Disciplinary_Literacy/DLFineArts.pdf
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2014a). General music K-8: Fine arts curriculum
framework. Retrieved from

102

http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/Fine_Arts/GeneralMusicK_8Revised2014.pdf
Arkansas Department of Education (ADE) (2014b). Visual art K-8: Fine arts curriculum
framework. Retrieved from
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Learning_Services/Curriculum%20and%20In
struction/Frameworks/Fine_Arts/VisualArtK_8Revised2014.pdf
Asselin, M. (2005). Teaching information skills in the information age: An examination of trends
in the middle grades. School Libraries Worldwide, 11(1), 17-36.
Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL) (2000). Information literacy
competency standards for higher education. [Brochure]. Chicago, IL: Association of
College & Research Libraries.
Aydin, G. (2013). The effects of technology-supported mind and concept mapping on students’
construction of science concepts: The effect of mind mapping in science education.
Anthropologist, 20(1), 166-176.
Bayer, A. (2014). The components of effective professional development activities in terms of
teachers' perspective. Online Submission, 6(2), 319-327.
Bucher, K. (2000). The importance of information literacy skills in the middle school
curriculum. Clearing House, 73(4), 217-220.
Bulger, M. E., Mayer, R. E., & Metzger, M. J. (2014). Knowledge and processes that predict
proficiency in digital literacy. Reading and Writing, 27(9), 1567-1583.
Carey, J. 0. (1998). Library skills, information skills, and information literacy: Implications for
teaching and learning. School Library Media Quarterly, 1, 1-21.

103

Cash, R. M. (2017). Advancing differentiation: Thinking and learning for the 21st century.
Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit Publishing.
Cavas, B., Cavas, P., Karaoglan, B., & Kisla, T. (2009). A study on science teachers' attitudes
toward information and communication technologies in education. TOJET: The Turkish
Online Journal of Educational Technology, 8(2), 20-32.
Chang, I. (2012). The effect of principals' technological leadership on teachers' technological
literacy and teaching effectiveness in Taiwanese elementary schools. Educational
Technology & Society, 15(2), 328-340.
Chu, S., Tse, S., & Chow, K. (2011). Using collaborative teaching and inquiry project-based
learning to help primary school students develop information literacy and information
skills. Library & Information Science Research, 33(2), 132-143.
Colwell, J., Hunt-Barron, S., & Reinking, D. (2013). Obstacles to developing digital literacy on
the internet in middle school science instruction. Journal of Literacy Research, 45(3),
295-324.
Common Core State Standards Initiative (CCSSI) (2010). Common core state standards for
mathematics (CCSSM). Washington, DC: National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers. Retrieved from
http://www.corestandards.org/wp-content/uploads/Math_Standards.pdf
Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) (2013). Annual report to the
public, the states, policymakers, and the education profession. Washington, DC: Author.
Retrieved from http://caepnet.org/~/media/Files/caep/accreditationresources/annualreport-final.pdf

104

Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) (2015). CAEP accreditation
standards. Washington DC: Author. Retrieved from
http://caepnet.org/~/media/Files/caep/standards/final-board-amended20150612.pdf?la=en
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative
and qualitative research (4thed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method
approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Curcic, S. (2011). Addressing the needs of students with learning disabilities during their
interaction with the web. Multicultural Education & Technology Journal, 5(2), 151-170.
Cydis, S. (2015). Authentic instruction and technology literacy. Journal of Learning
Design, 8(1), 68-78.
Davies, M. B., & Hughes, N. (2014). Doing a successful research project: Using qualitative or
quantitative methods. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dempsey, B. (2003). Teaching research skills to young students: The critical role of the media
specialist. Multimedia Schools, 10(2), 1-7.
Donham, J., & Rehmke, D. (2016). High school to college transition: Sharing research with
teachers. Teacher Librarian, 44(2), 13.
Eisenberg, M. B. (2003). Technology for a purpose: Technology for information problemsolving with the Big6. TechTrends: Linking Research & Practice to Improve Learning,
47(1), 13-17.
Eisenberg, M. B., & Berkowitz, R. E. (2011). The Big6 workshop handbook: Implementation
and impact (4th ed.). Santa Barbara, CA: Linworth Publishing.

105

Eisenberg, M. B., Lowe, C. A., & Spitzer, K. L. (2004). Information literacy: Essential skills for
the information age (2nd ed.). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Eisenberg, M. B., Murray, J., & Bartow, C. (2014). Big6 by the month: A common sense
approach to effective use of common standards for information literacy learning. Library
Media Connection, 32(6), 38-41.
Ellis, P. D. (2010). The essential guide to effect sizes: Statistical power, meta-analysis, and the
interpretation of research results. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.
Ertmer, P., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. (2010). Teacher technology change: How knowledge,
confidence, beliefs, and culture intersect. Journal of Research on Technology in
Education, 42(3), 255-284.
Farmer, L. S. (2003). Facilitating faculty incorporation of information literacy skills into the
curriculum through the use of online instruction, Reference Services Review, 31(4), 307312.
Feng, L., & Ha, J. L. (2016). Effects of teachers’ information literacy on lifelong learning and
school effectiveness. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology
Education, 12(6), 1653-1663.
Fitzgerald, M. A. (2004). Making the leap from high school to college: Three new studies about
information literacy skills of first year college students.” Knowledge Quest 32(4), 19-24.
Fitzpatrick, M., & Meulemans, Y. (2011). Assessing an information literacy assignment and
workshop using a quasi-experimental design. College Teaching, 59(4), 142-149.

106

Foo, S., Majid, S., Mokhtar, I., Zhang, X., Chang, Y., Luyt, B., & Theng, Y. (2014). Information
literacy skills of secondary school students in Singapore. Aslib Journal of Information
Management, 66(1), 54-76.
Forte, A. (2015). The new information literate: Open collaboration and information production in
schools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10(1),
35-51.
Geisinger, K. F. (2016). 21st century skills: What are they and how do we assess them? Applied
Measurement in Education, 29(4), 245-249.
George, D., & Mallery, P. (2003). SPSS for windows step by step: A simple guide and reference.
11.0 update (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Gill, S. (2003). Tracking the integration of library skills in the curriculum. Tech Trends, 47(1),
23-24.
Graham, S., Capizzi, A., Harris, K. R., Hebert, M., & Morphy, P. (2014). Teaching writing to
middle school students: A national survey. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary
Journal, 27(6), 1015-1042.
Gross, M., & Latham, D. (2007). Attaining information literacy: An investigation of the
relationship between skill level, self-estimates of skill, and library anxiety. Library &
Information Science Research, 29(3), 332-353.
Gross, M., & Latham, D. (2012). What's skill got to do with it?: Information literacy skills and
self-views of ability among first-year college students. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 63(3), 574-583.

107

Gulamhussein, A. (2013). Teaching the teachers: Effective professional development in an era
of high stakes accountability. Center for Public Education. Retrieved from
http://www.centerforpubliceducation.org/teachingtheteachers
Head, A. (2012). Learning curve: How college graduates solve information problems once they
join the workplace. Retrieved from Project Information Literacy:
http://projectinfolit.org/pdfs/PIL_fall2012_workplaceStudy_FullReport_Revised.pdf
Hedberg, E., & Ayers, S. (2015). The power of a paired t-test with a covariate. Social Science
Research, 50, p. 277-291.
Heil, D. (2005). The Internet and student research: Teaching critical evaluation skills. Teacher
Librarian, 33(2), 26-29.
Heinen, R., Leone, S. A., Fairchild, J., Cushenbery, L., & Hunter, S. T. (2015). Tools for the
process: Technology to support. In D. Harrison (Ed.), Handbook of research on digital
media and creative technologies, (pp. 374-395). Hershey, PA: IGA Global.
Herring, J. (2009). A grounded analysis of year 8 students' reflections on information literacy
skills and techniques. School Libraries Worldwide, 15(1), 1-13.
Herring, J. E. (2006). A critical investigation of students' and teachers' views of the use of
information literacy skills in school assignments. School Library Media Research, 9, 140.
Hsieh, M., Dawson, P., Hofmann, M., Titus, M., & Carlin, M. (2014). Four pedagogical
approaches in helping students learn information literacy skills. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 40(3-4), 234-246.

108

Hsu, H. Y., Wang, S. K., & Runco, L. (2013). Middle school science teachers’ confidence and
pedagogical practice of new literacies. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 22(3), 314-324.
Huggins, A. C., Ritzhaupt, A. D., & Dawson, K. (2014). Measuring information and
communication technology literacy using a performance assessment: Validation of the
student tool for technology literacy (ST2L). Computers & Education, 77(0), 1-12.
Hughes, S. (2003). The Big6 as a strategy for student research. School Libraries in
Canada, 22(4), 28-29.
Hutchison, A., & Reinking, D. (2011). Teachers’ perceptions of integrating information and
communication technologies into literacy instruction: A national survey in the United
States. Reading Research Quarterly, 46(4), 312-333.
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) (2007). National educational
technology standards and performance indicators for students. Eugene, OR: International
Society for Technology in Education.
Islam, R. L., & Murno, L. (2006). From perceptions to connections: Informing information
literacy program planning in academic libraries through examination of high school
library media center curricula. College & Research Libraries, 67(6), 492-510.
Jones, D. L. (2011). Academic dishonesty: Are more students cheating? Business
Communication Quarterly, 74(2), 141-150.
Julien, H. (2016). Beyond the hyperbole: Information literacy reconsidered. Communications in
Information Literacy, 10(2), 124-131.

109

Julien, H., & Barker, S. (2009). How high-school students find and evaluate scientific
information: A basis for information literacy skills development. Library & Information
Science Research, 31(1), 12-17.
Klomsri, T., & Tedre, M. (2016). Poor information literacy skills and practices as barriers to
academic performance. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 55(4), 293-305.
Koehler, M., & Mishra, P. (2005). What happens when teachers design educational technology?
The development of technological pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of
Educational Computing Research, 32(2), 131-152.
Kolowich, S. (2011). What students don’t know. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2011/08/22/erial_study_of_student_research_habit
s_at_illinois_university_libraries_reveals_alarmingly_poor_information_literacy_and_ski
lls
Kuhlemeier, H., & Hemker, B. (2007). The impact of computer use at home on students’ Internet
skills. Computers & Education, 49(2), 460-480.
Kuhlthau, C. C., Maniotes, L. K., & Caspari, A. K. (2015). Guided inquiry: Learning in the 21st
century: Learning in the 21st century. ABC-CLIO.
Ladbrook, J., & Probert, E. (2011). Information skills and critical literacy: Where are our
digikids at with online searching and are their teachers helping? Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 27(1), 105-121.
Lai, Y. L., & Jen, C. I. (2015, October). Using Google sites to promote 7th graders’ information
literacy, reading comprehension, and information technology through inquiry-based
learning in Taiwan. European Conference on Information Literacy (pp. 317-327).
Springer International Publishing.

110

Lawless, K., & Pellegrino, J. (2007). Professional development in integrating technology into
teaching and learning: Knowns, unknowns, and ways to pursue better questions and
answers. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 575-614.
Lenz, B., Wells, J., & Kingston, S. (2015). Transforming schools using project-based deeper
learning, performance assessment, and common core standards. San Francisco, CA: John
Wiley & Sons.
Lester, J. H. (2003). Planning effective secondary professional development programs. American
Secondary Education, 32(1), 49-61.
Lin, C., Yaw-Huei C., & Wen M., (2014). Effects of integrated information literacy on science
learning and problem-solving among seventh-grade students. Malaysian Journal of
Library & Information Science, 19(2), 35-51.
Locklear, A. L. M., & Kent, E. (2015, September). A writing process approach to student
engagement & information/digital literacies. Paper presented at the Georgia International
Conference for Information Literacy, Savannah, GA.
Lodico, M. G., Spaulding, D. T., & Voegtle, K. H. (2010). Methods in educational research:
From theory to practice (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Long, S. (Ed.). (2012). Virtual work and human interaction research. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Lundstrom, K., Diekema, A. R., Leary, H., Haderlie, S., & Holliday, W. (2015). Teaching and
learning information synthesis: An intervention and rubric based assessment.
Communications in Information Literacy, 9(1), 60-82.
Martinez, M. R., McGrath, D. R., & Foster, E. (2016). How deeper learning can create a new
vision for teaching. Retrieved from http://nctaf.org/wp-

111

content/uploads/2016/02/NCTAF-ConsultEd_How-Deeper-Learning-Can-Create-a-NewVision-for-Teaching.pdf
Maxwell, J. A., & Miller, B. A. (2008). Categorizing and connecting strategies in qualitative data
analysis. In S. N. Hesse-Biber & P. Leavy (Eds.), Handbook of emergent methods (pp.
461-478). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McCambridge, J., de Bruin, M., & Witton, J. (2012). The effects of demand characteristics on
research participant behaviours in non-laboratory settings: A systematic review. PLoS
ONE, 7(6), 1-6.
McMillan, J. H., & Hearn, J. (2008). Student self-assessment: The key to stronger student
motivation and higher achievement. Educational Horizons, 87(1), 40-49.
Mertler, C. A. (2015). Introduction to educational research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Mokhtar, I., & Majid, S. (2014). Information literacy standards, guidelines and their
implementation: An analysis. DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information
Technology, 28(2), 5-12.
Mokhtar, I. A., Foo, S., Majid, S., Theng, Y. L., Luyt, B., & Chang, Y. (2009). Proposing a 6+3
model for developing information literacy standards for schools: A case for
Singapore. Education for Information, 27(2), 81-101.
Morrison, G. R., Ross, S. M., Kemp, J. E., & Kalman, H. (2010). Designing effective instruction
(6th ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Murphy, L. M., Shelley, M. A., White, C. J., & Baumann, U. (2011). Tutor and student
perceptions of what makes an effective distance language teacher. Distance
Education, 32(3), 397-419.

112

Murray, J. (2003). CyberConnect: Use the internet with Big6 skills to achieve standards.
TechTrends: Linking Research & Practice to Improve Learning, 47(1), 18-21.
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (2015a). NBPTS Health Education
Standards. Arlington, VA, Retrieved from
http://boardcertifiedteachers.org/sites/default/files/EAYA-HEALTH.pdf
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (2015b). NBPTS Social Studies-History
Standards. Arlington, VA, Retrieved from
http://boardcertifiedteachers.org/sites/default/files/EAYA-SSH.pdf
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) (2002). Professional
standards for the accreditation of schools, colleges, and departments of education.
Washington, DC: Author.
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) (2008). Professional
standards for the accreditation of schools, colleges and departments of education,
NCATE, Washington, DC. Retrieved from
http://www.ncate.org/Standards/UnitStandards/UnitStandardsinEffect2008/tabid/476/Def
ault.aspx#stnd1
National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS) (2013). Social studies for the next generation:
Purposes, practices, and implication of the college, career, and civic life (C3) framework
for social studies state standards. Retrieved from
http://www.socialstudies.org/system/files/c3/C3-Framework-for-Social-Studies.pdf
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices (NGA) & Council of Chief State
School Officers (NGA & CCSSO) (2010). Common core state standards for English

113

language arts and literacy in history/social studies, science, and technical subjects.
Washington, DC: Authors.
Neumann, C. (2016). Teaching digital natives: Promoting information literacy and addressing
instructional challenges. Reading Improvement, 53(3), 101-106.
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) (2013). Next generation science standards: For
states, by states. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Nilsen, C. (2012). Faculty perceptions of librarian-led information literacy instruction in
postsecondary education. In World Library and Information Congress: 78th IFLA
General Conference and Assembly (pp. 1-25).
Owen, P. (2010). A transition checklist for high school seniors. School Library Monthly, 26(8),
20-23.
Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes
professional development effective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation.
American Educational Research Journal, 44(4), 921-958.
Phillips, V., & Wong, C. (2010). Tying together the common core of standards, instruction, and
assessments. Phi Delta Kappan, 91(5), 37-42.
Polly, D., & Hannafin, M. (2010). Reexamining technology’s role in learner-centered
professional development. Educational Technology Research and Development, 58(5),
557-571.
Prado, J., & Marzal, M. (2013). Incorporating data literacy into information literacy programs:
Core competencies and contents. Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information
Services, 63(2), 123-134.

114

Probert, E. (2009). Information literacy skills: Teacher understandings and practice. Computers
& Education, 53(1), 24-33.
Purcell, K., Rainie, L., Heaps, A., Buchanan, J., Friedrich, L., Jacklin, A., Chen, C., & Zickuhr,
K. (2012, Nov 1). How teens do research in the digital world. Pew Internet & American
Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/01/how-teens-doresearch-in-the-digital-world/
Ramig, R. (2010). Online tools for research-elementary and middle school style. MultiMedia &
Internet@Schools, 17(5), 15-17.
Reinhart, J., Thomas, E., & Toriskie, J. (2011). K-12 Teachers: Technology use and the second
level digital divide. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 38(3), 181-193.
Shih, J. L., Chuang, C. W., & Hwang, G. J. (2010). An inquiry-based mobile learning approach
to enhancing social science learning effectiveness. Educational Technology &
Society, 13(4), 50-62.
Smith, J. K., Given, L. M., Julien, H., Ouellette, D., & DeLong, K. (2013). Information literacy
proficiency: Assessing the gap in high school students' readiness for undergraduate
academic work. Library & Information Science Research, 35(2), 88-96.
Snyder, S. (2016). Teachers' perceptions of digital citizenship development in middle school
students using social media and global collaborative projects (Doctoral Dissertation).
Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3607&context=dissertations
Stockham, M., & Collins, H. (2012). Information literacy skills for preservice teachers: Do they
transfer to K-12 classrooms? Education Libraries, 35(1), 59-72.

115

Teacher Education Accreditation Council (TEAC). (2011). TEAC principles and standards for
teacher education programs. Retrieved from
http://www.teac.org/accreditation/appendices-and-formats/
Terrazas-Arellanes. F. E., Knox, C., Strycker, L. A., & Walden. E. (2016). A face-to-face
professional development model to enhance teaching of online research strategies.
Journal of Information Technology Education: Research, 15, 335-376. Retrieved from
http://www.informingscience.org/Publications/3536
Thomas, N. P., Crow, S. R., & Franklin, L.L. (2011). Information literacy and information skills
instruction: applying research to practice in the 21st century school library. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited ABC-CLIO.
Troia, G. A., & Olinghouse, N. G. (2013). The common core state standards and evidence-based
educational practices: The case of writing. School Psychology Review, 42(3), 343-357.
U.S. 21st Century Workforce Commission. (2000). A nation of opportunity: Building America's
21st century workforce. Retrieved February 6, 2017, from
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1003&context=key_wo
rkplace
Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., & Van Diepen, S. (2013). Information and strategic internet skills of
secondary students: A performance test. Computers & Education, 63(1), 218-226.
Varlejs, J., Stec, E., & Kwon, H. (2014, Dec 13). Factors affecting students’ information literacy
as they transition from high school to college. School Library Research, 17, 1-23.
Walraven, A., Brand-Gruwel, S., & Boshuizen, H. (2009). How students evaluate information
and sources when searching the World Wide Web for information. Computers &
Education, 52(1), 234–246.

116

Walter, J. G. (2008). The puzzle of internet plagiarism and instructional design: Helping high
school teachers put the pieces together. (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3315215)
Walton, M., & Archer, A. (2004). The web and information literacy: Scaffolding the use of web
sources in a project-based curriculum. British Journal of Educational Technology, 35(2),
173-186.
Weidert, J. M., Wendorf, A. R., Gurung, R. R., & Filz, T. (2012). A survey of graduate and
undergraduate teaching assistants. College Teaching, 60(3), 95-103.
Williams, D. A., & Wavell, C. (2007). Secondary school teachers’ conceptions of student
information literacy. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 39(4), 199-212.
Williamson, K., McGregor, J. & Archibald, A. (2010). Successful collaborations between
teachers and teacher-librarians: An exploration focused on teaching students to avoid
plagiarism. School Libraries World Wide, 16(2): 16–30.
Yeh, Y., Hsu, Y., Chuang, F., & Hwang, F. (2014). Middle-school students’ online information
problem solving behaviors on the information retrieval interface. Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 30(2), 245-260.
Yoon, K. S., Duncan, T., Lee, S. W. Y., Scarloss, B., & Shapley, K. L. (2007). Reviewing the
evidence on how teacher professional development affects student achievement.
Retrieved from
http://164.116.19.35/LAP/pubdocs/ReviewingEvidenceHowTeacherPDAffectsStudentAc
hievement.pdf

117

Zhang, S., & Duke, N. K. (2008). Strategies for internet reading with different reading purposes:
A descriptive study of twelve good internet readers. Journal of Literacy Research, 40(1),
128-162.

118

Appendix A
Pre-intervention Teacher Survey
Thank you for participating in this research of middle school teachers’ perceptions of
information literacy skill instruction. Please complete the following survey items before you
begin the “Information Literacy Skill Instruction” unit.
Instructions: Please select the most appropriate response to the following items.






Which subject do you primarily teach? (Select one)

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Art
Music
P.E.
Science
Social Studies
Math
Literacy
Computer Applications

EAST
For how many years have you been a certified teacher?

o
o
o
o

0-2 years
3-5 years
6-8 years

9 + years
How many research projects do you typically require your students to complete in a year:

o
o
o
o

0 [Skip items 4 – 13, proceed to item 14]
1-2
3-4
5 or more

Section 1 Instructions: Please use the scales below to respond to each item.
How often do you require your students to do the following tasks
when completing a research project?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Define the research problem/task prior to beginning the
project?
Use only specific resources selected by the teacher?
Individually, or in a small group, identify the best
resource(s) to use for the research project?
Use print resources?
Use online databases as information sources?
Present research findings/information using digital resource.
(PowerPoint, Glogster, Kidblog, etc.)?
Present research findings/information using print resource
(e.g., research paper, speech with notes, poster, etc.)?
Use paraphrasing and citations to avoid plagiarism?

119

Never
(1)

Occasionally
(2)

Frequently
(3)

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐
☐

☐
☐

☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

Section 2 Instructions: Please use the scales below to respond to each item.
I provided my students specific instruction and/or strategies to do the
following tasks when they completed past research projects:
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Define the problem and identify requirements of the problem.
Identify the most appropriate and accurate resources.
Locate and access information.
Use keyword and other online search strategies such as Boolean
logic.
Extract and engage with information (i.e. read, hear, view, touch).
Organize information from multiple sources.
Create a product or performance.
Evaluate the product or performance.
Evaluate the information solving process.

Never
(1)

Occasionally
(2)

Frequently
(3)

☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

Section 3 Instructions: Please select the response that indicates your level of agreement with the following items:
Indicate your level of agreement with the following statements
regarding information literacy skills:
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills.
Librarians rather than teachers should teach information literacy
skills.
Students should complete several research projects each year.
Students should complete research projects in literacy classes.
Students should complete research projects in mathematics classes.
Students should complete research projects in science classes.
Students should complete research projects in social studies classes.
Students should complete research projects in art and music classes.
Students should complete research projects in physical education
classes.
Students should complete research projects in health classes.
Students should know how to synthesize multiple information
sources.
Students should know how to evaluate the validity of resources.
Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid plagiarism.
Students should have computer skills for research projects.
Teachers should have computer skills needed to teach students how
to complete research projects.

Disagree
(1)

Neutral
(2)

Agree
(3)

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

Thank You for Completing the Survey!
Enjoy learning about Information Literacy Skill Instruction!

120

Appendix B
Post-intervention Teacher Survey
Now that you’ve completed the unit, we would like you to share your perceptions of information literacy skill
instruction by completing the following survey.
Section 1 Instructions: Please use the scales below to respond to each item.
How often do you plan to require your students to do the following tasks when
completing future research projects?
1. Define the research problem/task prior to beginning the project?
2. Use only specific resources selected by the teacher?
3. Individually, or in a small group, identify the best resource(s) to use for
the research
project?
4. Use
print resources?
5. Use online databases as information sources?
6. Present research findings/information using digital resource.
(PowerPoint, Glogster, Kidblog, etc.)?
7. Present research findings/information using print resource (e.g., research
paper, speech with notes, poster, etc.)?
8. Use paraphrasing and citations to avoid plagiarism?

Never
(1)

Occasionally
(2)

Frequently
(3)

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

☐

Never
(1)

Occasionally
(2)

Frequently
(3)

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

Section 2 Instructions: Please use the scales below to respond to each item.
I plan to provide my students specific instruction and/or strategies to do the
following tasks when they complete future research projects:
9. Define the problem and identify requirements of the problem.
10. Identify the most appropriate and accurate resources
11. Locate and access information
12. Use keyword and other online search strategies such as Boolean logic
13. Extract and engage with information (i.e. read, hear, view, touch)
14. Organize information from multiple sources
15. Create a product or performance
16. Evaluate the product or performance
17. Evaluate the information solving process

Section 3 Instructions: Please select the response that indicates your level of agreement with the following items:
Indicate your level of agreement with the following statements regarding
information literacy skills:

Disagree
(1)

Neutral
(2)

Agree
(3)

18. Teachers should know how to teach information literacy skills.

☐

☐

☐

19.
20.
21.
22.

Librarians rather than teachers should teach information literacy skills.
Students should complete several research projects each year.
Students should complete research projects in literacy classes.
Students should complete research projects in mathematics classes.

☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Students should complete research projects in science classes.
Students should complete research projects in social studies classes.
Students should complete research projects in art and music classes.
Students should complete research projects in physical education classes.
Students should complete research projects in health classes.
Students should know how to synthesize multiple information sources.
Students should know how to evaluate the validity of resources.
Students should know how to cite sources used and avoid plagiarism.
Students should have computer skills needed for research projects.
Teachers should have computer skills needed to teach students how to
complete research projects.

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐

☐

☐

☐

121

Section 4 Instructions: Please use the space provided to write your responses to the following items.
1.

For what reasons would you include information literacy skills when teaching middle school students?

2.

For what reasons would you not include information literacy skills when teaching middle school students?

3.

Please add any additional comments you would like to share regarding information literacy skill instruction for your
middle school students

Thank You for Participating!
Hope you enjoyed learning more about Information Literacy Skill Instruction!

122

Appendix C
IRB Approval

123

Appendix D
Approval Letters
School Approval Letter 1

124

School Approval Letter 2

125

Appendix E
Teacher Email Invitation

To: [6th and 7th grade teachers in local middle schools]
From: Erin Catherine Shaw
Subject: Information Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers
Message:

Dear Teachers,
You are invited to participate in a study to learn more about technology-supported information
literacy skill instruction. The study involves completing a fun and interactive online instructional
intervention as well as anonymous pre- and post-surveys to collect your perceptions. You can
complete the 50- to 60-minute study on any Internet-connected device.

You are encouraged to please participate in this study to better understand practices and attitudes
of middle school teachers toward technology-supported information literacy skill instruction.

Please use the web link below to access to the instructional intervention and surveys.

Click here to begin
(You will be taken to the consent page first. After completing the consent form, click “Start
Survey” to begin recording your responses).

Enjoy learning more about information literacy skill instruction!
Thank you for your participation!
Erin Catherine Shaw

126

Appendix F
Consent to participate in a Research Study
Examining Middle School Teacher Practices and Perceptions Regarding Teaching Information Literacy
Skills
1. WHY ARE YOU BEING INVITED TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH?
You are being invited to take part in a research study about Examining Middle School Teacher Perceptions
Regarding Information Literacy Skill Instruction for Middle School Students. You are being invited to take part in
this research study because you are a teacher in grades 6-7. If you volunteer to take part in this study, you will be
one of about 52 people to do so.
2. WHO IS DOING THE STUDY?
The person in charge of this study is Erin Catherine Shaw of The University of Memphis Department of Instruction
and Curriculum Leadership. She is being guided in this research by Dr. Deborah Lowther. There may be other
people on the research team assisting at different times during the study.
3. WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY?
The purpose of this study will be to examine the influence of an online instructional intervention, Information
Literacy Skill Intervention for Middle School Teachers” on teacher perceptions toward technology-supported
information literacy skill instruction. By doing this study, we hope to learn that through the completion of the
intervention, participants in this study will gain a better understanding of how to use information literacy skill
instruction, specifically the Big6 model and the benefits it can provide; Second, the study findings will help inform
administrators, professional development providers, and other researchers on teacher perceptions of using
information literacy skill instructional practices with middle school students. The significant findings will include
teacher identified challenges to the use of information literacy skill instruction with middle school students, as this
information will enable specific, targeted interventions to address teacher concerns.
4. ARE THERE REASONS WHY YOU SHOULD NOT TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?
You should not take part in this study if you are under the age of 18 and not currently teaching in 6th or 7th grade.
5. WHERE IS THE STUDY GOING TO TAKE PLACE AND HOW LONG WILL IT LAST?
The research procedures will be conducted on your own time and you must have access to an Internet-connected
computer. You will be provided with the web link for the online instructional intervention, which will include a pre
and post survey and explicit directions. The total amount of time you will be asked to volunteer for this study is
approximately sixty minutes in a single setting.
6. WHAT WILL YOU BE ASKED TO DO?
As a participant, you will first receive an email invitation with a link that will direct you to a site where you will be
required to complete a consent form. After completion, agreement and submission of the consent form, you may
then proceed to the Pre-Intervention Teacher Survey. Once you have completed the pre-teacher survey you will be
directed to the online instructional intervention “Welcome Page.” The “Welcome Page” provides you with an
overview of the objectives and step-by-step instructions of how to navigate through the site. You will then work
through the Instructional Intervention, which is divided into three modules. Once you complete a module, you
must complete an online practice review activity to proceed to the next module. After you complete the three
intervention modules, you will then be directed to a Post-Intervention Teacher Survey. Once the post-teacher
survey is complete, you will select “Submit” to exit the intervention.
7. WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS?
To the best of our knowledge, the things you will be doing have no more risk of harm than you would experience in
everyday life.
8. WILL YOU BENEFIT FROM TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
There is no guarantee that you will get any benefit from taking part in this study. Your willingness to take part,
however, may, in the future, help society, as a whole better understand this research topic.

127

9. DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY?
If you decide to take part in the study, it should be because you really want to volunteer. You will not lose any
benefits or rights you would normally have if you choose not to volunteer. You can stop at any time during the
study and still keep the benefits and rights you had before volunteering
10. IF YOU DON’T WANT TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY, ARE THERE OTHER CHOICES?
If you do not want to be in the study, there are no other choices except not to take part in the study.
11. WHAT WILL IT COST YOU TO PARTICIPATE?
There are no costs associated with taking part in the study.
12. WILL YOU RECEIVE ANY REWARDS FOR TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
You will not receive any rewards or payment for taking part in the study.
13. WHO WILL SEE THE INFORMATION THAT YOU GIVE?
We will make every effort to keep private all research records that identify you to the extent allowed by law.
You information will be combined with information from other people taking part in the study. When we write
about the study to share it with other researchers, we will write about the combined information we have
gathered. You will not be personally identified in these written materials. We may publish the results of this study;
however, we will keep your name and other identifying information private.
The data for this study will be collected and stored via electronic means. All electronic data will remain confidential
and secure via complex passcodes.
This study is anonymous. That means that no one, not even members of the research team, will know that the
information you give came from you.
14. CAN YOUR TAKING PART IN THE STUDY END EARLY?
If you decide to take part in the study you still have the right to decide at any time that you no longer want to
continue. You will not be treated differently if you decide to stop taking part in the study.
The individuals conducting the study may need to withdraw you from the study. This may occur if you are not able
to follow the directions they give you, if they find that your being in the study is more risk than benefit to you, or if
the agency funding the study decides to stop the study early for a variety of scientific reasons.
15. WHAT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS, SUGGESTIONS, CONCERNS, OR COMPLAINTS?
Before you decide whether to accept this invitation to take part in the study, please ask any questions that might
come to mind now. Later, if you have questions, suggestions, concerns, or complaints about the study, you can
contact the investigator, Erin Catherine Shaw at ecshaw@memphis.edu or 501-581-3013. You can also contact her
faculty advisor, Dr. Deborah Lowther at dlowther@memphis.edu. If you have any questions about your rights as a
volunteer in this research, contact the Institutional Review Board staff at the University of Memphis at 901-6782705. We will give you a signed copy of this consent form to take with you.
16. WHAT ELSE DO YOU NEED TO KNOW?
Your school administrators support this study.
17. STATEMENT BY PERSON AGREEING TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS STUDY.
I have read this informed consent document and the materials contained in it. I understand each part of the
document, all my questions have been answered, and I freely and voluntarily choose participate in this study.

128

Appendix G
Open-Ended Responses: Reason(s) to Include Information Literacy Skills
#

2

For what reasons would you include
information literacy skills when
teaching middle school students?
For students to better understand the
research process and how to use
information more effectively.
Helps kids complete projects

3

Easier for projects

4

Students will need these skills to be
successful, both in high school and in
the real world. They must be aware of
the proper ways to complete research
tasks with credible evidence and
complete citations/references.
Kids learn how to find information
better.
To help students define their topic,
assess information, synthesize
information from multiple sources, and
self-assess and peer assess which will
ultimately develop their researching
skills.
I would include information literacy
skills because it will enable them to
become independent learners and not
reliable on others for information.
Information literacy skills help students
be more ready for college.

1

5
6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14
15

16

Student need to have these skills to
complete assignments for High School
& College. Well completed research
projects will have all these things
included.
It's better when they get to college to
know how to find answers and info. on
their own.
Helps with the research process

You need to teach information literacy
skills with each new class of students so
you are not expecting students to do
something they have not been trained to
do.
Information literacy skills help students
become lifelong users of information.
Projects are important for students in
21st century learning.
I would use information literacy skills
to research methods that other countries
do certain math skills.

To teach students how to be more
literate in a technological society and
help become ready for college and
careers in the future.

Reason 1
Understand the
research
process
Completion of
projects
Completion of
projects
Understand the
research
process

Reason 2
Use
information

Reason 3

Build skills for
future careers

Find
information
Understand the
research
process

Become
Independent
learners
Build skills for
high school
and college
Build skills for
high school
and college

Find
information

Completion of
projects

Build skills for
high school
and college
Understand the
research
process
Understand the
research
process

Develop
problem
solving skills

Develop
lifelong
learners
Completion of
projects
Miscellaneous:
Build future
research skills
for math
resources
Build 21st
Century skills

Use
information

Find
information

Build 21st
Century skills

Build skills for
high school
and college

129

Build skills for
future careers

Reason 4

Reason 5

#

17

For what reasons would you include
information literacy skills when
teaching middle school students?
Helps them to know how to research
and find information quicker.

18

It will help them learn to solve
problems using information they find.

19

My students need to see how to find
information in books still. They used to
know how to use an index but don't
seem to know how to do that anymore.
They all want to use the internet all the
time.
Kids can learn how to find information
if they are taught information literacy
skills- maybe they will do better in
college?!
To help all students be more confident
users and finders of information. It will
help them be college and career ready
and become lifelong learners.
It does help them when they get to
college.

20

21

22

23

24

To teach students the research process
so they can find and use information
easier to solve problems. And, to teach
digital literacy since my students are
using problem-based learning all the
time and I can't monitor every student
every minute of a project.
It will help them if they go to college

25

Makes better lifelong learners- and
makes research easier to manage.

26

Better understanding of the research
process which is very helpful in science
especially.
Helps the students be better learners.
Will probably help them in the future
for college.
Kids going to college will have an
advantage because they will know how
to research and write papers.
It makes finding information easier
when the kids have a process- LOVE
the Big6!
Makes research easier. Science is all
about finding answers- students should
be doing the same process for all
classes.

27

28

29

30

Reason 1
Understand the
research
process
Develop
problem
solving skills
Find
information

Reason 2
Find
information

Find
information

Build skills for
high school
and college

Use
information

Build skills for
high school
and college
Understand the
research
process

Build skills for
high school
and college
Develop
lifelong
learners
Understand the
research
process
Develop
lifelong
learners
Build skills for
high school
and college
Find
information
Understand the
research
process

Reason 3

Reason 4

Reason 5

Find
information

Build skills for
high school
and college

Develop
lifelong
learners

Build skills
for future
careers

Find
information

Use
information

Develop
problem
solving skills

Build 21st
Century skills

Use
information
Miscellaneous:
Use non-digital
resources

Understand the
research
process

Build skills for
high school
and college
Understand the
research
process
Understand the
research
process
Develop
problem
solving skills

130

Appendix H
Open-Ended Responses: Reason(s) to Not Include Information Literacy Skills
#

Reason 1

Reason 2

Not enough time

Lack of technology

7

For what reasons would you not include
information literacy skills when teaching
middle school students?
Time constraints to teach all frameworks and
complete labs twice a week. Sometimes can't
get technology (mobile labs).
Not enough time since I only have kids for 9
weeks.
Never learned how to teach the skills. Need
more help in teaching topics and skills to
kids.
There are really no good reasons I can think
of, unless we don't have time to cover
information literacy skills amongst the many
other standards we have.
Lack of time and lack of technology
resources.
Math classes would be the only area where
literacy skills may not be as relevant as in
other classes, but students will still need to
know how to read and communicate
information in math classes.
None

8

Time runs out

Not enough time

1

2
3

4

5
6

9
10

11
12

13
14
15

16

17
18

19

20

Not enough time
Didn’t learn how to teach research skills

None/No reason

Not enough time

Not enough time

Lack of technology

None/No reason

None/No reason

No Response
Don’t want to inconvenience the
librarian

Lack of technology in my classroom- I really
don't always want to bug the librarian to get
books together- I'd rather have computers or
laptops
I think they know alot of the skills already

Lack of technology

Once you have established that the students
understand information literacy skills and the
students have demonstrated their
understanding, you can assign future research
assignments and assume they know how to
research.
Time is often a factor- I think they should
know many of the skills beforehand.
I would not not include information literacy
skills.
The Common Core Standards do not suggest
or recommend that we do information literacy
skills in math. The required skills to be taught
in math is so abundant that there is not time to
teach all that we have to teach and also do
research.
None, other than many students already seem
to have the skills necessary to navigate the
resources.
None

Students should already have the skills

Not enough time since I teach so many math
frameworks. If I wanted to use technology
there aren't always computers available.
Not enough time to teach all the parts of
research- they should know it by the time
they are in 7th grade.
None

Not enough time

Lack of technology

Not enough time

Students should already have the skills

Students should already have the skills

Not enough time

Students should already have the skills

None/No reason
Not in the standards

Not enough time

None/No reason

Students should already have the skills

None/No reason

None/No reason

131

#

21

22

23

24

25

26

27
28

29
30

For what reasons would you not include
information literacy skills when teaching
middle school students?
There are no reasons not to include
information literacy skills when teaching
middle school students.
They should already know how to complete a
research project by 7th grade and the literacy
teachers do a lot of the instruction by the time
we research mathematicians.
I realize that I wasn't teaching the kids any
skills before they began because I thought
everything about EAST was discovery but
now I know they need to see instruction in the
research process.
Students should already know how to
research since they do it in literacy and they
are in 7th grade.
Time- I always assume students know how to
do things so I don't plan enough time to teach
the skills.
No time to teach how to do specific things. I
forget they don't know everything about the
Internet and research.
No time to get everything done.

Reason 1

Reason 2

Not enough time to always get it done in a
semester (my class only meets for a
semester). Plus, the kids should know how to
find information on the internet so I shouldn't
have to teach that all the time.
Absolutely NO reason!

Not enough time

I thought students knew how to research and
fidn information on the web- I didn't think I
had to teach them where to look.

Students should already have the skills

None/No reason

Students should already have the skills

Should be taught by literacy teachers

None/No reason

Students should already have the skills

Should be taught by literacy teachers

Not enough time

Students should already have the skills

Not enough time

Not enough time
Students should already have the skills

None/No reason

132

Not my responsibility

Appendix I
Open-Ended Responses: Additional Comments Regarding Information Literacy Skills
#

Please add additional comments you
would like to share regarding
information literacy skill instruction for
your middle school students

1

4

If all teachers use the same process
for research projects the students
would be better equipped to finish
projects.
Never thought that anyone should
have to do research projects except
literacy- I need help teaching the
kids because they had so many
questions I can't answer.
Never learned to teach literacy skills
becasue as a coach and PE teacher
we didnt' need it. Kids should know
how to do all of the research stuff
before they get to my PE classs.
These skills are a must for students!

5

None

None

6

Teaching research to middle school
students is a difficult and time
consuming process, but it is worth
the investment because students are
developing skills that can potentially
last a lifetime.
I always select sources for my
students, but I like the idea of
teaching them how to select
appropriate sources. This will
definitely help them in the long run.
I really need to emphasize "new
information is generated". I love this
and hadn't thought of that before.
I absolutely love the idea of using a
lottery for selecting topics for
students. What a fun way to make it
fair! I will be using this when we do
research on composers.

Skills are necessary

More subjects have to do research
now so this seems to matter more to
administrators.

Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction
No response

10

Nothing

None

11

None

None

2

3

7

8

9

12
13

Reason 1
Use same process for
information literacy
skills/Big 6

Reason 2
Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction

Should be taught by literacy
teachers and/or librarian

Need help teaching info.
Literacy/PD

Need help teaching info.
Literacy/PD

Students should already
have the skills

Skills are necessary

Increased desire to integrate
new methods of teaching
information literacy skills

No response

I like the idea of every subject area
sharing the duty of teaching
information literacy since it often
falls on the librarian and/or the
literacy teachers.

Shared responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction

133

Seems to be administrative
decision

Reason 3

#

Please add additional comments you
would like to share regarding
information literacy skill instruction for
your middle school students

Reason 1
None

Reason 2

I do feel that students need a strong
foundation in research to be able to
be college ready and those skills
should begin to be taught at an early
age.
All teachers should share the burden
of teaching information literacy
skills to the students. It's fallen on
the shoulders of Language Arts
classes for many years.
Students learn how to find things on
the world wide web but it doesn't
make them good digital citizens.
They need a lot of information in
locating appropriate information that
is valid. And, teachers need to know
how to use the computer resources
to help the students rather than
turning them loose.
I didn't really think about math
being able to use information
literacy skills but I think solving
math problems is a lot like
conducting research- finding
information to help "solve" the
problem. I still don't really have time
to conduct a research project but I
might be able to just have kids get to
thinking about finding information
even in a math word problem (which
we have a lot of open response
now).
Students still need to know how to
find information in books. They
can't alwasy rely on the information
found on the internet.
None

Skills are necessary

Should teach in
Elementary grades

All teachers are now involved in
research skill instruction- but I don't
think everyone understands nor
knows how to teach students to find
information. Perhaps they weren't
taught how to do it? I think
professional development should be
provided to non-literacy teachersmaybe even by the literacy teachers
so everyone teaches the same
process. I love the Big6 and already
used it with my kiddos.
I'm one of the only math teachers to
require a research project in our
school- the kids enjoy it and they get
to learn about math in a different
way. I wish more math teachers
taught a research project.

Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction

14

NA

15

16

17

18

19

20
21

22

Reason 3

Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction
Students have inadequate
information literacy skills

Need help teaching info.
Literacy/PD

Not my responsibility

Desire to integrate
Information literacy into
teaching

No time to teach all skills

Use same process for
information literacy
skills/Big 6

Need help teaching info.
Literacy/PD

Skills are necessary

None

Already teach information
literacy skills

134

#

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Please add additional comments you
would like to share regarding
information literacy skill instruction for
your middle school students

Again, I didn't think I needed to
teach information literacy skills but
they need to learn the process.
I think literacy should still do the
majority of the information literacy
skill instruction or the librarian. I
don't think social studies teachers
know the process or how to teach
and we don't have time to get it all
done.
I'm glad everyone has a shared
literacy responsibility for researchinstead of just literacy handling a
research paper.
Research is hard for 6th graders to
grasp. It's hard to teach the skills
without a step by step process so I
really like the Big6.
I thought kids knew how to find
everything (especially on the
internet through Google)!
I didn't really think about kids
needing to use research skills in
social studies but they do. I like the
idea of using a printed project
(posters are what my kids make for
Famous Wanted people we research)
but I think I might try a technology
project too. TESS says to give kids
choices so that might work too- the
kids pick if they do a technology
project or a paper project.
I teach research skills as my
computer applications class and the
kids really learn how to be finders of
information when using the
Big6.The only thing I hadn't thought
about was 6th graders being able to
use in text citations to avoid
plagiarism- I thought they were too
young but we will try it! Every
middle school teacher needs to teach
information literacy skills so kids
are ready for college and careers!
I like the Big6 model- breaks
research down into a manageable
process- kind of reminds me of the
scientific method.

Reason 1
Not my responsibility

Reason 2
Skills are necessary

Reason 3

Should be taught by literacy
teachers and/or librarian

Need help teaching info.
Literacy/PD

No time to teach all skills

Skills are necessary

Desire to integrate some
Information literacy into
teaching

TESS driven to try new
practices using technology.

Use same process for
information literacy
skills/Big 6

Students have inadequate
information literacy skills

Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction

Teachers should share
responsibility of
information literacy skill
instruction
Use same process for
information literacy
skills/Big 6
Students should already
have the skills

Use same process for
information literacy
skills/Big 6

135

