LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE:
PRACTITIONER EXPLORATIONS IN THE USE OF DESIGN PSYCHOLOGY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL AUTOBIOGRAPHY FOR LIBRARY BUILDINGS AND DESIGNS

by

AMY BETH

This dissertation is a study of the meaning and experiences of libraries described by six
library-building design practitioners in their environmental autobiographies. Participants
were guided through an adaptation of Toby Israel’s (2010) Design Psychology Toolbox
(hereafter known as the DPT or the “Toolbox”) exercises. The research is intended to
expand the practice of designing libraries as places and spaces where social and
emotional affordance is supported. Emphasizing the significance of libraries as place and
space where people often have rich and even transformative experiences serves to
augment use-efficiency and evidence-based space planning. Primary goals of the study
included providing an opportunity for library-building and design practitioners to tap into
their own environmental autobiographies to explore how experience creates meaning in
the environments of our lives, and to explore how personal narratives in the form of
library stories hold rich information about place and space. As part of this research,
participants were encouraged to consider which aspects of the DPT exercises they might
incorporate into future client intake exchanges and explorations for proposed librarybuilding programs. This dissertation describes a mixed method approach inherent in
environmental autobiography research where both in-depth interviewing as well as
sketching and mapping are employed as participants recall their past, explore their
present, and imagine their future in describing the significance of libraries over their life
course.

Chapter 1
Introduction
Statement of the Research Problem
Library-building and design projects frequently reflect patterns of building use
based on metrics of information access, efficiency, and evidence of collection use
(Elmborg, 2011; Janks & Lockhart & Travis, 2012). Extremely limited project budgets as
well as demands derived from perfunctory facility needs-assessment surveys inform and
drive the vast majority of library project planning (Janks, et al., 2012). Relying on
metrics-based information and retrieval-use data almost entirely excludes the significance
of the human experience of place and of space. In contrast, personal library stories—
individual narratives of the library’s meaning in memory and today—offer abundant
evidence of the impact of libraries as environments where transformative personal
experiences can unfold (Buschman & Leckie, 2007; Gough & Greenblatt 1990; Beth,
2010). Buschman and Leckie wrote and edited the anthology, The Library as Place;
History, Community, and Culture (2007), inviting contributors to situate their personal
journeys in libraries as essential sites for shifting social movements over decades of
changing American political mores. Gough and Greenblatt edited an entire volume on the
library as a place of privacy and self-protection, enclaves that have fostered the comingout process for generations of LGBT people. In earlier research, I interviewed people to
elicit their appreciation for libraries as sacred places. In this work, I listened to
immigrants name the library (and identify their library cards) as their first toe-hold in

1

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

understanding themselves as Americans and I learned how, for many users, libraries are a
place of continuous return for the unfolding of significant life transitions.
While library practitioners—including architects, designers, and library building
planners—may hold a sense of place and a deep regard for human environmental
meaning (Franck & Howard, 2010), all too often this understanding is not employed in
building and design project planning (Israel, 2010). I contend that library design is
impoverished by this oversight, and that the widest range of user-experience is
diminished when we neglect personal narrative and the insights that derive from
individual histories. I seek to show that accessing personal narrative can influence and
greatly benefit the library-building experience for all who participate in the process and
for all who libraries seek to serve.
It is the received wisdom that libraries, along with print publications, are
threatened and headed toward rapid extinction (Edwards, 2013; Shenton, 2014; Stripling,
2014). Stripling names libraries as vital bulwarks against nationally plummeting literacy
rates, and one of the few places where the shame of illiteracy is countered by overt
support, including programs and environments designed for new readers to succeed. In an
era of big box (book) stores, with the widespread presumption that digital information
adequately replaces the need for “a trip to the library” and online retail imitating library
services, library building projects today are vulnerable to being remade in the image of
strip-malls, one-stop-shop environments. The entity we know of as the library is in
danger of being reduced to its most flashy, consumable parts: Internet access, juice for
portable devices, and cup-holder accessorized seating in stain-resistant fabrics. In this
moment, key practitioners—architects, designers, and library professionals—lack

2

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

awareness of the tools and protocols that are being developed to create and enhance
human environmental meaning in (library) design and building projects (Israel, 2010;
Mattern, 2014; Sharpe & Bodnar & Long & Deisley, 2011). Resisting this trend, Mattern
sees the public library as an innovation lab (2014). Sharpe et al. held a weekend-long
symposium to reimagine libraries, naming them as essential in all that is great and good
for growing self-reliant, and civically engaged individuals starting with primary and
secondary education (2011).

Issues and Background to the Problem
Despite these promising preliminary investigations, the field of environmental
psychology has neglected to look at libraries as a significant environment akin to home,
childhood playground, neighborhood, etc.1 From course readings to published articles,
conference papers, poster sessions, proceedings, and invited speakers, libraries as
relevant environments of relationship, offering people some of the most significant
spaces and places of their lives, are conspicuously absent. While libraries as institutions
serve—among other functions—to honor and hold a place for narratives of many kinds, it
is narrative research methods, the data collection and analysis of library-focused stories,
which are largely missing from the investigation of libraries, past and future. In the field
of Library and Information Science (LIS), academics privilege quantitative data over
qualitative data, in stark contrast to many other practitioner fields. Not only has the LIS
field lagged in the embrace of narrative as a form of valid or rigorous research (Eckerdal,
2013; Bates, 2004), theories of ‘place’ and ‘space’ have only slowly been incorporated
1

Based on an analysis of the indices of the EDRA Proceedings, editions of the Handbook of
Environmental Psychology, literature review searching, and a review of syllabi from
environmental psychology courses.

3

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

into LIS literature and practice, and are slower yet to inform the formal training of
librarians (Buschman, Given, Leckie, 2010; Kevin, Mehra, 2016). By inviting participant
narratives about the experience of information retrieval—the process of seeking
information, refining a search through trial and error, the benefits of enacting a fruitful
search—Eckerdal’s article demonstrated the power of individual library adventure. As
editor, Susan E. Montgomery’s (2017) monograph on library assessment for learning
spaces includes chapters such as “A Place to Think, Feel, and Act: Psychological
Approaches to Understanding Library Spaces” (Harris, Schweighardt, 2017), and “The
Evolving Role of the Architect in Library Design” (Sens, Dowlin, 2017), articles
identifying the significance of library stakeholders’ narratives, including those of the
architect. Notwithstanding regional and cultural differences in their formal practitioner
education, my research and acquaintance with architects shows that schools of
architecture and design actively stifle the environmental knowledge and concerns that
budding practitioners bring to their work (Dujardin, 2013; Israel, 2010; Gutman, 2009).
Professional training routinely fails to educate architects and designers about the
importance of human interactions with environments or the meanings of humanenvironmental interactions. (Carter & Cromley, 2005; Nasar, Preiser & Fisher & Salama,
2007; Brooker & Weinthal, 2013). Dujardin worked with design students in the
Netherlands to champion people-centered designs for critical stakeholders. Toby Israel’s
extensive interviews with three famous architects included passages reflecting on how
their formal training demanded their personal environmental amnesia, and instead
privileged the building of forms and configurations devoid of individual memory and
meaning. In the work of Carter & Cromley, the people who shared the stories of their

4

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

lives used the vernacular in the re-telling of place and the project of an architectural
endeavor. Nasar et al. were early provocateurs in challenging schools of design by
demanding that designers draw from lived experience rather than emphasizing innovation
for its own sake. Because schools of architecture and design have produced generations
of practitioners lacking an awareness of the significance of human environmental
experience and who are utterly unfamiliar with the tools and protocols being developed to
address the significance of such experiences (Franck & Howard, 2010), those responsible
for proposing and designing library building projects fail to engage their clients in this
exploration of what is termed “self-place needs.”
As a career librarian now in my fourth decade of service, I am profoundly aware
of the bonds people have to libraries as environments of physical meaning, in addition to
their social, cultural, psychological, and aesthetic significance. Time and again, people
reference their need to re-experience the library in the evocative ways of their past, and to
protect the branch or institution from losing characteristics they hold as dear. Important
features may be as seemingly incidental as how mission-style wood furnishings offer an
inviting setting for their intellectual curiosity, or the way that light pours welcomingly
into a library room at a particular time of day. From childhood to adulthood, people seek
out their library as part of bigger weekly rituals, and depend on the persistence of
libraries to satisfy their sense of community. Over a lifespan, library-use rituals and
meanings may change, but personal ideas of “the library” persist. Inclusion of self-place
needs in the re/design process would allow for an examination of the ways “self”
influences place, and conversely, how aspects of “place” influence the self. Libraries are
places where people describe having transformative experiences of identity and find

5

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

profound meaning in relationship to the environment. Yet remarkably, self-place needs in
library building projects are rarely, if ever, investigated in the early phases of needsassessments, nor are they seen as priorities at the design table—and thus they are rarely
incorporated into building programs (Smale & Regalado, 2014).
Smale and Regalado have accumulated ethnographies of college students’ use of
libraries among other, more informal study spaces. Their research includes descriptions
of students studying in their apartment building hallways considered to be conducive as
options outside of their college libraries, and students without home study-space
composing academic papers on smartphones during subway rides. Students provide
drawings of their daily comings and goings of their college library making it evident that
college libraries offer them a wide range of fundamental meanings: from use as a base for
socializing with classmates, to a place where health and personal hygiene can be
maintained, and from a site of intellectual encouragement and support, to “a place of my
own” for students who otherwise lack quiet and privacy. Karen R. Diller published
research on methods for space assessment to support learning (Diller, 2015; Diller &
Phelps, 2010). Her 2017 literature review frames Montgomery’s anthology on assessing
library space; it incorporates ways of studying space for learning in general and uses of
academic library space, in particular (Diller, 2017). In recent years, promising new voices
and new dialogues have emerged (Hanagarne, 2013; Mattern, 2014; Shenton, 2014;
Stripling, 2014) helping to refine understanding of the library’s significance for diverse
groups. Hanagarne speaks explicitly about how individuals experience their library trips
and what takes place in the space to encourage their return. He articulates how
community engagement has always been and will continue to be more than the mere use

6

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

of collections. The meaning of access and use of libraries is reflected in the fact that
librarians are invited speakers for TEDx talks, write well-subscribed blogs on the future
of public spaces, and are solicited for opinion pieces in intellectual publications
concerning not only the future of libraries, but of the experience of place (Michael, 2016).
The examples above demonstrate the imperative for architecture and design
professionals to incorporate self-place needs and the environmental meanings held as
valuable by generations of people as they create library building programs and projects.
Toby Israel is a design psychologist who crafted The Design Psychology Toolbox
(hereafter known as DPT or the Toolbox). She created it to invite environmental
autobiographies and to generate data to counter missing personal narratives. This
dissertation addresses the practitioner-client process of engagement with library projects
and it expands the discourse on library space and place for the field of environmental
psychology in promising ways, to offer a model toward building libraries that are most
reflective of human needs.
Goals of the Research
The primary goal of my study was to collect data from architects and design
participants who had undertaken DPT exercises to analyze the DPT’s adaptability for
libraries. By providing an opportunity for library-building and design practitioners to tap
into their own environmental autobiographies, I sought to explore and analyze how
experiences create meaning in the environments of our lives. Narratives in the form of
library stories hold rich information about the significance of place and space in the
creation of individual agency and democratic community mores. As physical,
noncommercial space is increasingly contested and rare, library narratives offer us insight

7

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

into the continuance of a robust and informed public. The findings from library narratives
warrant exploration and inclusion in the fields of environmental psychology and deserve
to be factored into the practice of architecture and design for library building projects. To
explore these ends, I adapted Israel’s DPT exercises.
Additional goals include:
•

Providing practitioners (architects, designers, and librarians) who work with
library building and design programs, with specific terminology for engaging in
dialogue that prioritizes explorations of individual meaning and with an
opportunity to practice self-place reflection through an adaptation of DPT.

•

Expanding the literature on the meaning of human environments by appropriately
situating libraries alongside childhood homes, playgrounds, neighborhoods, etc.,
through an analysis of libraries as known environments of significant experience
and meaning over the life course.

•

Researching education in the fields of architecture, design, and librarianship to
support learning about place and space, and the value of human environmental
meaning, alongside time-honored studies of form, function, and metrics of use
assessments. Such an expansion stands to enrich professional practice. The
contribution of this research will identify experience and inherent knowledge that
students in these fields already possess and bring to practitioner education and
training (Freire, 1970).

•

Researching the use of narratives and narrative inquiry to determine how library
narratives might serve as rich, knowledge-based content and in what ways

8

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

narratives constitute a valuable source for qualitative research in the LIS field.
Where are the missing library narratives?
Potential Significance of the Research
Participation in this research introduces a small set of architect and design
professionals to an adaptation of the DPT exercises tailored specifically for professionals
who build libraries. Through the social science research method of ‘environmental
autobiography,’ a process of self-reflection generates self-place narratives, and with
analysis, a valuable source of data for library design. Analysis creates the possibility for
the assessment of such practices for application to building projects. There is no other
body of qualitative research on design professionals that catalogues practitioner
experiences of self-place needs or their fulfilling self-place bonds with libraries. My
assessment of the six practitioners’ narratives generates data that can be analyzed towards
an understanding of how their past library experiences meaningfully informs their future
professional library project work.
The analysis generated from this dissertation can inform future research on the
use of narrative inquiry tools as part of professional training and on the potential for their
use in professional practice. While the number of participants for this in-depth study is
intentionally small, there is the potential for informative follow-up exchanges with other
architects and designers, through professional development offerings such as practicums,
lectures, courses, conferences, internships, etc. Participants will be positioned to share
their experience of the DPT, perspectives of the tool, and the value they derived from
participation in the research. Finally, there is the potential for the practitioners who

9

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

participated in this study to embrace a discussion of self-place needs as a method for
working with library design clients and stakeholders.
I contend that shifts in practitioner-client self-place awareness might shift the
intake process for library design and building programs. When the social and emotional
experience of use and human relationships to libraries is incorporated into the design and
planning phase, it is likely to enhance any existing processes in which use-metrics and
efficiency of information retrieval have dictated outcomes. Through my participation in
professional networks, this dissertation might expand the respect for and consideration of
using narrative inquiry in research pertaining to library science topics. This dissertation
might serve as further evidence in the quest for social scientists involved in
environmental design to bring social science research concepts to the practice of
architecture and design fields. The American Institute of Architects New York’s
(AIANY) Architecture and Social Science Committee offers educational programs
promoting research and practice between these fields. A social science and architectural
history primer is provided each year (Wener et al., 2017). As a career librarian with a
wide range of professional contacts and colleagues, I am regularly invited me to share my
work at institutions through all-staff, in-service days, conference panels, blog entries,
addresses to special interest groups, and hands-on project work. I envision delivering an
educational hands-on session along with other scholars on library space and with
architect and design professionals who have expertise in library buildings for participants
planning to enter library building projects at an upcoming Association of College and
Research Libraries preconference. Finally, the dissemination of the ideas proposed in this
dissertation might also expand the recognition of libraries as environments of significant

10

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

meaning alongside other long-noted significant environments of experience such as
childhood homes and neighborhoods (Boschetti, 1987). My research for this dissertation
has reinforced my belief that there remains a great deal of importance still to learn about
human attachment to libraries as places, and that the narrative content of practitioner
library stories in particular is one key to understanding the experience of meaning in the
environmental setting of the library.
I plan to publish this research in a variety of highly accessible journal articles in
the practitioner literature to share the opportunity for further research and application of
the methods. I plan to participate in programming with AIANY’s Social Science
Committee. I also intend to present the process and findings of the research to audiences
at professional conferences and potentially in in-depth workshops often associated with
conferences. Finally, assuming the findings affirm the significance of the research, I am
inclined to partner with Toby Israel to identify audiences concerned with library
architecture and building projects for expanding the use of the DPT.
Research Questions
The focus of this work is on the experiences and meaning of the self-place
connections described by the participants, namely those practitioners who create librarybuilding programs, from libraries as spaces and places in their lives. The main research
question shaping this study is:
How do library-building practitioners describe their experience(s) of libraries in their
own environmental autobiographies, and how do these descriptions inform our
understanding of libraries as environments of significant meaning?
To answer this research question, I pose several sub-questions to guide my study:

11

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

i)

Understanding the powerful influence of one’s own environmental
story/environmental autobiography (Rivlin, 1978; Marcus, 1979) on the
relationship between self and place, how might the DPT exercises support
opportunities for practitioners to use self-place exploration with their
clients as part of the process for creating library building and design
programs?

ii)

What value do participants themselves find in DPT exercises?

iii)

What are the usual expectations and planning processes for librarybuilding practitioners and clients as they enter the design proposal stages?
How do practitioners and clients experience the usual expectations?

iv)

Does the library as place figure into people’s place attachment, place
genealogy, and place memory? If so, how is the library as place significant
to individual practitioners of architecture and design?

With this study, I hope to stimulate interest amongst library-building practitioners
to invite reflection on self-place attachment and the value of environmental
autobiography. I hope to contribute to an understanding of the dynamics of libraries as
place over the life course. In addition, my analysis of the data might prove useful for
helping those involved in library building projects become aware of the emotional aspects
of libraries as distinct from the library’s historic, primary role in information storage and
retrieval. The results of the study may also support a path to rediscovering unarticulated
or sublimated design desires. In her interviews with architects on home design
psychology and the creation of ideal places, Israel consistently and unintentionally
recorded the architect’s desire for ideal library spaces. In my own preliminary research, I

12

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

foregrounded libraries as the spine of one’s life story to prompt practitioner
environmental autobiographies. This method immediately brought out descriptions of
ideal library spaces that my sample of practitioners longed to recreate in their
commissioned work. In short, showing the longing for creating evocative projects that
successfully reflect libraries as rich, meaning-filled places and spaces in the lives of
library-building practitioners is what drives this study.

13

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 2
Place and Space Over the Life Course

All buildings tell stories. We know that buildings tell stories because we can
identify them by place, time, and culture (Psarra, 2009). I consider Psarra’s Architecture
and Narrative: The formation of space and cultural meaning, a seminal work in my topic
area. We can recognize the differences in cultural, historic, geographic narratives
between the library building framed by the lions on 5th Avenue in Midtown Manhattan
and the brownstone Carnegie library on a corner in Harlem, and between the glass-walled
storefront library in sprawling downtown Houston and the library bookmobile on a South
Dakota reservation. All people tell stories, and linguistic theorists as well as
psychologists have long documented the necessity of human expression for development,
growth, and self-understanding (Bruner, 1986, 1990; Rosenberg & Ochberg, 1992;
Sarbin, 1986). We can choose to believe that lives are stories in progress, interpreted and
in translation, and through the research of human scientists we determine that
communication, culture, and connectivity are where meaning surfaces (Polkinghorne,
1988; Hatch & Wisniewski, 1995). Josh Hanagarne, (2013) is a library scientist with
Tourette Syndrome. He names his inability to control his volume, spontaneous vocal
eruptions and physical disruptions as making him the most unlikely candidate to serve in
a library profession. His patrons have designated him as “the world’s strongest librarian,”
a fitting metaphor for how his personal, involuntarily visible narrative repeatedly draws
articulations from others on the meaning that libraries hold for them. The culture of
communication and connectivity that libraries make possible draws users who approach
Hanagarne and bond with his story, sharing the meaning that they make of his presence,

14

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

and their determined choice to inhabit the library environment with him. His authority as
a librarian, along with his involuntarily loud sounds and his reflexive movements,
confirms for many that the library operates as a great, open, welcoming, inclusive, and
professionally-served place where diverse interests are met in one public space intended
for all by a civil society.
The examples of buildings that echo local landscapes, of Hanagarne, or of
countless immigrants who have found a true welcome in libraries, tells us how cultural
content, ancestry, and geography build narratives that give us content to understand
where meaning surfaces. While there is much about libraries that yield stories of noble,
heartwarming, justice-demonstrating transactions, libraries are institutions that carry the
flaws of humans who lord over them. Sometimes librarians are information gatekeepers;
sometimes taxpayer patrons are privileged over the unemployed homeless; sometimes the
milieu of a library is intimidating; sometimes collections are dated or filtered at the
expense of underrepresenting marginalized lives; sometimes age groups have imposed
limits on access to collections—insulting their curiosity and capacity to grasp content;
sometimes sexual prudery dictates both collections and circulation policies; sometimes
libraries exacerbate frustration with false claims for lost items or inflated fines;
sometimes libraries are places of unwelcoming signage and worse; and sometimes
libraries make privacy feel impossible and the thought-police feel probable, and
occasionally privacy has been won out by the FBI. When we listen closely to the
narratives of the disgruntled as well as the contented, then we can claim to make good
use of narratives for building libraries as human environments.

15

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

The experience of entering a library and being in a library holds profound
meaning for a vast number of people experiencing the library as a place of designated
transaction (Beth, 2010; Elmborg, 2011; Stripling, 2014). Libraries are also often
experienced as a space (de Certeau, 1984), and that which is transacted does not
exclusively concern literary commodities. Where this research is concerned, place might
be considered the “where” of a being, and is literally experienced through the body and
our senses (Lefebvre, 1984). Space might be thought of as the possibility or as the texture
of experience. I define place as a tangible environment, and regard space as an abstract
concept more intimately connected with a mental understanding of the physical place.
Space is external, experienced and held within the mind. Since libraries are greater than
the sum of their collections and services, it seems prudent for practitioners—architects,
designers, library administrators, and city/campus planners— involved in library-building
projects to acknowledge the meanings that libraries represent to a variety of people in
different historical geographies.
When we build, design, remodel, or renovate, we select stories to tell and methods
for telling them (Gopnik, 2000). Buildings tell stories about many things, about their
location in space and time, about the culture of their context, about the values and
knowledge of their creators—both those whose applied talents brought forth the building
and those who inhabit its space (Smale & Regalado, 2014). My research investigates how
architects and designers who work in relationship to libraries as both place and space can
create, foster, and cultivate cultural content—what I call narrative meaning—and how
narrative meaning can be supported in the initial phases of library-building projects,
whether they are new, redesigned, renovated, or remodeled.

16

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

When Meaning Goes Missing
When I began to explore the topic of library as place and space in people’s lives
more than a decade ago, the topic was conspicuously absent in the literatures of LIS,
architecture and design, and environmental psychology. My own practitioner-training as
a librarian never investigated theoretical explorations of place or space, and in the 30-plus
years since my initial training, the LIS field has still not developed such theories, nor has
it incorporated theories of place and space from other fields into its scholarship, reflective
practice or review (Kulthau, 2004; Schroeder & Hollister, 2014). Leckie, and Buschman
took their well-received anthology The Library as Place (2007), and understood the time
had come for the field to develop formal theories. Together with Given, they looked at
Lefebvre’s work on spatial dialectics and pushed the discourse further in the LIS field
(Leckie & Given & Buschman, 2010).
The historical work of LIS pertains to the history of the book (Hall, 1996); to the
social history of public libraries, intellectual freedom, and freedom of access to
information (Wiegand, 1989; Wiegand & Davis, 1994); and to the American library
system as part of the evolution of civil society (Augst & Wiegand, 2001). Wiegand is a
comprehensive historian of libraries in that he neither rests at a chronology of
institutional building counts or architectural patterns, nor a record of policy formation.
Rather, he situates all his research in a social historic context and is forever asking
questions about the impact on individual lives through collective institutional practice.
Quite recently, a healthy handful has been written about the “library as place” (Buschman
& Leckie, 2007; Elmborg, 2011; Kapitzka & Bruce, 2006; Most, 2009; IFLA, 2004;
May, 2009; May & Black, 2010). However, with Buschman & Leckie and Elmborg as

17

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

exceptions, most current investigations emphasize hyper-technology, social media, and
access to information from a variety of commercial providers. These trends beg the
questions of what a library is and what a librarian should be. While these perspectives are
necessary elements of library education and information advocacy in today’s world, they
neglect to account for the meaning to be found in the experience of using libraries that
informs our understanding of the library as space (Chaban, 2017, September 18; Kells,
2017).
There is a range of perspectives on the concept of the library as place and space.
The term “library as place” is used in LIS literature to address place as a physical,
architectural, and mapped environment (Foote, 2004; Osburn, 2007); sometimes “library
as place” is used to evoke an environment of sacred embodiment of literacy (Wiegand,
2005). In many instances, “library as place” describes a physical library in direct
opposition to the digital library (Templeton, 2008; Gorman, 2000). Bennett (2009) wrote
about three paradigm shifts in the design of library spaces, defining them as readercentered, book-centered, and learning-centered. Finally, the “library as place” may refer
to the library as a repository, along with all the attendant physical facilities management
issues (Closet-Crane, 2011). In her review of renowned film documentarian Fred
Wiseman’s 2017 documentary Ex Libris: The New York Public Library, Manohla Dargis
of the New York Times wrote, “…he takes his camera into those same [grand] halls as
well as into more humble city branches. He sweeps into atriums and down corridors,
pauses in reading and meeting rooms, and lays bare this complex, glorious organism that
is the democratic ideal incarnate.” (Dargis, 2017, September 12). Libraries often, though
not always, are physically impressive entities where an equally impressive array of

18

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

activities, processes, conversations, and performances occur. More than a mere location,
libraries are constructed space (Lefebvre, 1984) as well as social and transactional space.
As depositories, libraries hold and offer a wide range of cultural resources for
many public uses. Libraries are a type of cultural and social institution amongst other
such institutions, and reflect various external institutional interests including those of
government and corporations. Grievously, in these times, the library is often required to
defend itself, needing justification to persist as a professionally-served physical
environment, viewed as competition to large commercial chain booksellers and at risk for
succumbing to virtual space and online information. The virtual library, it needs pointing
out, exists nowhere in particular and answers to no unitary authority. While the virtual
library is a marvelous, recent arrival with its own unique place and space attributes, the
physical library is understood as both a place and space belonging to someone(s), in fact,
to everyone, all of us.
Theoretical and conceptual writings that consider the library as a space, such as
Hersberger, Sua, and Murray’s (2007) writing on the existence of “Negro libraries” in
the development of African American education and civil society engagement, and
Templeton’s (2008) work “placing the library” and the human geography of the library,
were critical new readings in the LIS field. Bushman & Leckie (2007) pulled together the
most important anthology of writings on this topic to date. By inviting narrative writings
that honor the library as a place of history, community, and culture through lived
experience, a new discourse unfolded along with the realization that we have been remiss
by not asking questions of the significance of libraries as places that are also spaces.

19

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Research of the past 10 years places the exploration of space in the context of
theories developed from many fields, including psychology, philosophy, geography, and
architecture. This has allowed for the recognition of the experience of place and space, a
“sense of place” (Tuan, 1977), emerging from studies and discussions of the life of the
library space itself (May & Black, 2010). One example occurs in discussion of how
people arrive in libraries not only for a scheduled meeting but for the experience of
sharing the library as place and space before, during, and after meetings (Aabu &
Audunson & Vårheim, 2010; Elmborg, 2011). Theories of space from each of these fields
lend library science theorists and practitioners a host of new perspectives on the
experience of using the library for transactions apart from literary consumption. Whether
as a formal place where meetings are held or as a space where meetings ‘happen,’ the
research and publications specifically include libraries as environments of human
transaction where the experience has every bit to do with the setting. When the library is
considered as an environment that is not reduced to one of literary consumption, it is
rapidly revealed as an environment of potential expansive meaning over the life course
(Beth, 2010; HFMUS, 2010). Much of the research acknowledges a phenomenological
perspective (psychology and architecture) (Seamon, 2000; Templeton, 2008) and
recognizes the possibility of connections between people and the place (library) (Pruitt,
2010; Prigoda & McKenzie, 2007).
As a library administrator, I have participated in numerous library-building
projects and learned first-hand that designers seldom incorporate their own meaningful
experiences of libraries in their professional design work, although they often express a
yearning to do so. The meanings that library practitioners remember and wish to honor

20

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

have become delegitimized in the beleaguered process of achieving project budgets,
bureaucratic authorizations, and committee-pleasing design requirements. It is critical
that we acknowledge building design practitioners as knowledge producers, encourage
reflection in their practice, and call for them to incorporate experience and meaning into
their library designs.
Libraries as Transactional Spaces
Space studies (Bisbrouck, 2004; Demas, 2005; Freeman, 2005; Janks, 2012;
Kapitzke, 2006; Limberg, 1999) in libraries focus almost exclusively on functionalist
metrics of measuring use patterns, to the blatant exclusion of libraries as environments of
transactional meaning. Project budgets prioritize high traffic encounters at service points,
pathways to hasten access (to both the service points and collections), and facilities use.
If the purpose of encountering and experiencing the library doesn’t survive the
functionalist chopping block, it doesn’t survive the project. Accordingly, those in
supervisory positions on library projects often fail to understand libraries as unique
entities whose environments consistently afford meaning beyond mere functionalist use,
an enjoyment that characteristically extends into meaningful life experience.
It is deeply troubling that we lack social science research and collaboration
opportunities for architects, designers, and librarians to create libraries of our future
where place and space reflect vital meanings that people draw from their experiences of
libraries. In an age driven by information, speed of information, and the power associated
with the commodification of information, those who are drawn to libraries as human
environments of cultural, social, symbolic, and intellectual meaning are underserved—
and the designers of places/spaces known as libraries are underutilized. Instead, a new

21

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

type of dominant space is envisioned, where newly constructed environments of
sophisticated technological tools are given pride of place, presenting the illusion of
control over the purpose, description, and human use of libraries (Sherman, 2015).
The prevalent assumption that “comprehensive digital access” means that virtual
space seamlessly replaces physical space, and that physical collections can be sufficiently
replaced by virtual collections flattens and distorts human experience. This perspective,
which presently dominates perceptions of the future of information access and colors
environmental preferences, relegates the experience of library-use to a limited sphere of
search and discovery—as though this were a complete description of the role of libraries
and the full range of the meanings that libraries should be designed to fulfill.
Big-box bookstores are offered as the modern, rightful evolution of public
libraries (Fister, 2014; Mattern, 2014). This commerce-driven vision threatens the core of
libraries as environments of public culture and inheritance. The library’s albeit imperfect
broad access, balanced selection, pluralistic possibility for discovery, and transactional
experiences are replaced with calculated “tell you what to read” collections and cafés
offering seating for one—opportunities that are calculated to add pleasure to the thrill of
spending money in a habitat that increasingly can only be accessed by car. Reliable
technology and digitized collections create marvelous possibilities for virtual libraries, or
as is more commonly the case, virtual collections. Accordingly, virtual libraries and
collections inhabit a new space and add new dimensions for accessibility, access rights,
transaction, and interaction. The fact of some aspects of libraries having “gone virtual” is
often praised and frequently discussed as the [sic] successful evolution of libraries
themselves (Hanagarne, 2012).

22

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Fister, Mattern, and Hanagarne clamor for public recognition of libraries as
transactional spaces where “throw[ing] the baby out with the bathwater” does a deep
disservice to society. If we rest at a misunderstanding of libraries as information access
and retrieval storage houses rather than as houses of transaction and development we will
renege on the social development of society ranging from the intimate personal growth of
becoming literate, through to the innovation of artists, industries and entrepreneurs.
While “improvement” holds tremendous opportunities for greater accessibility, new kinds
of collections, and for the meaningful integration of virtual place and space, “improving”
cannot justify “removing” libraries as physical environments to be visited and created in
partnership with patrons. In the now widely cited 2005 Council on Library Information
Resources report, contributing authors Demas (2005), a renowned academic library
leader and innovator of library space and virtual learning, and Freeman (2005), a
nationally recognized authority on library planning and design, drive home this very
point in their unique essays challenging us to think about new potential for the place we
call the library. Their work underscores the importance of the library as a continued place
for teaching, learning, and research in the digital age.
Making Room for Meaning
Two popular misperceptions threaten the future of the physical library. The
mistaken belief that the physical library is obsolete, that the virtual library provides
everything we need, reveals only the narrowest understanding of what the library truly is
and can be. The other sees libraries as cookie-cutter units, little different from generic
franchise bookstores. Recognizing the distinct ways that libraries serve local
communities—provide multiple means of access to information, offer specialized

23

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

collections, and give patrons varied pathways to programs and space—is essential for
keeping doors open (Mattern, 2014). For the most part, when libraries and peoples’
experiences are considered in the same conversation, the discussion embraces literacy
and the power of books but seldom includes an interrogation of environments or people’s
experience of space. When libraries are invoked as sacred entities, this discourse also
focuses on books, but usually to the exclusion of the library’s uniquely transactional
environment. When there is a chance to talk about experience of place or the meaning
that the use of space holds for people, literacy, technology, and learning are privileged
over the social and emotional aspects of libraries. It is no wonder that a commercial
environment offering shelves of books steeped in the aroma of freshly brewed coffee and
dotted with cushy seating is able to foster the misperception of the chain bookstore as “a
library”—even if it is only a version of what the library is becoming, despite being no
library at all (Lane, 2017). When we reduce libraries as equivalent to all that has been
digitized and pinned to the Internet or to the notion of ‘appear-anywhere’ entities like
chain bookstores, we diminish our ability to conceive of libraries as unique spaces of
culture and of meaning over the life course.
Libraries as Space
Oldenburg (1990, 2001) has written extensively on great good public spaces—
spaces to which people go by choice—that he terms “third places,” defining these as
public places where people can gather, putting aside the concerns of home and work
(their “first” and “second” places, both necessary places). “Third places” are where
people can unwind, meet, chat, connect, engage, and which also serve social community.
Here I argue that Oldenburg’s earlier thinking about the life and value of culturally

24

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

created spaces—essential for lived stories and for identifying environments where
experience consistently renders it a place of significant meaning for people—critically
overlooked libraries as “third place” environments, and that this oversight might stem
from his lack of a feminist lens, and a general undervaluing of female-dominated
environments. Nonetheless, building on Oldenburg’s core insights, I regard the library as
a complex environment that potentiates significant meaning as a “third place”—along
with aspects of “first place” (home and family) and “second place” (workplace)
experience. While for the vast majority of patrons, libraries do not qualify as “first place”
environments within Oldenburg’s narrow definition, librarians have written compellingly
about serving populations who access libraries for their “homelike” aspects, including
resting and washing. Without qualification, those of us who work in this female
dominated profession at all levels certainly experience libraries through the “second
place” designation of his theories, and beyond a doubt, libraries were for too long
conspicuously absent from an understanding as “third places.”
Under competing pressures, library planning and design practitioners may render
21st century libraries as places and spaces that are devoid of meaning. Templeton (2011),
referring to linguistic expression as narrative (Bruner, 1986; Sarbin, 1986) states, “What
a library becomes under such hyper-generative circumstances is born out of patterns in
which the lives of its users and communities weave disparate and novel experience into
spaces of communal infrastructure, linguistic and material” (p. 200).
The existing discourse of library design is dominated by concerns of technology,
equipment, and space requirements that do not address the “third place”—places of
meaning, psychological, and environmental qualities (Harris, 2007). To apply our

25

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

understanding of the significance of libraries as place and space over the life course, it
seems necessary for the professional discourse to expand. I wish to use narrative research
to promote a more full understanding of the library in the life of the user, and to
reimagine our inherited understanding of the user in the life of the library.

26

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 3
Design Psychology
Toby Israel is an environmental psychologist who identifies herself as having
founded a relatively new field known as design psychology (Israel, 2010). Defined as
“the practice of architecture, planning and interior design in which psychology is the
principal design tool” (Israel, 2010), design psychology supports the articulation of
experience in identifying how an environment becomes a place of significance to us and
illuminates what it is about the experience, textures, furnishings, objects that makes the
place meaningful in our memories (Neary, 2005). With methods that build heavily on
environmental autobiography, Israel developed a set of exercises—the Design
Psychology Toolbox, or DPT—intended to bring memory to the conscious fore and to
explore intimate connections with past experiences of place.
The fundamental principles of design psychology build upon the idea that we all
have emotional attachments to certain surroundings, places, and atmospheres of our past.
As adults we often seek to recreate these symbols or environments to achieve ideal
environments in our present. Often, we are unaware of the ways in which the
environments we strive to create are linked to past places and objects. Beyond the
baseline of achieving shelter and places where we experience feeling secure, an
awareness of self-place relationships and an articulation of our environmental
autobiography can contribute to our awareness, growth and actualization.
In the discussion of methodology that follows, a section entitled, “Using Narrative
Research to Derive Self-Place Meaning: Environmental Autobiography and Design
Psychology” there is a further description of the process of environmental self-reflection,

27

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Gaston Bachelard’s (1964, p.8) “topoanalysis- the systematic psychological study of the
sites of our intimate lives,” and the foundation of environmental autobiography in design
psychology.
Methodology Introductory Statement
This section includes discussions on qualitative research, narrative analysis and
environmental autobiography, design psychology, methods of data collection, methods of
data analysis, and issues of validity. The process of determining an appropriate
methodology for this inquiry has been a lengthy one, but in the end, the methodology did
not just provide me with a way to approach the research, it forced me to think about my
central questions in new ways. Methodology informed my inquiry.
I am compelled to think about how designers reveal narrative meaning in their
work. For my research, I have adapted Israel’s DPT environmental autobiography
interrogatories to the concerns of libraries. The methodologies that I have chosen support
the investigation of libraries as environments of rich human experience quite apart from
traditional understandings of the library’s centrality to the history of the book or the
attainment of literacy. These methodologies support a shift in the way practitioners
approach the relationship between human experience and place, while interacting with
clients to create library building and design space proposals. Using methods rooted in
environmental autobiography, I am looking to engage practitioners of architecture and
design, of library science, and of human environmental relationships who are involved in
building, designing, renovating or remodeling library buildings and spaces of the future. I
believe people-centered public spaces are essential to democracy. Accordingly, I proceed
with the belief there is value in incorporating the social and emotional human aspects of

28

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

the experience of using libraries when entering the design process. Since there is no
precedent for the work of capturing and analyzing narratives of practitioner experiences
of libraries as environments of significance over their life course, it seems judicious to
proceed in a manner that achieves the accumulation of data while affording practitioners
an opportunity for participation and reflection.
In preparation for this dissertation, I explored layers of narrative inquiry through
two routes. First, I undertook an initial study of definitions and methods of narrative
research from a wide range of authors investigating the ‘how-to’ of narrative research, the
‘how-come’ of narrative research, and the rise of narrative research in importance as a
form of data (Atkinson, 1998; Clandinin, 2007; Daiute & Lightfoot, 2004; Herman et al.;
2012; Leiblich, Tuval-Mashiach & Zilber, 1998; Linde, 1993; Mitchell, 1981; Riessman,
1993; Warhol, 2010). I believed I would learn the ‘how to’ and ‘how-come’ of the
narrative research options, but instead gained a living sample of grounded theory—
grappling with a study of my own emergent learning (Glaser, 1992). Narrative inquiry
and analysis have no precise prescribed or delineated methodologies. In fact, there is no
clear canon. The history of narrative inquiry indicates splinter groups of theorists and
departures from accepted methods. Narrative—increasingly recognized and accepted as a
valuable source of information and accepted as an important approach in many research
efforts—was once a hard sell where questions of the validity of its methods within
qualitative research was concerned (Mishler, 1986).
Second, I sought a research methodology for libraries and narrative meaning that
could be useful to practitioners directly engaged in constructing the future of libraries.
The targeted participants: architects, designers, and library professionals who, by

29

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

participating in DPT exercises and in-depth interviews, might find self-awareness and
value in the tools. My hope for this study is that practitioners will consider portions of the
DPT or the tool in its entirety to shift the practitioner/client approach in the visioning
phases of design projects and for identifying priorities in library-building programs. How
can the narratives of practitioners tell stories of libraries, and what stories can they tell?
How can library narratives tell stories of people’s lives, and what stories can they tell?
How can these stories be applied to library building projects? Beyond the privilege of
extending a self-learning opportunity to an individual practitioner, I sought to foster a
greater understanding of the significance of experience and of meaning of libraries for
practitioners, generally. I hoped to build on an embryonic body of library research and
practice, and to enhance practitioner/client dialogue, documentation, and planning
participation amongst those engaged in library planning, design, and architecture.
Qualitative Research and Narrative Inquiry
Narrative methods center on the experiences of our lives and the expression of our
stories as collected by narrative researchers. Although interviews are a primary form of
narrative data collection, other forms such as observations, documents, photographs,
moving images, drawings, or performances also can provide rich ways of conveying our
experiences (Creswell, 2013 p.71). Blogs are increasingly recognized as a form of data
collection for narrative research, while journals and letters were two of the earliest
formats for documented narratives.
Bearing in mind Bruner’s (1986) idea that narratives are a primary method for
humans to know and think about our worlds, I am drawn to narrative inquiry to learn
about the role of libraries in the life stories of practitioners who participate in the design

30

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

of library as professionals. Because architects and design professionals often best express
themselves through visual communication, I opened “environmental autobiographies” to
include sketches as part of the narrative process. I will discuss this and the choice to use
Israel’s DPT exercises—which builds on environmental autobiography—at greater length
later in this section.
Personal narratives were once marginalized under the influence of rationalist
epistemology and the insistence on rigid hypothesis testing in experimental methodology
along with the scientific preoccupation with objectivity and generalization over
individual experiences (Clandinin, 2007; McAdams, Josselson, Lieblich & Turns, 2001).
All of the authors named here took professional risks by pushing against prescriptive
measures and asserting the qualitative richness of narratives as invaluable data. In
contrast to other qualitative methods in scientific pursuits, narrative is the primary
scheme or means by which human existence is rendered meaningful (Polkinghorne,
1988). Narratives are a portal to the mind in action, both for the content of the mind and
its operations (Chambers, 2005). Narratives offer a holistic, qualitative type of inquiry,
which moves us away from more traditional subject manipulation and focuses instead on
learners in their natural environments, with all their complexities and interconnectivities
(Shlain, 2010). Narratives may offer insights that exceed the understanding of researchers
and practitioners alike, and in applied fields such as health, law or public administration,
narratives can bring forth “local knowledges” or aspects of unique demographic
experiences (Ospina & Dodge, 2005). In my efforts to connect library narratives with
practitioners involved in the design and future of library buildings, I value narratives as a
source for aiding in producing meaningful, actionable knowledge.

31

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

The “narrative turn” (Mitchell, 1981) refers to the impact of narratives and the
methods of narrative research as “narrative” was first identified, as it edged into new
disciplines, before “arriving,” and ultimately becoming an aspect of interdisciplinary
inquiry (Cortazzi, 1993; Lieblich et al., 1998, Ricoeur, 1981). This “turn” refers to how
researchers explore questions of the meaning derived from experiencing and interpreting
the world, rather than measuring, predicting and explaining it. The “turn” acknowledges
the potential importance for narrative inquiry in the experiences and perspectives of both
the researcher and the people studied. As some feminist researchers contend (Belenky,
1986; Gilligan, 1984; Goldberger, 1996; Warhol, 2012), narratives have always been a
valid way of knowing, and perhaps the renaissance of narratives as a method within
qualitative research reflects an appreciation for new, more sophisticated collection and
analysis (Clandinin, 2007; Daiute & Lightfoot, 2004; Herman et al., 2005).
Personal narratives, recognized as a fundamental cognitive activity (Cortazzi,
1993), have always been an important meaning-making tool at the core of human
experience, giving us a holistic understanding of the contributions that actions and events
make to particular outcomes (Polkinghorne, 1988). McAdams (2001) writes extensively
on the significance of life stories, stories that give a life a sense of unity, meaning, and
purpose, and how narrative case studies allow us to focus on the stories of participants.
They serve to ground theory in the particulars of lived experience, and they give
participants a voice in the construction of theory. Riessman (2008, p.194) names casecentered narrative analysis as a method that can produce rich, context-dependent new
knowledge that can be usefully combined with other knowledge to augment our
understanding of meaning.

32

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Narratives of lived experience often include space, and pose fascinating
challenges in expanding our notions of ‘validity’ (Lentini, 2010). But the new landscape
of narrative methodological introspection today offers a wide embrace of research
methods (Bateson, 2010; Bragg, 2004; Braid, 1996; Gilbert, 2002; Ospina & Dodge,
2005). These individuals looked beyond the use of narratives for learning about health
crises and listened, so that Bateson would shift our awareness from demographic
burdensome caregiving, to longevity as legacy; Bragg could ask new questions in
research on identity; Gilbert could learn about the extension of grief over the life course;
and Ospina and Dodge would have narrative evidence of sacrifices made in lives
dedicated to public administration service. The potential of personal narratives as data for
making sense of things and for interdisciplinary connections has only grown stronger
with the introduction of new media and the opportunities created by cyberspace for
millions of people to be part of much bigger and more flexible communities (Boellstorff,
2010; Shlain, 2010) both in written and visual content. These new mediums are magnets
for narrative, and the resultant explosion of examples that reinforces the value of
narratives as data.
Being more process-than product-oriented, collecting personal narratives is
valued for adding a time integrated, historical perspective on things (Josselson &
Lieblich, 1999). Personal narratives are also valued for revealing a multitude of complex
environmental factors which shape learning and through the telling, an articulation of
meaning from race, social status, age, ethnicity, and sexuality, to (dis)ability and culture
may emerge (May & Black, 2010).

33

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Israel (2010) believes that environmental narratives include a family genealogy of
place that acknowledges temporality akin to theories of spatiality and dialogue set forth
by Julia Kristeva (1981). While Kristeva’s theoretical work is explored in this
dissertation in greater depth in Chapter 6: Data Analysis: Narratives of Environmental
Meaning and in Chapter 7: Data Analysis: Reflections on the Design Psychology
Toolbox, it is important in this chapter to note Kristeva’s influence on Israel’s articulation
of individual narratives holding family genealogies of place and more. Additionally,
research indicates that it matters if the language of the telling and the language of the
experience coincide or not (Marian & Neisser, 2000). As authors of our own personal
stories, we have a unique perspective on our specifics in time and space, neither of which
might be shared by others. This is what Bakhtin (1986) calls the “surplus of seeing”—the
processes, critical experiences and interconnectivities that each of us experiences, which
others may not have had, or that may be overlooked or discounted. By adding one
person’s “surplus of seeing” to that of another, a better, richer picture of reality emerges.
Bruner (2004) offers that there is no such thing as an innocent eye and that the
brain is never free of “pre-commitment.” Bruner and Braid (1996) both believe we should
consider personal narratives as discursive constructions, more than factual
representations. This means that what we choose to tell in our own story is always
influenced by what we already know about other people’s stories and experiences; what
we say or do not say is shaped by what we believe to be of interest to particular
audiences. To capture the phenomenon of narratives always influencing other narratives,
Kristeva coined the term “intertextuality,” a succinct way of indicating that right from the

34

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

onset, every text “is under the jurisdiction of other discourses” (Jardine, 1981; Kristeva,
1981) and subject to the inescapable realities of temporality and spatiality.

Using Narrative Research to Derive Self-Place Meaning: Environmental
Autobiography and Design Psychology
What are the traditions, how are narratives used, where do my interests fit in, and
how are my questions simulative? Enter author and environmental psychologist Toby
Israel, and her book, Some Place Like Home: Using Design Psychology to Create Ideal
Places (2010). Some Place Like Home (2010) presents design psychology as a conceptual
tool for architectural planning and design purposes able to retrieve the inner
environmental images each of us has packed away in our memory banks. Israel (2010)
states:
Thus what began as my personal exploration of my environmental autobiography
has ended up as a much broader exploration of the psychological connection
between person and place… my theories are based not only on the work of
Bachelard, but on the ideas and methods of other colleagues, many of whom were
also inspired by Bachelard to journey down the path of environmental meaning.
Environmental psychologists, interdisciplinary professionals who examine the
interplay between people and the environment, have particularly contributed to
thinking in this area. Yet the challenge for environmental psychologists has
always been to see their thinking—their theories and research—applied as part of
the actual design process. Thus, I present here not only a process by which
individuals can gain insight into their self-place connection but a useable
programming technique which can help match people and places at the deepest

35

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

possible level. In fact, I have come to refer to this method of working as a new
“inner vision” field of design called “Design Psychology.” I define Design
Psychology as “the practice of planning, architecture and interior design in which
psychology is the principal design tool.” (p. x)

Israel’s book primarily focuses on achieving an ideal home, but the intention of her work
was to bring design psychology to any building and design process. The book includes
the DPT, composed of nine exercises in a series of in-depth interviews, and draws heavily
from the methods of environmental autobiography. The DPT presents a new
methodological framework for the exploration of self and place. It is a methodology
steeped in qualitative narrative inquiry, narrative analysis, and environmental
autobiography. The DPT framework anticipates that understanding of self and place are
molded by the environment in which we live and work, by our social and cultural
inheritance and surroundings, and by the aesthetic awareness we gain from those places
and times. Proceeding from the insight that self and place are intertwined throughout life,
the DPT foster in-depth interviews, prompting participants to explore how
understandings of self and place grow and change.
In Some Place Like Home (2010), Israel states, “I just want to demonstrate that
the methodology is appropriate. If my application of narrative hasn't been used before it's
about demonstrating fit of the method to the content, not the content derivation” (p. xii).
Bruner (1986), in naming the significance of narrative analysis, describes narratives as
one of the primary ways that humans know and think about their worlds. Coupled with
the awareness that architects and design professionals often best express themselves
through visual communication, environmental autobiography’s signature combination

36

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

method of sketches and in-depth interviews makes this form of narrative research highly
relevant for the targeted practitioner-participants: architects and designers.
In a 1979 UC Berkeley working paper entitled “Environmental Autobiography,”
Clare Cooper Marcus includes a footnote explaining the premise for the write-up, “This
course - Landscape Architecture 240, “Personal Value in Design”—is a seminar for about
ten graduate students in which a once-a-week experiential exercise…enables students to
gradually uncover their own environmental values” (p.13). In the Appendix that follows,
Cooper Marcus provides a detailed description of the method of environmental
autobiography in which she comments on what is meant by the call to document
“significant environments of your life” (p.15), “How you interpret “significant” is up to
you: for my purposes, I’d say an environment was significant if, in thinking about it, it
still has some emotional “charge” for me, either positive or negative, and especially, it
would seem significant if similar environments today elicit a similar emotional response”
(p.15). I remember reading this list for the first time with great anticipation to see which
places would be offered to students as examples to consider recalling and writing about:
•
•
•
•
•
•

houses you lived in
houses of friends or relations you visited
neighborhoods you lived in or visited
landscapes you played in, or studied, or spent vacations in, or possibly just read
about and never visited
schools you went to
cities or countries or landscapes you visited as a tourist

I am still struck by the conspicuous absence of libraries from the list. Home,
neighborhood, school, relatives’ houses visited, new lands—but not libraries.
Environmental autobiographies have often been used for expressing and capturing
childhood space meaning (Boschetti, 1987; Chawla, 1992; Sobel, 1993). In Brian

37

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Kenney's dissertation, The Transformative Library: A Narrative Inquiry into the
Outcomes of Information Use (2008), narratives of library-use consistently referenced
how attachment to libraries stemmed from childhood. In Kenny’s findings section, he
acknowledges the significance of what participants described about their earlier library
experiences, naming this in his conclusion section as an unexamined aspect of his own
story. In 2012, I interviewed Kenney about narrative as an appropriate research method
for library science and for environmental psychology, and he stressed the importance of
providing opportunities for people to revisit their past library experiences in considering
their practices and preferences in their adult library use and lives (B. Kenney, personal
communication, October 26, 2012). This advice echoes my own research compiled in
2004 when participants were asked to describe what they thought about when they heard
the word “library.” Many described in visceral detail a library of their childhood, and
almost all the participants spoke of social and emotional experiences having nothing to
do with the information or resources they utilized. Narratives included first experiences
of independence: being allowed to ride a bicycle to the library unaccompanied by an
adult, or befriending the librarian, an adult who was neither a family member or relative.
Also included in narratives were moments in the development of their autonomous self:
forming rituals on the pathways to and from library visits; having the yearning for
privacy fulfilled in libraries; finding space away from family members and expectations;
exploring sexual identity in the sanctuary of the stacks; coping with negative experiences
with mean librarians and the process of recovering from them; experiencing intellectual
freedom; becoming an American with the rite of passage of using a public library. The
library also holds pride of place narratives as the location for finding ground or retrieving

38

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

a feeling of groundedness after life transitions such as the end of actively raising children,
losing a job, starting a new business, encountering a health crisis, relocating, the death of
a parent, a retirement, or a divorce. In these narratives, participants articulated how they
had made meaning in childhood through their creation of rituals and pathways to and
from the library, and the memory of texture of place and the experience of the actual
library itself (Beth, 2010). While there is a special place for childhood library memories
formed from our initial encounters with libraries, it is library experience over the life
course that offers the richest array of narratives from which to learn.

Procedures, Recruitment and Ethical issues
This research has been approved by the Institutional Review Board of the City
University of New York - Graduate Center. Participation in this project was not expected
to have any negative repercussions for the participants, beyond what might be
encountered in everyday experience. Participants were fully apprised of the research
methods, objectives and timetable and were informed that they could withdraw from the
study at any time, or end an interview at any time.
Targeted participants were architects and design professionals who have worked
on library design, construction, or library renovation projects as authorities in their fields.
“Qualitative researchers usually work with small samples of people, nested in their
context and studied in-depth” (Miles & Huberman, 1994, p. 27). In the end I worked with
six participants, each one an architect or design professional with experience in library
designs, renovations, and building projects. Library projects included the design and
building of new facilities, expansion of existing facilities, restoration of a library, and
renovation of libraries. Librarians who intimately engage with such projects were also

39

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

considered for inclusion. As there is no definition of a “library architect” or “library
designer,” I sought participants who self-defined as such. Librarians who share the
responsibilities of library building projects may also have extended their talent where
design and planning were necessary, and so too were considered for participation in the
research. To arrive at the final six participants, I set out to identify as many as 10
potential participants, since even when proceeding from the best intentions, research
participants sometimes may need to step aside during the process, or at the last minute.
All participants ultimately requested confidentiality, which has been kept in three
ways. First, a copy of the names, contact information, and the pseudonym of each
participant is kept in hard copy, locked with the researcher’s personal papers, with the
commitment that hard copies will be destroyed after five years. Second, all electronic
documents will consistently use pseudonyms. Third, while transcribed portions of the
interviews, sketches from the environmental autobiographies, and the DPT exercises
from all six participants are included in this dissertation, accompanying information will
be changed or deleted to insure confidentiality for those requesting it (i.e. “XYZ Library”
will replace the actual project name).
Participants were recruited via two strategies: word of mouth (aka snowballing),
and via online notification (See Appendix A). With established professional networks in
library administration, in architecture/design/construction fields, as well as amongst
environmental psychologists, when I shared my interest and my intended dissertation
approach, my professional colleagues were eager to refer potential participants or to
spread the word. I also posted a call for participants at forums (e.g. New York School of
Interior Design, the New York Chapter of the AIA, Center for Architecture, METRO NY

40

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

professional library meetings and speaker series, New York Public Library Midtown
Campus planning sessions, etc.) to promote visibility on the topic and to inspire those
who might be knowledgeable and wish to participate. My topic is important to consider
across fields, so cross-posting through professional networks (listservs, membership
distribution lists, special interest group electronic bulletin boards, etc.) was an effective
way to draw participants whose interest in place and space connect back to libraries and
architecture and design.
For research that is exploratory, I choose to use a fairly homogenous group with
the hopes of producing the richest possible data (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Homogeneity in
the participant group was not a goal, but nevertheless, it did occur. The field of
architecture remains dominated by white males; the fields of design and of librarianship
are also predominately white professions (Shannong, 2013), but are female dominated.
By design, this research was undertaken with a small group of participants who selfidentify as having professional experience in library building or design projects. While
the findings may be strong, I certainly do not claim that they can be generalized.
Nonetheless, the findings from this research on libraries will add to the person-place
literature, will provide another example of how DPT exercises can be applied to future
research considerations, and will expand the numbers of practitioners who, having
experienced this method, might shift their understanding and approach to factoring in
human experience when considering a library (or other) building project. While the
number of participants in this research is modest by design, I hope that my investigation
serves as a model for further exploration of narratives in fields where practitioners are
under-represented as a critical knowledge source, for applying environmental

41

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

autobiography in the self-place relationship and process of awareness, and for design
psychology as a method for aiding library architecture and design professionals alongside
librarians in approaching library building designs as a place and space of significant
experience and meaning over the life course.
I created a demographic profile of participants in (Figure 1). Demographic data
beyond Figure 1 is included in the analysis section of my dissertation. Figure 1 serves to
share at-a-glance standard information about which readers are often curious. I provided
brief, engaging profiles of each participant that you, the reader, could become better
acquainted with the individuals who provided the lengthy quotations provided in this
dissertation.
Demographic Profile of Participants (list of demographic data inquired about)
Gender
Age
Occupation
Years in occupation
Race
Lifestyle (optional?)
Class background
Current class identity
Education level and credentials
Participated in raising children
Data Collection
Location
This research was conducted among architects and design professionals, and
included one participant who holds a library degree but is not employed as a librarian,
and me, the researcher who is a practicing librarian. The study took place in 2016 in the
greater NYC metropolitan/tri-state area. During the six-week interviewing period, I was
available to travel and schedule meetings to suit the research and participant needs. This
42

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

decision allowed me to maximize financial resources required for travel, and supported
my access to potential participants who may have responded throughout the region to my
call for participants through snowballing/word-of-mouth notification. My professional
life afforded me access to cost-free spaces in which to invite participants and to conduct
the research. Every priority was given to conduct the interviews in an environment
deemed comfortable by the participant.
At the start of the six-week interviewing period, I worked with participants one,
two and three for the first three weeks, and then worked with participants four, five and
six over the subsequent three weeks. Because narrative produces rich individualized data
it was important to keep the number of simultaneous interviews on a scale that allowed
me to be fully present in my listening and reflecting on what they shared. The interview
had three segments (past, present, and future) and each participant was guided in that
order. Supplemental contact with participants took place when there was a need for a
follow-up question, completion of a thought, or clarification.
All interviews took place either in a lounge or in a study room of a library, a café,
or in a client consultation/discussion room of an architect and design firm. Whereas only
the café space could properly be considered neutral space, the most important factors I
addressed were making certain that each participant felt comfortable and that their
privacy was supported. Additional considerations that I addressed and met were ensuring
each participant’s ease in meeting with me, a stranger, seeking spaces comfortable and
quiet enough for conduct interviews, and scheduling meeting space that was easy to
locate and relatively accessible. All the spaces used had comfortable seating and a surface
space conducive for the creative work of sketching.

43

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Procedures
Interviews were taped at the time of meeting, and transcribed subsequently. For
depth, I undertook an iterative process of re-listening and note-taking. Sketches were a
component of the interview process and were collected at meetings. I recorded a total of
36 hours of interviewing and sketching discussion time for the six participants.
Additional interview hours were not initially anticipated, but brief exchanges for
clarification and inquiry took place over the following months.
I conducted the interviews with as much mutual professional acknowledgement as
possible. Dervin (2007, p.53) describes a “naturalistic and holistic approach to
interviewing, [in which] it is the informant—not the researcher—who is free to define
terms such as emotions or learnings or muddles. While many dominant theories of
interviewing attempt to structure interviewing in such a way that the goal is to constrain
informant interpretations to research intent, sense-making draws on different theories of
communicating… treating interviewees as knowledgeable informants on their life
situations, capable of theorizing events, causes, and outcomes.” I set out to achieve the
naturalistic and holistic approaches of interviewing Dervin describes, and believe that I
was successful in my treatment of the participants as respected partners.
The research instrument used for interviews was an adaptation of Israel’s DPT
exercises (Israel, 2010). I adapted the exercises for my research specifically to address
practitioners of architecture and design for whom library-building projects were part of
their work (Appendix D). I met in person with Israel on April 11th, 2014 and received her
verbal assent to work with her DPT exercises for my research. On April 25th I received

44

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Israel’s written consent to adapt the exercises for my dissertation (T. Israel, personal
communication, April 25, 2014, Appendix B).
The DPT exercises are intended to explore a sense of place deeply and fully, and
to elicit a sense of self in relationship to place. Israel described a past, present, and future
sequence as an ideal approach, with an intentional period of reflection time between
exercises (Israel, 2010). Israel also explains:
In all cases, the exercises are suggested for a springboard, as catalysts for further
discussion and contemplation about the relationship between one’s self and place.
In particular, the exercises are meant to encourage self-place growth, not to assist
in delving into the emotional complexities of people’s non-environmental lives.
They are not intended as any form of therapy though, in fact, any discussion
involving personal growth always has the potential to strike a very personal note.
With this in mind, those entering into the personal aspect of the Design
Psychology process should participate only on the level with which they feel
comfortable… Overall my hope is that the readers will use these exercises to
become more conscious of the meaning the environment holds for them and
encourage all to more consciously create homes and other places that express a
fulfilling self-place bond. (p.46-47)

Accordingly, my adaptation of Israel’s DPT exercises are named and sequenced
as follows and are presented in their entirety in Appendix D:

Past:
·
Library Timeline
·
Library Family Tree
·
Favorite Childhood Place Visualization

45

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

·

Mental Map

Present:
·
Library Sociogram
·
Personality and Library as Place
Future:
·
Special Objects Inventory
·
Taste Structure
·
Ideal Library Place
The DPT includes nine exercises and draws from the methods of environmental
autobiography as a form of narrative inquiry. Environmental autobiography is comprised
of two parts: writing or talking aspect, and a drawing aspect. In environmental
autobiography, an inquiry is posed (i.e. “Using the tools before you, tell me about the
chronology of your life, using the library as the guide.”). The DPT process took three
sessions per participant and I followed the recommended Past, Present, and Future
sequence. The exercises and sessions described in this chapter are written in the present
tense to emulate the script I used in introducing the adaptation of the exercises to Toby
Israel, to support any reader of this dissertation that might consider using them, and to
present them in as consistent a manner as possible with the way they appeared in the
initial proposal for this dissertation. Here are my brief descriptions of the sessions and
exercises along with explanations of directions I gave:

Session 1: Past:
Library Timeline: Ex 1: (20 minutes) The purpose of this exercise is to plot a
personal chronology of relationships to libraries, including geographic location, type of
library, and approximate age at the time that the practitioner experienced the library.

46

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Library Family Tree: Ex 2: (20 minutes): The purpose of this exercise is to
expand the memory of the past beyond our own roots and to acknowledge the roots of our
ancestors.
This allows us to understand that in environmental terms we not only possess
environmental autobiographies but environmental genealogies as well. Participants will
be asked to fill in a graphic of a ‘family tree’ with boxes as library buildings where they
can indicate what they might know of the past library experiences of family members and
other significant people in their genealogy. Once the ‘family tree’ is completed I will ask
the participants a few short questions to further explore the influence of library
experiences on their lives.
Favorite Childhood Place Visualization: Ex 3: (30 minutes) The purpose of this
guided visualization is to help participants recall a favorite place from the past that may
have influenced their present sense of library as place. I will read a script and instruct the
participant to complete the exercise only on the level comfortable to them.
Mental Map: Ex 4: (30 minutes): The purpose of this exercise is to generate an
image of an environment experienced by the participant that allows them to become more
aware of the qualities of place that are especially pleasing or significant to them. I will
ask the participant to draw a map of a memorable library they experienced in childhood,
before 18 years of age.
Once the map is drawn, I will ask for annotations describing the look and feel of the
place. Last, I will ask the participant to reflect on and respond to questions that seek an
articulation of the qualities of the described place, especially those that may have been
pleasing, disturbing, or significant.

47

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Session 2: Present:
Library Sociogram: Ex 5: (30 minutes): The purpose of this exercise is to
stimulate thinking about the social dynamics of how space can be used and the “who” of
space when it comes to library stakeholders. Participants will be asked to draw a rough
floor plan of a library that they are familiar with and to label it in terms of individual,
shared, and public space. Finally, I will ask questions intended to elicit an articulation of
the experience of the three types of space uses and whether the participant designed,
redesigned, or worked in that space.
Personality and Library as Place: Ex 6: (30 minutes): The purpose of this
exercise is to have participants bring to the surface assumptions they may hold based on
their own experiences about constructing functional library spaces. Thinking aloud about
personality and library as place, may heighten awareness of what informs their design
preferences and decisions. Participants will be asked to answer five questions in the
process of exploring the topic.
Session 3: Future:
Special Objects Inventory: Ex 7: (20 minutes): The purpose of this exercise is to
make a connection between objects and place and the experience of objects in our
attachment to place and our awareness of the significance of objects beyond form and
function. Participants will be asked to make a list of special objects in libraries that for
whatever reason have been a part of their life, as well as to categorize those objects and to
name if and how the objects held meaning. Once the list and the assigned categories are
completed, I will ask the participants to answer related questions.

48

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Taste Structure: Ex 8: (20 minutes): The purpose of this exercise is to reflect on
how our aesthetic, taste, and style may derive from our past experience including what
might be inherited from our family library genealogy. With that awareness at the fore, I
will ask questions of how the participant might bridge to current and future library
projects while honoring the importance of taste in forming place.
Ideal Library Place Visualization: Ex 9: (1 hour and 20 minutes): The purpose of
this exercise is to imagine an ideal library place, now, with the awareness of one’s own
library environmental autobiography, and the articulation of libraries as a place of
significant experience and meaning over the participants’ life course. It is a guided
visualization exercise. I will read a script and instruct the participant to complete the
exercise only on the level comfortable to them. Participants will be asked to draw the
ideal place they imagined. They will be asked to depict or describe as fully as they can
the many design aspects that go into creating a successful library place. This exercise will
model the potential for participants to arrive at a satisfying design approach when
preparing to engage future clients in developing a library-building program.
Data Analysis
Data consisted of completed tables from the DPT exercises, sketches by the
participants, transcriptions of their interview—including reflection and answers to
additional questions I posed—and notes taken during live conversations.
Qualitative in its design, a wide array of analyzing approaches was used to
interpret the results of this narrative inquiry process. Narrative analysis is often crafted in
thematic representations, but Reissman (2008) also notes how at times structural analysis
of the telling of our stories is key, and in other instances ‘audience,’ or acknowledging

49

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

‘who’ the story is directed at (dialogic/performance) is where analysis rests. Israel
designed the sequence of Past, Present, and Future to allow reflection to build organically
upon it, and for reflection to become articulation in the future imagination of desire.
Some of the analysis was drawn from participant responses to questions asking them to
consider—as practitioners—the potential for self-place connections in future library
projects. Those reflections naturally came after having experienced the telling of their
own library life story/ narratives.
Although there were typically several days of down time between interview
sessions, some of the analysis emerged in real-time collaboration with the participants.
For example, after a sketch was completed, I asked participants to tell me about their
sketch as follows:
“I would like you to tell me your sketch, all the events and experiences which
were important to you and any textures or descriptions that came to mind. Start wherever
you like. Please take the time you need. I’ll listen first, I won’t interrupt, other than to
clarify; I will just take some notes for afterwards.”
These conversations were audio taped and later transcribed. Again, the iterative
process of re-listening and note taking provided me with data. I carefully and repeatedly
listened to each interview, attending to descriptions of experience of the library as place.
Two participants preferred to further illuminate their sketched content in writing directly
on the page rather than through talking through the sketches alone.
I first analyzed the data using the themes from the interviews and then by
identifying experiences and expressions of meaning or the connections that participants
had to their libraries and associated environments. Two examples of themes that emerged

50

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

include the intellectual development of experiences described in the Past section, and
concerns about grace and transition in the Future section. I reviewed their data and
created plates as a way of visually sharing outtakes from the narratives. Some sketches
are integrated in the data analysis chapters as evidence of and relationship to the words
participants used to describe memories, experiences, and imaginings. As expected, I
found that even though participants did not presume the power or influence of their past
experiences in their present work, in fact, aspects of their past self-place attachment and
experiences presented themselves clearly in their professional work and were even more
apparent in the participants’ hopes for their future professional work. I analyzed their
ideas and concepts of ‘libraries’ as lived experience, as well as in comparison to library
designs created by other architects. I wanted to understand the opportunities and
challenges they perceived in knowing how to explore and assess self-place needs in the
process of creating future library building programs. I wanted to learn their reactions to
the DPT in specific ways so as not to rest at a yes or no answer for whether they found it
useful or would consider using it. In addition, I hoped to get a better understanding of
their value as practitioners incorporating the social and emotional human aspects of the
experience of using libraries when entering into the design process.
I conducted this dissertation study to understand the place-experiences of
practitioners who design and build libraries and how they: (1) relate to the library as
place (2) name experience from their own library story as an influence or lens on their
professional work, and (3) how/what/if they anticipated bringing forward aspects of
environmental autobiography or Israel’s DPT exercises in future client explorations of
library building projects. Within the dissertation I have provided analysis and discussion

51

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

of practitioners designing libraries as places and spaces where social and emotional
affordance is supported early in the process and is communicated to the client as critical
to the cost, planning, and success of the project.

52

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Part Two
Chapter 4
Brief Introduction to the Data Analysis
There are three data analysis components of this dissertation and they are broken
into three distinct chapters starting with Chapter Five and ending with Chapter Seven.
Chapter Five, “Data Analysis: Meet the Participants,” provides demographic and
biographical snapshots of the six participants and includes an entry on me, the researcher.
Chapter Six, “Data Analysis: Narratives of Environmental Meaning,” offers long
quotations and sketches from the participant narratives. In this chapter, I provide an indepth presentation of how narrative data brings experience and meaning together and
where narrative data supports discovery of complex thinking true to feminist research
methods (Stanley & Wise, 1983). Chapter Six is structured along eight points of belief
that informed Israel’s development of the DPT, plus two additional points of my own that
evolved from my analysis of this research. Chapter Seven is called, “Data Analysis:
Reflections on the Design Psychology Toolbox.” Using the guiding periods of Past,
Present, and Future of the DPT exercises, I have sorted through the data, documented
themes that emerged, and provided analysis with short quotations and plates that further
illuminate participant responses and reactions to the research. Emerged themes include
personal journeys, intellectual development, thoughts on the library as space, professional
journeys, objects associated with building and experiencing libraries, transitions and
grace in the libraries as a place, and finally reactions to participating in the research and
thoughts on future ideal environments for libraries.

53

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 5
Data Analysis: Participants of the Research

Demographics of the Participants
Six participants ranging in age from 35 to 62 participated in completing the nine
exercises of the Design Psychology Toolbox. The median age of participants was 51.
While all six are architects, several of the participants have other professional training.
One participant holds an additional advanced degree in music for vocal performance, one
participant holds a library degree but has never been a full-time librarian; yet another
participant holds an MFA with a concentration on museum design leadership. One holds
an MS in urban planning. Four participants identified along the spectrum of being female,
and two identified as male. Three Caucasians participated in the research. Among the
three Asian participants of different heritages, one identified herself as biracial and
referred to being of two different Asian ethnicities. Three participants had strongly-held
identities as belonging to immigrant families; one participant was herself an immigrant.
Two immigrant-family participants come from the Northeast corridor of the United
States, as did a third non-immigrant participant. One participant hails from the Midwest,
one from the South, and one equally identifies as coming from Southern California and
Central Florida. While participants used a variety of different words to self-identify, most
have middle class origins. Five of the six participants have been involved in raising
children. All participants chose to participate confidentially and accordingly a
pseudonym was created for each. The number of years they have each professionally
practiced in architecture and design, and brief descriptions of their lifestyles are noted in
the Demographics of Participants chart included in this chapter, below.

54

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 1: Demographics of the Participants

Note: Figure 1 created by Amy Beth
In addition to Figure 1, under the heading, “Meet the Participants,” biographical
snapshots provide readers with familiarity of the participants’ geographic roots and an
overview of their family genealogy of libraries. Along with listing participants’
significant intellectual developments, the snapshots of important environments and
people in their lives helps to color the depth of what they share more fully in their
environmental autobiographies and narratives. The biographical snapshots are also
starting points for becoming familiar with each participant’s personality, and the spirit of

55

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

their architecture and design work. Last, the summary data presented here sheds light on
their interest in participation in this research. All six participants were passionate about
their work, passionate about libraries, and passionate about libraries as transactional
places, beyond their functions as sites of information storage and retrieval.
I have included myself under the heading, “Meet the Researcher.” While I had no
prior relationship to any of the participants, neither can I be perceived as a generic
researcher. Since my presence facilitated and was inseparable from their participation, I
include myself to avoid the pretense of invisibility or neutrality. While the participants
brought their familiarity of working with librarians to the table, on my side, I brought my
familiarity of working with architects and designers from years of professional work, as
well as a long history of supporting and producing social science scholarship and service.
As a library professional, I have been a lead administrator and partner in library building
projects more often than I have stamped due date slips in books. The schools of
architecture and design to which participants refer are places familiar to me. In the course
of my professional life, I have had the opportunity to visit almost all of the libraries
where the participants earned their architecture and design degrees, and where several of
them worked while enrolled as students.
The specific libraries that made lasting impressions on them, the history of library
building styles, the trends in library program demands, all that was referenced I am
familiar with or at least conversant. Several practitioners were elated to learn that I could
read blueprints and could follow the vernacular used in their field. The fact that, like the
practitioners, I am middle aged, allowed for a certain ease of communication, an
unspoken but understood peer connection as they talked about their lives. When a

56

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

participant spoke, for example, of their shift from print to digital media, we spoke as
contemporaries, without second-guessing if the participant was being regarded as a
dinosaur. My service on public library boards and as an accomplished academic librarian
gave me credibility with my accomplished interviewees, and meant that I was well
received as a partner in the research process.
My work as a librarian and a practitioner is relevant in my analysis of the data I
collected. I have spent 25 years learning, thinking about, and exploring the field of
environmental psychology. Motivated by the desire to have libraries treated as important
environments of study, my research seeks an articulation from architects and designers
that libraries are significant environments in their lives—and to see if the DPT could be
adapted to learning more about libraries as ideal places. My interest in the entire scope of
the participants’ library experiences goes beyond their professional attainments, and is
designed to engage them as whole people, while serving as a path to their own potential
growth as library designers. As Creswell (2013) and Bruner (1986) attest, telling our
narratives is a primary way for humans to know and think about their worlds. Bringing
decades of anecdotal library-based observation and research to the formal interview table
affirmed their participation, and it helped me to see patterns and categories in the
research analysis.
One final short section, “Confidentiality and Naming Process,” addresses the
process I undertook to rename each participant while preserving their privacy. In the
renaming process while rendering them confidential, I nonetheless sought to recognize
each of them as individuals, creating resonance with their geography and heritage as

57

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

measures of respect for their work, their insights, and their generosity of time given to
this research.
Meet the Participants
Augustus Buffington, 53: Organic
“Libraries are where you learn to respect taking care of something that is
temporarily yours.”
Augustus Buffington embodies his New England roots. He’s less a displaced New
Englander living in New York and more of a transplant bringing New York the best of
New England. His love of libraries, and subsequently of museums, began as a childhood
weekly ritual of visiting the public library with his mother and brother in northern New
England. The Carnegie building and its contents sparked interest in how the old and the
current worlds could come together for old and young alike. He recalled how his mother
devoured reading. She had no college education, had lived a demanding agricultural life,
but knew the marvels of a free public education available through a library card. She
guided her sons away from farming. Together they exited the barn and rows of crops in
the field. Together they entered the library and rows of stacks filled with books. Augustus
carries this memory forth in his professional life by starting each project with the
question of “who is the audience?” and “what will the barn be used for?” As a New
Englander he believes “…if you have the house, then what you can do with the barn is
limitless.” He spoke of how architects and designers create space where the value for
memory can be expressed alongside the intention of holding space for new intentions and
new memories.
He recalled discovering Frank Lloyd Wright’s Architecture: Man in Possession of
his Earth (Wright & Wright & Nicholson, 1962) and how it solidified his interest in

58

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

designing space. “It has text by his daughter Iovanna Lloyd Wright and beautiful
renderings and images of Wright's architecture side by side with photos of the great
monuments of architecture—the Egyptian pyramids, cathedrals, the Taj Mahal, etc. … I
think what grabbed me was Wright's search for a truly American form of architecture, his
innovative buildings, what young mind could not be inspired by them, and the idea that
architecture is a continuum that reflects its time and culture. Very inspiring book to find
in the small local public library—and one of the few they held on architecture. I was
probably about 13 or 14 at the time.” Augustus references Wright’s belief in organic
architecture, the primacy of designing places in harmony with humanity and the
environment, to be his compass in all that he is and all that he does professionally. When
asked to describe his lifestyle, Augustus answered, “Father, Husband, Designer in that
order.” His love for his roots inspires him. “I’m forever interested in that sort of nostalgia
aspect. Utilitarian agricultural structures were awesome childhood spaces for games and
activities.” As a father he converts that space of multifaceted use, wonder, and
exploration in bringing his own children to, and in the designing of, museums and
libraries.
Rosa Dawson Loeb, 60: Sensory
“I have a hard time separating the genealogy of libraries from the genealogy of
my relationship to books… I have an experience of place that maps to the books
I’ve read from there.”
Rosa Dawson Loeb designs library and book spaces with a well-honed sense of
how people physically experience their bodies in relationship to the biblio-environment.
A passionate reader, she grew up in Minnesota as one of six siblings. “I come from a big
family and a noisy household, but I could drown out the cacophony with my books!” Her

59

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

words were put to the test as we coped with the bustling environment of the café she’d
chosen for our meeting, the door ajar to both cool air and asphalt-blasting jack
hammering providing a surrounding street soundtrack. Rosa sat through the exercises and
interviews of the DPT completely engrossed in the tasks I set her, while seemingly
unaware of the constant flow of disruptive noises and activities bumping up against our
conversation. Her ability to concentrate is equally an asset at the busy architecture firm
where she is a principal, where her own work area sits in the center of a big open space.
She disappears into her work and into her process, finding comfort in the vibrancy of the
environment. Rosa holds a second graduate degree in the performing arts and brings to
her architectural work an understanding of how vocal projection and sound draws in the
human senses and defines any built environment. Describing her journey as a parent, she
gave a remarkable account of the uniqueness of each of her (now grown) children telling
me about the books she read aloud to them, the location and spaces where books were
read, and how she recognized the sparks in her children’s development relative to those
readings and spaces. Her professional commitment to public, cultural design projects
draws from her background in the arts, and ensures that library projects reoccur in the
firm’s portfolio. Many of her career projects preserve and celebrate an existing building’s
architectural classicism with modern, astutely blended additions or renovations that
celebrate the original design while meeting contemporary communal needs. Sustaining a
tradition that has its roots in her childhood in the Midwest, at 60 Rosa still rummages
through library and bookstore collections, seeking out books to read aloud with her adult
children and husband, preferably while sitting by a lake.

60

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Avery Golden, 36: Alchemy
“There used to be a tactile way to achieve conceptual learning…take the Avery
Index, you had to touch the pages, scan the listings with your finger, flip the page,
sometimes you had to use your fingers to hold a couple of different places and
reach for a second volume…you were having a two part brain experience while
you were taking information in visually… you’re having to project forward, but
you’re physically engaged in your learning…the Avery Index was alive and it was
my library.”

Figure 2: “...the Avery Index was alive, and it was my library.”

Note: Figure 2 drawn by participant Avery Golden

61

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Avery Golden is an unstoppable thinker. Architect, urban planner, educator,
designer, GIS methodologist and data alchemist head the list. She is passionate in her
commitment to bring data to the fore of visual learning. This passion informs her design
work, all of which addresses spatial injustice and informational ethics, as well as her
approach to engaging clients and architecture students alike. Her journey to libraries is
unusual in that her childhood included trips to a public law library with a father drawn by
intrigue and personal interest rather than profession. She was a keen observer of her
mother who didn’t read and who did not fill the house with books, but who labeled
objects and created organization systems for everything. At a young age she began to see
and think in categories of objects and ideas of her own, becoming fascinated by what
informed and constituted order.
In Figure 2, “...the Avery Index was alive, and it was my library.” She describes in vivid
detail her first discovery of the Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals while working in
her undergraduate college library. She encountered this paperbound subject-specialized
index (shown in red on the bottom stack shelf in Figure 2) with fervor. Her exploration of
the Avery Index coincided with the beginning phases of digitization of specific years of
the Index by the library where she worked. Note the computer square in red is depicted as
an older, bulky desktop machine. It was an exciting period of transformation in libraries
during which, for the first time, indices could be searched electronically, allowing people
to find results that came from more than one category (author, article title, or subject),
and which could be narrowed by fields like date or periodical name. She found herself
grappling with the format change of the Avery Index not only as a new way of
experiencing a reference tool but also as an upset to her once easy relationship to all

62

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

things paperbound. In Figure 2, the dotted red lines take us to black dots emanating from
both the print and the digital versions of the Index. Both formats of the Index were
necessary until the back years could be digitized and finally incorporated in their entirety
into the digital version. Further above the swirl of black dots, Avery provides a schema
for how she plots data today; in her interview, she spoke of the power of visual data in all
things creative and as a valuable way to communicate concepts and thought. Avery
describes the moment when the Index first shifted to an online format as the moment of
her greatest personal transformation in understanding the concept of the library as place.
She claims the Avery Index itself as her library, rather than the building that houses it,
“...the Avery Index was alive, and it was my library.” This idea that the Index itself is the
library opened her to the possibility of data sets where “the narrative embedded in any
data set is its autobiography.” Originally raised in Southern California before a portion of
the family made a major geographic shift to Florida, Avery has a fierce ability to make
her findings and projects digitally portable. “I take stock of what has influenced me
because in some ways it traces where I’ve been and what I’ve at least intellectually or
mentally considered enough to read. In that way my personal library is autobiographical
as a collection.” Professionally she leads architecture students to create visual data to plan
and create spaces, and she implores them to understand that no data set tells a story as a
standalone piece. Without the people who had resources, gathered questions, instruments,
and used field-based research to collect answers, a raw data set, by itself, cannot reveal
the story. Her concept of libraries of the future is grounded in creating spaces where
visual data and data sets can be accessed, shared, interacted with, and which constitute a
space that is itself a library. While the learning curve to access the information contained

63

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

in these libraries might be steeper at first, she believes that once we are initiated we will
all achieve a new but equivalent sensorial experience of library as place. Where once the
smells of books and textures of wood and upholstery library furnishings held primacy of
place, the digital equivalent can become meaningful in our senses too.
Charles Marion, 62: Grace
“I have a predilection for buildings that connect to nature and the community of
people in its surroundings. I’m motivated in the creation of public spaces where
there is a sense of individual arrival and a shared experience of “borrowing the
view.” In libraries where you can get obsessed with all there is to keep pulling
you further into the library the borrowed view gives you relief from the intensity
of diving in. When you can see nature it’s like coming up for air, restoring, and
then returning.”
I first met Charles Marion at the Center for Architecture in New York City, where
the event of the evening addressed the importance of how the architectural program, the
social program, and the program of activities all shape how space is created and
produced. When I shared my call for participation in this dissertation research (which
echoes some of the same concerns), Charles didn’t hesitate to say yes. As the principal
architect of his firm, he is not only interested in the specifics of the projects the firm is
hired for, but how he can build skills to support a transformative architecture. “If our
work enables organizations, communities, and individuals to thrive, then that’s where I
want us to be.” My interviews with Charles were held at his firm in a cold, industrial
conference room. Bare brick exposed walls, plain painted peeling pipes, a non-descript
project table, and miserably uncomfortable stackable Eames fiberglass shell chairs. His

64

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

schedule was tight, his posture apologetically said, “I’m just so busy…”—I arrived
uncertain he’d make it through the first set of exercises of the interview process. I was
wrong. His warmth quickly defied the look of the meeting space. The questions and
exercises evoked memories of his family and life in South Carolina. He revealed his
emotions revisiting the ways in which people of his past had invested in his intellect and
pushed him to expand as a thinker. He described a grandfather who had books and little
else in his home, a teacher who generated ideas for him to investigate in the library, a
librarian who tracked him down to help him expand from where he’d left off, and his
continuous surprise in the generosity of elders who invested in his potential. “There was a
message of expansion of ideas ever calming the unfolding and the craft of mind play
meant to understand how new ideas pushed boundaries or opened possibilities for how
things could be created.”
The muscle memory of that growth is where he attributes his calm, composed,
and evolving openness to new design ideas. At this stage of design success, he is
intensively focused on learning how to do research with clients to determine best
outcomes for human experience in a given space and how space resonates with intention
for those human endeavors. Charles dipped back to the Southern culture of his upbringing
and how it informs his current thinking about grace as an expression of culture in the
built environment. Libraries in urban New York are “mobbed,” but achieving transitions
that recognize how grace is manifest by the culture of people in those spaces is
compelling. His own grace flowed as he pondered the ‘how’ of designing public libraries
today when “…120 people from 120 countries will arrive each with a different

65

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

architectural concept of grandeur and of space and of access to books, and I want them,
all of them, to feel welcome here.”
Kai Shizi, 35: Textured
“Architectural books were cost-prohibitive when I was in school and training, but
the library, oh the library—floor to ceiling access to all that I coveted. My sense
of grandeur was more in my imagination than tied to the library as place, but
that’s the beauty of libraries. They transform limits into expanse.”

Tailored, clothed in black, and attentive to all that is the personal aesthetic, Kai
Shizi commands a ‘take me seriously’ presence, stating, “Rigorously simple picks are a
part of the architectural interplay.” Raised in a northeast suburb of Philadelphia where
housing had a particular brand of monotony, Kai tuned-in to ‘difference’ to feed her
passion for what more was possible. This expression of the self struck me as a
continuation of her family refugee-immigration narrative, one that has persisted for
generations. Originating from China and arriving in America by way of several periods of
stay in other countries, Kai named her maternal grandmother as her human map to
opportunities, a love of books, learning, and of libraries.
Her grandmother’s intellectual curiosities were stifled by virtue of her generation
and gender, her mother’s applied intellect was limited by immigrant oppression and
political unrest, and Kai’s passion for the “possible” was hampered by the expressionless
institutional repetition that defined the working-class socio-economic survival her family
had negotiated. While there was no shortage of intellect, the paucity of educational
opportunities for the women in her family led them to self-reliant learning. “My
grandmother made us treat books with an extreme level of respect. We were not allowed

66

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

to sit or stand on them. They were treated as precious things. To this day I cannot
underline or make notes in a book.” Kai’s interview connected her personal experience to
her professional drive in stunning ways. She insists on designing libraries as engaging
spaces where discovery happens harkening back to generations of the women in her
family who entered libraries and found them to be essential places of encouragement and
where desire was kept alive in direct opposition to their oppression. As one member of a
large refugee-immigrant family who is living and practicing in America in the decades
that abut the 21st century, Kai identifies her ancestry as a point of distinction from
professional peers where computerization and its effect on conceptualizing space,
grasping scale, tactile creativity, and observation held different norms. Speaking of the
“choreography” of space as her guide in her work, she talked of designing libraries
through the experience of always having been part of large, shared family-spaces.
Finally, she emphasized the importance of tactility and texture both in her life and in
libraries—how people experience the texture as the message of place—whether you are
welcome to settle in to stay, or if you are expected to complete your arrival by preparing
to go.
Connie Zhōng, 49: Sanctuary
“…be quiet to find themselves in a world full of noises.”
Connie Zhōng and I first met by happenstance at a public program on designing
future libraries at the New York School of Interior Design. While chatting after the
panelists spoke, I invited her to participate in my dissertation research. Her enthusiasm
for doing so was remarkable. She may have been the one to phone me even before I
initiated scheduling contact. Our first session took place in an unimaginative conference

67

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

room at her architecture and engineering firm. Her interview hours were filled with
highly descriptive language, detailed drawings, and strong emotions. Within the first few
sentences she literally exclaimed, “The library was my sanctuary!” Listening to her, the
doldrums of the conference room transformed into a time travel visit within her
imagination— flying about the globe, visiting people, places, projects, and different time
periods of her life. Connie spent her formative years in Hong Kong, and later attended a
New England all-girl boarding school to complete her primary education.
A college graduate of Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), she set her intentions on
building a life in New York and has lived and worked in the state almost exclusively
since she was in her 20s. She describes the library as a place for people like herself to “be
quiet to find themselves in a world full of noises.” Now approaching fifty, she proudly
notes never having had a hiatus from libraries and spoke at length of her personal use
long after libraries were no longer paired with her educational years.
Today her professional success as an architect reflects her specific calling for
library building projects. The principal architect of her firm recruited her specifically for
her demonstrated understanding of the importance of including librarians as essential
partners in library building projects. She focuses on what patrons and librarians as
stakeholders genuinely want in libraries while respectfully resisting those board members
with tendencies to drive projects into banality. Connie is a woman of vision who is as
interested in the dynamics that inform a project as she is in the outcomes. Despite
libraries having been personal refuges and places for turning inward to hear her own best
thinking, she builds environments with rich, interactive community space and sound,
places that foster people being “connected.” To my delight she asked if I knew of the

68

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

work of Oldenburg and “third places.” She explained, “Libraries are like my first, second,
and third place.” The word LEGO derives from the Danish phrase “leg godt” which
means “play well.” Her intense love of LEGO fits her in that an appropriate phrase for
the architect with the reputation for bringing the stakeholder parts together to form a good
fit.
Meet the Researcher
Amy Beth, 53: Narratives
“Audre Lorde was a librarian you know...”
Although my experience of working through the Design Psychology Toolbox is
not incorporated into any of the data provided in this dissertation, who I am, what I bring
as a researcher to this dissertation, and what my professional experiences have been in
library building projects makes me an instrument of the research. My senses have been
tuned to experience and now I am bringing my experience to the research. I’m not
standing at an objective distance, dispassionately trying out a tool on participants. There
is no blank slate in me. As the analyst whose conclusions inform the outcome of the
research, I offer the reader a small introduction of myself, a mini environmental
autobiography as a participant in the research process:
I have been a librarian for more than two-thirds of my life. Throughout this time, I
have had ample opportunity to reflect on my choice of career, whether in answer to those
who ask, “What made you decide to be a librarian?” or in quiet self-reflective moments
when I marvel at my own enduring satisfaction with the profession. I grew up in an urban
environment where childhood trips to the library fulfilled the need for a clean public rest
room or a cool sip from a working water fountain as much as they served the desire to

69

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

find books in which to disappear. The library had practical purpose at every turn. In my
difficult teenage years, the library became a refuge and a sanctuary. Distraught by the
circumstance of a deteriorating family life, I would go to the library, pull out a random
reel from The New York Times on microfilm, thread it to the uptake reel, and “let ‘er
spin!” In the solitude of the backlit screen and with the warmth of the fanning motor, I
would sit and read about the complexity of others’ lives finding consolation in the
broader troubles of the world that I randomly discovered at the reader. Libraries held me.
They were a landing place, a place from which my desire to know other stories and other
possibilities could unfold. In combination with my anonymity, my curiosity allowed me
access to library buildings over many years and in many locations, leaving distinct
impressions on my understandings of space and place in a person’s life. From these early
experiences
I derived a meaning and belongingness that has sustained me over the course of
my life. As a librarian I am committed to supporting self-reliance in the educational
endeavors of all people, secure in the understanding that I have skills and resources to
share with others to discover anything we need to understand. I am fascinated by the
narratives of those for whom libraries hold deep meaning, and recognize myself in those
who regard libraries as sacred as they enter/exit/re-enter the spaces and places of libraries
over the course of their lives.
Confidentiality and Naming Process
The six participants who took part in this research were warm and welcoming. In
the course of our interviews, they shared their cell phone numbers, invited me to their
firms, shared their portfolios, flexed bragging rights on projects, told me about their lives,

70

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

told me about their parenting, told me about their relatives, and shared secrets. From the
start, five of the six participants asked to not have his or her name used in the
dissertation. This was agreed upon in the first meeting, and each participant and I signed
off on the consent to participate sheet that committed me to confidentiality. Much later in
the process I circled back to participants for a follow up question, and I shared with the
participants that I was at the stage of creating a name for each person. I asked each one
again if they remained of the mind to keep their anonymity. This time, the sixth
participant also requested confidentiality. In the conversation that followed, the
participant said that taking part in the research had been a great experience, but the idea
of having clients “Google me” when being considered for hire, and stumbling across a
good read about their past simply wasn’t appropriate or good business. They were clear
and committed to the fact that this dissertation will be open access and searchable down
to the last word on the page.
Despite my social science training, I chafe at standard techniques for protecting
anonymity. I am not of the numbering ‘Participant 1, 2, 3’ mindset. For me, such naming
strips the participants of their dignity and, for the reader, causes them to all blur into one.
While it is the participants’ prerogative to not have their names used, it is my prerogative
to assign them names in the research that uphold their dignity as real individuals and
maintain their human accessibility for readers. But how was I to uphold confidentiality
and assign appropriate naming?
For each participant, I made a list of variables related to their geographic past and
the libraries in which they had developed as professionals. I listed features of their legal
names and other aspects of inheritance, attributes that defined them as individuals. I listed

71

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

the ‘what’ and the ‘where’ they had shared of how they came to work on library building
projects. This process allowed me to consider the participants as complex people in
deliberating on pseudonyms.
Here is an outtake on my notes while constructing Augustus Buffington’s name:
“…U of Maine. Katz Library in 1974. Too Jewish-sounding to reflect his roots.
(undergraduate, but Augusta, Maine—fitting since it was his youth, could name him
Augustus) Augustus (very New England, he’s a dyed in the wool Mainer) RISD later =
Fleet Library. Named after the damn bank…dreadful, Augustus Fleet. No way. What was
RISD’s library called before that? Totally generic. BUT!!!! The infamous Eliza
Buffington (first librarian!). Elijah (also common in New England) Fleet… Elijah Fleet.
no. Augustus Buffington. Yes.”
It should be evident that the participant named Avery had a deep connection with
the Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals.
In constructing Kai Shizi’s name, I felt it was important to reflect her Chinese
ancestry, that I not Anglicize her name. I called her for approval, to which she replied,
“Ooo, do I get to have a big mane with my big name?” My notes include this thought
process:
“Penn State Architecture and Landscape Architecture Library—online library
catalog is LionSearch and the Nittany Lions are the mascot of PSU. Princeton history is
thrown in here, but no relevance. Lion in Chinese is Shi Zi. Lions are an auspicious
symbol of courage, valor, energy and wisdom. Fits her! It also symbolizes strength,
goodness and the spirit of change. Spirit of change. Now THAT fits her. In her education
and in her use of public libraries she described monotony as her nemesis. Her need to

72

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

bust out. The friend whose family encouraged creativity. The supplies at the library.
Regionally she hails near Levittown, Levit… Levi… derives from the 10 lost tribes; in
China the place where Jews are found in is Kaifeng. Kai Shizi.”
It was both a privilege and a fun task to consider each participant in their
respective history, places of discovery and greatness, and create new names reflective of
each individual. I value the opportunity that this research has offered to work with my
participants’ narratives and to uphold the confidentiality of their names.

73

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 6
Data Analysis: Narratives of Environmental Meaning
In this section, I explore with my six participants the influences of their “Past”
and self-place bonding, and how these influences inform their “Present,” and their
“Future” professional practice. I have adapted this “Past,” “Present,” and “Future”
structure directly from Israel’s work, and it serves as part of my own analysis of the study
data. The data for this exploration comes from a form of “behavioral mapping,” gathered
during open-ended, interactive interviews with each participant.
For each of the three sections, “Past,” “Present,” and “Future,” I use 10 points of
analysis. Israel (2010) developed the first eight points (Appendix E), which I have
expanded with an additional two points that elucidate the findings from my own research.
The lengthy quotations that follow are reproduced here to demonstrate the fullness of
thought that occurs when practicing design professionals are invited to explore their
intimate pasts.
Exploring self-place connections is valuable in building project processes and
outcomes where human experience of space and place is valued. Libraries are long
overdue for being understood as environments where tremendous self-place bonding
happens. Israel (2010) investigated how the bond between a person and a place becomes
an ideal that we seek to repeat in environments that follow. Point 9, the first of the two
points I have created, considers how larger scale place-settings (i.e. libraries, as compared
to homes) are able to hold intimate meaning for people, and for design professionals in
particular. This point recognizes the importance of scale and kind of environment in
considering how intimate place settings of the past might inform both present practice

74

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

and future professional engagement. In Point 10, I explore how the methods, tools,
research, and data generated by social scientists may be useful for design professionals
and the projects they command, either in formal education settings or incorporated into
the practice of a firm. As a whole, the 10 points frame ways in which foregrounding
awareness of self-place connections can consciously create fulfilling places for
practitioners and clients alike.
By giving each participant a memorable name, I hope to help the reader form a
coherent understanding of each practitioner throughout the analysis. A single descriptive
word has been added as a mnemonic reference to each named participant. I also see that
there is a large social relationship in accordance with Bahktin's (1986) conceptions of
socially situated text, and I try to capture those social relationships in the presentation of
participant biographical statements as well as in their narrations and my analysis of what
each participant shared.
To both honor participant narratives and to offer the reader a deeper sense each
participants’ voice, I have chosen to include lengthy participant quotations in this data
analysis chapter. These passages, taken from my research notes, capture what I have so
often heard on the sidelines of library projects, in an architect’s yearning to incorporate
an element or a feature from a long-ago remembered library, a piece of their past, some
manifestation of which they have dreamt of bringing into their professional present or
future. In the details of their memories, they describe their place attachment and their
desire to recreate spaces where those memories might come to life anew. Architects and
other design professionals make up a small percentage of the people who, unprompted,
share their library story once they find they are in the presence of a librarian. I offer a

75

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

sampling of statements from my 2010 research—and from my many year’s experiences
of having strangers divulge their memories of libraries—to demonstrate the library’s
iconic nature and to pique interest in understanding how the library’s meaning is created.
Each of the excerpts below was shared with me in conversation. Again, these
remembrances are from people who are not architects and who did not contribute to this
dissertation. Since the statements were not recorded at the time they were made, the
quotations do not reflect the grammar, slang, or regionalisms of the original speakers. But
the sentiments and stories were preserved, pulled variously from my professional
research notes, the people who piloted the research methods of this dissertation,
memorable interactions with individuals, and from my personal journals. Many who
shared their experience spoke about their ritualized journeys to the library, revealing how
place attachment is formed first through occurrence and then through memory. For many,
remembering a trip to the library and the rituals associated with time spent in a library
captures memories of coming into one’s self, identity formation, and an awareness of
one’s intellectual development. Remembrances reveal how people’s attachment to books
and reading were formed in the place of the library. For others, library-experiences
capture remembrances of the neighborhood and the people with whom they shared their
geography, from friends and teachers to neighbors or shopkeepers. Other memories
capture social mores, laws, and political climates against which the library was
experienced as a refuge. In all of these remembrances, the library is powerful as place
and space.

76

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Here’s some of what people have shared with me regarding the trip to the library:
When I was a kid, the library was the first place I was allowed to ride my bicycle
to alone.

I think the library was the only place I knew how to find from my home other
than my school. Sometimes I would ride my bicycle there even when they were
closed just so I could practice getting there. Here is where I always wanted to be.

Every Saturday we looked forward to the trip to the library. For certain we looked
forward to what books the librarian would help us find in exchange for what we
brought back, but we also stopped at the bakery on the walk back. That was like
chasing heaven with heaven.

We always walked to the library. Along the way we’d tell each other about what
we were hoping to find this week or what we’d read, and inevitably we’d slip into
our imaginations on the walk and make worlds along the way that echoed the
books we’d find at the library.

We always went to the Performing Arts library on Sundays and I noticed we
walked a little bit faster on the way getting there than we did on the way home. I
think we all hated to leave.

77

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

My siblings and I took turns being allowed to invite one friend on our weekly trip
to the library. I remember feeling like I was about to show off a part of our home,
even though it was probably the same neighborhood public library they used with
their family!

I don’t think we would see people we knew there, but my mother always made us
wash and comb our hair before we could get on with going to the library. I just
remember the building and how I didn’t really know the address, but I’d walk
along scanning for this different looking building, it was quite beautiful with long
windows and wide stairs, and when I’d see it in the distance I’d get this feeling
we should hurry because I found it and now let’s be there!

When I was a kid, the librarian was the first adult I was allowed to have a
relationship with that wasn’t a relative.

I grew up in the Deep South and the library, curiously enough, was the only place
in my childhood that was not segregated.

The library gave me a card and it made me feel for the first time like I belonged
here. I would go there and be reminded that someday I was going to be an
American.

78

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Just as people, unprompted, share their library story once they find out they are in
the presence of a librarian, one library story often begets another. It’s quite possible that
you, the reader, may be recalling your own library experiences in response to these
statements. Bruner (1990) insists that meaning is not “out there” but is constructed in the
human sphere of culture. There is also a larger, socially-based context for telling the
“library story,” one that appears in the work of authors, screen writers, bibliographers,
and artists who situate the story of their characters in libraries to convey the origins of
their values, the confirmation of their thought, or a culturally situated setting for
depicting the greater social context of the story they wish to tell.
Autobiographical writings that depict libraries as places and spaces that were
transformative in the lives of their authors include Stephen King’s On Writing: A memoir
of the craft, and Barbara Kingsolver’s essay, “How Mr. Dewey Decimal Saved My Life,”
as well as works of fiction such as The Time Traveler’s Wife and The Night Bookmobile
by Audrey Niffenegger that detail the experience of journeying to the library. Where does
the library as place begin and where does it end? Is it defined by the librarian who
directed you to worlds and cultures you were unaware of, or genres and formats you
never knew existed? Is it defined by ideas that pushed you beyond your comfort zone and
denied you your ignorance? Is it defined by your ancestor’s genealogy of reading?
Graphic novelist Alison Bechdel depicts her own genealogy of reading in a four-page
graphic work, “Compulsory Reading,” published in 2008 in the 1000th issue of
Entertainment Weekly, that shows her in lively conversation with classic authors as well
as her father, a book “missionary.” There are entire bibliographies (Raish, 2011)
cataloguing scenes in films that take place in libraries, lists of marketing ads that use

79

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

libraries as product-selling settings, works that include a librarian as a character, games
that incorporate library settings, and entries on music referencing librarians and libraries.
These depictions reveal that ‘the library’ can be variously the collection, the place, the
space of transaction, a relationship, and the offering. Like literacy, reading, and books,
the journey that brings us to the library is often inseparable from what is compelling
about the place or the experience of using the entity we call the library.
Before delving into the library stories of the architects and designers who
participated in this dissertation research and my analysis of their stories, I want to explore
the concept of environmental meaning raised in Chapter 2, where I discussed the social
contexts in which narrative lives, citing Bakhtin (1986), Bruner (1990, 2004) and Jardin
and Kristeva (1981). Where Bruner (1990) emphasizes that meaning is socially
constructed in human culture, Bakhtin (1986) posits that meaning stems from our
relationships with one another and the words we use, derive from a particular cultural
time and place. Both contend that meaning is specific to conditions of culture, language,
time, and place. Each one of us witnesses the transactions of our environment with a lens
that is ours and ours alone. Kristeva (1981) described “intertextuality,” the immediate
influence of every narrative on every other narrative, that our environmental influences
are never static and are forever simultaneously preceding the moment where narrative
emerges and where narrative instantly shifts every forthcoming narrative, “the
inescapable reality of temporality” (Jardin and Kristeva, 1981). Every one of us has
personal stories with a unique perspective on what our own specific influences were of
environment, what Kristeva calls time and space. Even when there are threads of
commonality, the meaning of our story can only ever be uniquely our own. This is why it

80

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

is so important to explore a range of library experiences; each narrative is one piece,
helping us to understand how libraries function to support individuals in achieving
environmental self-place bonds, and how libraries subsequently are understood as
meaningful spaces in their lives.
The passages shared below are from the participants who were part of my
dissertation research. As their stories unfold I show how their memories of past library
experiences enriches what happened once they arrived at the library. I discuss what I find
significant about the 10 points of analysis, and the quotations to which they are mapped.
The Ten Points and My Participants
My 10 points (Appendix E) of analysis illuminate the significance of intimate and
fulfilling self-place bonds. As stated previously, the first eight of these points derive from
the analytic work of Israel (2010), to which I added a final two points to more usefully
analyze my data (Beth, 2018). In reporting on each of the 10 points, I use quotations from
my research with design professionals describing their relationships to libraries of their
“Past”, “Present”, and “Future.” For each of the 10 points, I use quotations from two or
three participants to confirm the connection between the participants and that point. For
each participant, I chose two or three quotations that best convey the participant’s selfplace bond to the library. At the end of each quotation, I provide the name of the
participant, along with the section of the DPT where the quotation can be found.
Point 1.
Our sense of self and sense of the environment are intimately and profoundly
intertwined. (Israel, 2010, p. x).

81

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

To illustrate Point 1, I have chosen material from Augustus Buffington and Rosa
Dawson Loeb.
From Augustus Buffington, who can wax poetic about his beloved Maine boyhood to
the point that one feels transported to a New England landscape, listening to him speak
with his arm outstretched in the chill northern air:
I do think back to the center of my childhood, the types of games or activities that
are from my agricultural past. Every building I enter I bounce off of it as though it
were the barn and I’m seeking, seeking, seeking what magic happens inside. I’m
interested in that sort of nostalgia in aspects of library designs of today. In Maine,
the population was small, and the buildings seemed vast. The library of my
childhood was a classic solid Maine building designed by John Calvin Stevens, a
totally architecturally distinguished building made of granite from the area, and
like every solid house and farm had huge chimneys. We knew it was Maine
looking like Maine, even if we didn’t know exactly why, but even in a cold big
building it felt like home in Maine.
As described in the Meet the Participants section, he is the man you can take out
of New England, but you can’t take the New England out of the man:
So, when I’m asked to work on a library in Queens and we start every project
with “the audience,” it’s a lot more difficult to answer who the user group actually
is. The diversity of users, the issues of security, the cultural behaviors of its
visitors, the sheer numbers of people who will use the space, the ways in which
libraries are like community centers—I need to design it, so they can get out of
the flood and find a connection in the broader space—I want to bring them the

82

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

magic of the barn and the sense of continuity like the granite. I want to bring them
a barn or a library building that is etched into their story of arrival and they can
grow with the building every time they discover another reason for being there.
My childhood buildings and environment were full of endless discoveries and
they still define who I am today. Can I design and build that for someone else? I
hope so. Augustus Buffington– Organic (Mental Map and Favorite Childhood
Place)
In Augustus Buffington’s words I am most struck by how very strongly he sees
himself today as a product of his past and the buildings he experienced as a child. Maine
for him is a place of solidity, of stone buildings built for permanence. He recalls his
childhood experience of exploration of the interior of barns as “magic”—the same magic
that he tries to evoke as a designer, a very clear example how he connects his own past
with his present as a professional.
Rosa Dawson Loeb’s narrative demonstrates how in talking about libraries we
may describe ourselves as inseparable from the environments of our lives:
I tried to depict some of the most redolent memories I have of libraries having to
do with childhood where it relates to certain books that were my favorites, I
remember the smell of certain books and textures of the library the same way I
remember the smells of Minnesota. My mother taking us kids—there were six of
us, taking a handful of us to the local public library—we would take out books, I
remember the smell, I remember the book jackets with the little identification
number on the bottom, it was kind of exciting, I remember the books, but I also
remember the experience of going to the library. I remember my mother—of

83

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

course we’d never find all the books when it was time to go to the library, lots of
fines—of course you can never find them all on that one trip, trying to get ready
to go while trying to find all the books… I experienced the same with my kids
growing up, trying to find the library books, but it was, you know, not really
going to happen and you could just picture the exchange at the return desk, I
laugh, but it was a very positive memory. Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Mental
Map and Favorite Childhood Place)
In contrast to Augustus Buffington’s expansive, regional sense of his childhood
environment, Rosa Dawson Loeb brings forth a sensual, up-close, intimate scale of
environmental memory. She tells us about smells and textures. Now at age 60, she shares
how the memory of childhood library visits (her “Past”) and the environment of her
family informs her professional practice (her “Present”):
I was a real reader as a young kid, and I think it was partly my family was very, you
know, big family noisy household, and I could essentially drown out all the
cacophony by just taking up my library books to read for hours. I’m still that way. I
can sort of ignore whatever’s going on around me; I work in a very open office
situation, and I just never even hear, it just never bothers me, in fact my desk is in the
center of a great big open space and I think, in a way, it harkens back to just growing
up in a big and busy household where I could retreat, it was often through reading, I
would just grab some of my favorite library books and I would you know, I reread
book series that I just really loved… Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Timeline and
Sociogram)

84

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Point 2.
The seeds of this connection between self and place are planted in childhood. (Israel,
2010, p. x).
I will now cite additional material from Rosa Dawson Loeb, and introduce material
from Kai Shizi that has similarly strong references to childhood beginnings. It is
important to note that childhood was a strong reference for all my participants. While the
exercise itself was designed to lead the participants back through their childhoods, I was
taken by how readily these memories came forth once the exercise opened access to
them, and how much they each had to say based on their childhood memories. I often had
to ask participants to move on to the next exercise to allow enough time to complete the
whole sequence.
While this next quotation specifies a different childhood memory for Rosa Dawson
Loeb, like the “redolent” memories previously mentioned, it too has a textural tactile
quality to it. Rosa Dawson Loeb first sketched herself in a bookmobile (Figure 3) along
with words describing the memory of her childhood. I also include a photograph (Figure
4) of a tight stairwell bookshelf she and her husband designed later, during their married
life together, showing how childhood memory repeats itself in our reach for ideal places
throughout our lives.

85

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 3: “I can reach every book” – Rosa Dawson Loeb

Note: Figure 3 drawn by participant Rosa Dawson Loeb
This is a bookmobile. It used to come to our neighborhood when we were kids. What
I liked about it was that it reminded me of our first kitchen, and the way the kitchen
used to be our apartment, where I basically could reach every single book. What I
really liked about the bookmobile when I was a kid, I felt like I could, like it was just
my scale, human scale, like you didn’t really have to move too far, everything was at

86

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

your disposal. I think of that as a space that I really liked, and it was tight, you kind of
shimmied your way through, just like the kitchen, communal, full of what you liked,
everything within reach… I still like to build libraries where a nook allows for that
very dense, kind of compact, almost like a crate type feature. Rosa Dawson Loeb–
Sensory (Mental Map)

87

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 4: Home staircase library “I can reach every book” designed and photographed by
Rosa Dawson Loeb

Copyright and related rights waived via CC0

88

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

The narrow spaces in both images allow Rosa Dawson Loeb to touch the books on
both side of her, thus relating her body and its dimensions directly to her experience of a
book-filled space—a body-to-object relationship that she very self-consciously
incorporates into her work.
Kai Shizi articulates the connection between self and place, of an ancestry where
books mattered and later of libraries, seeds that were planted in her childhood and that
remain apparent in her understanding of her adult self—an architect who builds libraries:
I’m excited about recognizing that my love of libraries and my love of books actually
started generations back and from a lacking thereof. A big part of my history has
always been the family narrative about how my grandmother was not able to go to
school because in her generation even though she was unbelievably intelligent girls
were not allowed to go to school and they were needed for work whereas the brothers
were allowed. It was a gendered thing… So now I am an adult who helps design and
build libraries, and the importance of access to learning and books and libraries are all
a part of my genealogy… It starts with books and then transfers later on to libraries.
Libraries were a huge part of me being able to find my way around this huge desire to
create things that just didn’t go away. It wasn’t about a lack any more, it was about
libraries as desire and encouragement. Kai Shizi– Textured (Family Tree)
Point 3.
Our sense of self-place connection continues to grow and change throughout our
lives. (Israel, 2010, p. x).
Demonstrating how the seeds of meaning grow once planted, I continue with Kai
Shizi’s narrative of how what started as a connection to a place where she had access to

89

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

books becomes a greater environment for her creative outlet. The second narrative
segment of Point 3 is addressed through the words of Connie Zhōng, whose narrative
takes us from her experience of libraries as a refuge from loneliness, into her evolution as
a person whose professional work ethic is characterized by collaboration and discovery.
Connie Zhōng found continuity in libraries, tracing her growth over many years in how
she used libraries to cope with the involuntary disruption of self-place connection. In
contrast, Kai Shizi sought out libraries as an intentional disruption to the expressionless
monotony of her childhood neighborhood environment. The library expanded Kai Shizi’s
understanding of herself and nurtured her imaginative capacity, building off her seeds of
connection and genealogy:
Libraries were a huge influence on my becoming an architect… I had an elementary
school friend and we would always go to the public library and get books out on
crafts like instructional books on how to do those things because she came from a
family that was very more overtly artistic and would push being artsy and creative as
a ‘thing.’ Looking back at my family, being artistic was not something that was
understood in those terms… So, we would always get these library books and we
would make things. And that ends up being an important part of my genealogy
because her being artsy and having art supplies and my feeling encouraged in the
library legitimized art as an avenue for creative expression that I didn’t know I
needed and hadn’t articulated as such… Libraries were places where I could further
explore what I learned with my hands in a bigger sphere of what is possible and how
to do it. The specialized interest grew, and I went to architecture school. I could not
afford all those different fancy-pants architecture books because they tended to be

90

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

printed by academic presses and be all kinds of full color and glossy and beautiful. It
was definitely at that point a matter of access to a whole other degree. But my earlier
experiences with libraries evolved to inform my personal interest in ‘the tactile’ and
different modes of engagement and access are tied to my research and it all stems
from my genealogy. Kai Shizi– Textured (Family Tree)

This is how Connie Zhōng addresses self-place connection and names libraries as
vital to continuity in her life:
I was very much of an introvert. I’m not like a popular person. I’m basically a big
nerd who didn’t fit in, but I think most people feel that way. The library was my
sanctuary. It was my church, per se. I found, and I still find a world of things that
could open my eyes in any single direction that I want it to go. I love them, and I can
hide in there and read anything in the past, anything in the future. I don’t even know
how to begin. It’s just, I have a very deep relationship with libraries… With the
public libraries, I came from Hong Kong. I came here to the United States when I was
15 and I went to a boarding school. My parents were divorced. By myself. So that is
the school library. Before I left Hong Kong it was the public library. I went to junior
high in Hong Kong, which is called a secondary school, library becomes my
sanctuary at lunchtime. When no one eats with me, I go there and read and read and
read. Which is fine. I got used to being at peace with myself and talked to myself and
my best friend, basically. And then when I came to boarding school here, again, that
became my hiding spot. Because of my English, it was a lot of just catching up, so it
was really a place to hide but also a place to study and a place to empower myself.
When in college, same thing. I just feel like this is a world of misfits that came

91

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

together for some reason and unless you are interested in having conversation with
yourself… at that time, libraries were very… not collaborative spaces. It was very
much alone and be with yourself, and seems to me that unless someone is interested
in talking to themselves or finding out more about themselves or are very selffocused, they’re not going to come here. So, at that point it was a very different world
of libraries for me… Lack of self-esteem. Solace in printed words and books. Trying
to find myself in these written forms. That became home to me. Libraries became a
home to me. My second home. It’s not necessarily where I made friends, but it was
where I grew up. Because I found, realized, who I was… To me, this is very
important. … The library being my “third place,” you understand, from Oldenburg…
The library as the “third place” in my formative years was almost like my “first
place” or “second place”… But the libraries I build today are still all about discovery.
Collaboration and discovery. And it’s funny because my boss doesn’t know I used to
hide in libraries. He thinks I’m same as the libraries I make, and I make libraries
exciting places to go on discovery adventures. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Timeline
and Family Tree)
Point 4.
That connection is shaped not only by the physical reality of our environment but by
the psychological, social/cultural, and aesthetic meanings that place holds for us.
(Israel, 2010, p. x).
The three quotations I chose to illustrate Point 4 describe different formats and uses
of libraries. Each participant describes a texture and an experience that would not have
been possible in a place other than the library, or at least not at that particular moment in

92

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

each of their lives. The geographies of these participants are in high contrast to one
another, and yet the thread of shared experience as library goers resonates throughout. I
start with Rosa Dawson Loeb who comes from a large Midwestern family, whose avid
reading became one of many means to carve out space for her curiosity and who literally
found her voice through singing and through spectacular discoveries of recorded voices
collected in libraries. Her life as a creative person continued, evolving with her as her
professional in New York where libraries remained a constant for her:
I had a hard time separating the genealogy of libraries from the genealogy of my
relationship to books. That’s it essentially. I have an experience of places that now
have been co-opted by my architectural life where I evaluate libraries as buildings
and, so I don’t—even the libraries I experienced as a kid with my mom—don’t stick
with me but what comes to the forefront is the books and recordings that I
experienced in those places. But for me, I started thinking on a personal level about
libraries as spaces or places in which I discovered things that I didn’t know existed
like early recordings of Pavarotti, Pagliacci, Bellini. That was so amazing and
profound as a kind of learning experience for someone who was learning how to sing.
Listening to these great songs that were not readily available, or I had never
understood they had existed. One could go hear them again at the opera house but
that’s very different than listening to a great recording. And that was a similar
experience to when I moved to New York and I was still singing where I utilized the
New York City Public Library of Performing Arts and again it was the repository of
performance that seemed incredibly rich and fascinating. Rosa Dawson Loeb–
Sensory (Timeline and Family Tree)

93

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Kai Shizi experiences life through texture, the feeling of materials in combination
and contrasted with one another, and her experience of the library is suffused with the
psychological, social/cultural, and aesthetic meanings that place holds for us:
The inspiration and genesis for all things library for me is rooted in my repulsion for
beige Formica. High trafficked public libraries often have tables made out of it. It’s
supposed to be cost favorable and something you ignore because it blends with
everything, but this is exactly why it stands out to me. I find it repulsive probably
because I am trained to look at textures. It makes for a sense of “sad” where it is
supposed to support social things. It’s a “safe” surface that encourages achieving
being alone even while together with others using the table. It’s compounded by drop
ceilings with stains and a kind of beige, ugly common neutral grid which is not
neutral, it’s just ugly. These textures and beige spaces are not intended for coming
together or working together or even being alone in a more collegial way. You get
more of a sense of the library being a “shhhh…do your thing and leave,” and less of it
being a space that facilitates interaction or thinking together or anything else that is
about being together. Beige Formica is not hospitable. So, what’s memorable for me
is the distaste of space. Kai Shizi– Textured (Mental Map)
Avery Golden grasps life by the abstract horns. Her description of the
psychological, social/cultural, and aesthetic meanings that place holds for us are
intangible and should be considered as important insight into how libraries are spaces not
just of access but of affordance, much in the way Kai Shizi’s creativity and Rosa Dawson
Loeb’s experience with recorded sound originated in their experiences of libraries. Avery
Golden’s thought on this topic includes:

94

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

The thing is that’s different is when a library is a data warehouse. We all know what a
server farm looks like. Which is so funny, right? Ohmygosh… I have to think about
this and while I’m thinking about it I’m gonna reflect on a different synonymic
image. I have memories of film and television with the personal, with the library full
of books and everything that it connoted it for me. If we compare that now to the
plethora of film and television on the server farm, on a bank of servers… it connotes
something completely different. Calm, like the former library images—calm and
quiet and solitude and freedom, like intellectual freedom and the ability to selfishly
pursue what is interesting to you and to collect those things and there’s like a stability
and a safety and a comfort in that, whether it’s just images of someone’s personal
book library or the Little Mermaid’s collection of human crap like, archived together,
it’s all backed up and services the server bank and this giant warehouse of cold
machines with blinking lights, which always connotes the lack of freedom and
control. It connotes control instead of freedom. The very impersonal, nothing about
inquiry, but about network sameness. It’s not quiet respite, it’s unrelenting oppressive
systems. They might be the same. Not all server farms are that, but data banks and
server warehouses, in some respects, they could be the same as the book library, the
image of them is so very, very different. Or what that image has come to culturally
mean is so very, very different. Avery Golden– Alchemy (Objects and Taste
Structure)
Point 5.
We can become conscious of the meanings that places hold for each of us uniquely.
(Israel, 2010, p. x).

95

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

At this stage of self-place bonding, each participant has become more aware of how
environmental meaning has formed them, allowing them as individuals to begin to name
themselves in direct relationship to meaningful places. Quotations from Avery Golden
and Charles Marion clarify this point.
Avery Golden is the alchemist-gone-architect who initially formed a library in her
head from entries in the Avery Index, and who creates libraries as data sets and
conceptualized spaces. She describes the “cinematic” uptake of consciously forming
place-meaning for the concept of libraries:
What’s interesting is that I did not grow up around a lot of books. We weren’t a
reading family. I’m an anomaly. There are no other academics in my family. In fact,
few are even leisure readers. This is probably going to be out of order. There are
libraries that are ideas. And I never, when I was younger, enjoyed being in the library.
I went to very small schools that didn’t have a library. I can flash through images of
places [in my mind] that I won’t be able to actually name. There’s that sort of
cinematic [vision], and I mean that in many ways including just having seen them on
screens whether television or movies. Images of stacks of books. It’s ubiquitous, this
image of a very large personal library, as an idea, as a backdrop for... and it connotes
a certain kind of life, it connotes a certain kind of mind, a certain kind of inquiry, or
the ability and freedom and time for inquiry and reflection that image implies, quiet
sometimes solitude for better or for worse. Avery Golden– Alchemy (Timeline)
While the quotation above drives home Israel’s 5th point regarding becoming
conscious of the meanings that places hold for each of us uniquely, Golden expands on
this in her interview:

96

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

From very young—this is about to sound so cliché and silly—but it’s even ubiquitous
in Disney films from my childhood. Beauty and the Beast has that image. The Beast
has that big beautiful giant Library with the rolling ladders and the heroine Belle is
obsessed with reading and always has her nose in a book and this is a Wonderland to
her. Extend that one step further and the quasi-hoarder Ariel in The Little Mermaid
has her archive of found objects that operates the same way. It’s a space of reflection
and collection that is selfish in the best possible way. These artifacts, these
documents—and to her they are objects—but they operate the same way as the books
do in the library that they are collected, they're organized, they’re on display. They
wrap the space, implying that you’re reflecting upon them, in the same way that the
books do in a library. I have probably no physical libraries to speak of in my early
childhood. Which is odd because I have a pretty long memory. What’s the movie? Is
it ‘My Fair Lady’? Where Henry Higgins takes the not-so classy girl and turns her
into a lady? How many scenes take place in his library? It’s this backdrop. That’s the
space of the life of the mind. Avery Golden– Alchemy (Timeline)
Charles Marion eventually left his small southern town and now commands not only
a notable NYC architecture and design firm, but he evolved as an intellectual who readily
incorporates international perspectives into his work. Every part of his pathway to who he
has become holds his conscious awareness of the meaning each place of opportunity
afforded him:
I remember going to the main public library in the big urban downtown when I was a
teenager and it was kind of a thrill. It’s kind of like you graduated to the big library. It
was kind of a cool experience because you were suddenly mixing in with people from

97

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

all over the city rather than just your local branch. I didn’t know any of the people, it
wasn’t like I was going to run into anybody, but it was kind of almost like a big city
experience even though I was growing up in really kind of a small town. To kind of
go into this hall of intellect from your little southern town. I mean I didn’t grow up
with the New York City public library and suddenly run into the serious place of
learning where there’s a heavy social aspect. It was a very cool experience. Charles
Marion– Grace (Timeline)
Point 6.
Such consciousness can help us create places that express a fulfilling self-place bond.
(Israel, 2010, p. x).
To illustrate Point 6, I have chosen excerpts from the narratives and images from the
interviews of Charles Marion, Augustus Buffington, and Connie Zhōng.
Charles Marion thought back to describe the quintessential 1960s cement-panel
municipal library of his personal past. The experience of using this no-frills building had
a substantial impact on his awareness of the built environment. At this point in the
interview, he has sketched an image of the cement-paneled library, emphasizing its
simple single glass wall that offered relief in the form of a view out on to nature, a respite
for him from an otherwise austere building. This early experience formed him as an
architect. As I listened to him speak of “grandeur” as an important building quality, my
interest was piqued when he referenced the Phillips Exeter Academy library. A renowned
Louis I. Kahn design, the interior of the Exeter library incorporates wooden horizontals
alongside massive cement panels with large portals for natural light facing out onto open
green space. Despite its serviceable materials, the Exeter library is heralded for being

98

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

anything but utilitarian. The cement-paneled municipal library of Charles Marion’s past
with its refreshing view out onto trees, resonates with his appraisal of the Exeter Library,
comprised of massive amounts of similar material to very different effect. His reflection
allows him to provide insight on the origins of fulfilling self-place bonds:
Figure 5: Municipal library, concrete slabs, wood, and one glass wall

Note: Figure 5 drawn by participant Charles Marion

I’m a believer in great architecture. Something that is very uplifting and inspiring as a
piece of architecture will make people return. Just that alone… I came back to this
library—which was not a piece of uplifting architecture—because I was young and
there wasn’t anything else available. Which made it kind of great to me. It was a very
kind of glass and metal building as I recall, and it had stone and cement panels in it.
99

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Very 1960s-typical, kind of like post office buildings. But, in that town, it was a big
civic building and it was across the street from a major church. But this is quite a
magnificent square. But inside the building, there were people to help you; there was
a circular reference area. I suddenly had a very clear image of spending a lot of time
at that card catalog trying to find stuff. Frustrating. And I like buildings that have a lot
of grandeur and hierarchy to it so that there is sort of someplace that gives you an
orientation, so you kind of know where you are, so you keep coming back to that. I
like buildings that have a strong, symbolic quality to them, that are kind of based on a
statement about the meaning of the function in today’s world. I think a library is a
pretty exciting piece of architecture that says something symbolic about human
knowledge and is gonna be very inspiring… there’s something very nice about going
into a really big space that’s quiet and there’s this sense of awe that you have of it. …
The Exeter Library, when you see the big circles framing the books, there’s this awefeeling of human knowledge. It’s amazing. Charles Marion– Grace (Favorite
Childhood Place)
Figure 6: Exeter Library, concrete slabs and wood

Copyright and related rights waived via CC0

100

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Augustus Buffington is in perpetual hope of sharing the magic of the barn. His quest
to create fulfilling self-place bonds is at the heart of his motivation to create meaningful
design:
The libraries of my past cling to me. But they are already built and live in a different
place on the map from where I am called to design. Yet I’m always going back to
how you can help people feel a building as an extension of how they know that’s
them. It’s challenging, particularly if you haven’t been in that space or building
before and lived the experience of it. How can I grab on to preference or something
that relates to the reasons why those people are attached to the library building that’s
more than books? We are constantly asking who we are to come fit into that space.
And this is where my past makes it happen. Bring the natural world inside. Discover
local materials that define the community. Use synthetics to illustrate a situated story
of the community, the local economics, and the building, but reconnect us back
through what’s real and what’s tangible and what’s familiar, and what’s their own.
Augustus Buffington– Organic (Ideal Library Place)
Throughout my own library career, I have worked with architects and design
professionals on many building projects. There have been countless times when one of
them has sidled up to me to confess their desire to incorporate features and experiences of
beloved libraries from their pasts that would emulate those fulfilling self-place
environments in the new space. I have been astonished at how many times an architect
has created a side-conversation to share that their mother was a librarian, or to mention
their own memories of the library experience, and to express how much they wish they
could, just one time, incorporate a certain feature of a past library into a current client

101

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

project. The desire for design professionals to want to extend a fulfilling self-place bond
into current work is not, in my experience, uncommon.
Connie Zhōng proclaimed, “Libraries are my sanctuary!” For her, the library is more
than an analogy to a sacred space; it’s nearly a visceral experience. Having become
conscious of the meaning that libraries as ‘place’ hold for her, she maintains a silent
mission to create places that express the fulfilling self-place bond of libraries in her
younger days, while still being able to honor the diverse purposes public libraries must
serve today. Our many hours engaged in the exercises of the DPT brought her libraryempathy to the fore. After sketching a school library of her past, while describing a recent
visit as an alumna, she began:
This is, basically, my [New England] high school library that turned into a cafeteria.
Obviously not exactly, but it embodies pretty much what I think libraries are now.
There are no quiet group studies. It was very much self… it’s where you go to find
yourself. Whether you study, yourself, whether you read, yourself, whether you sleep,
where you find things. Then you face the authority and you ask them and you pay,
because you get penalized, because you have to pay for the late fee and then you meet
people very shortly and then you leave. This is almost like a church, believe it or not,
now that I’m talking about it… If you look at the…it’s very orthogonal, which is like
a church. It has many little pockets of privacy areas. There are really no nook things,
per se, any more. So, like a church, you come to find yourself, you come to pray, you
come to study, you come to do whatever you’re gonna do, and apologize, to atone, to
whatever, and then you face this authority figure, and they either slap you or they
give you answers. So, to me, it’s very much like that.

102

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 7: “Library as church: you face this authority figure"

Note: Figure 7 drawn by participant Connie Zhōng

103

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

There was a pause in Connie Zhōng’s interview that I answered with my
encouragement, “It’s fascinating. Many people talk about libraries as sacred places and
therefore it evokes memories of being in sanctuaries or religious places, but you actually
have an experiential way that you relate it to, so I love listening to you talk about it.”
She continued:
I think libraries have changed so much and I am actually an old soul and I yearn for
[she pauses] I think based on the past conversations we’ve just had I think you
understand where I was going with that. Libraries became a playground. And, it’s
lovely, but it’s not play… it’s not a community center. It should be that, but there still
should be private areas that you still feel that little bit of that sanctuary, that church,
that something, and I think maybe people these days don’t need them. I don’t know. I
don’t know where they find them. There doesn’t seem to be any place that you can be
there. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Mental Map and Ideal Library Place)
While there is great lament in her words, Connie Zhōng’s reverence for quietude and
retreat are present along with the consciousness Israel describes as necessary for helping
design professionals create places that express fulfilling self-place bonds.
Point 7.
Those in the design world who shape our physical environments have a particular
responsibility to build places that help us reinforce these vital bonds.
(Israel, 2010, p. x).
In support of Point 7, I offer quotations from Augustus Buffington, Kai Shizi, and
Rosa Dawson Loeb. Their statements were chosen because, in speaking as practitioners
about library environments, their words echo the obligations Israel sees as specific to

104

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

practitioners: to intentionally create places and spaces so that people can experience
environmental meaning and potentially achieve that self-place bond. All their quotations
come from the “Future” section of the DPT interviews.
Augustus Buffington speaks with enthusiasm for designing environments that
potentiate self-place bonding. His articulation of his role makes it impossible to confuse
his design approach with that of someone interested in mere spectacle. Augustus
Buffington’s sensitivity to the development of young people, captured in the quotation
below on designing children’s spaces in libraries, is echoed in his overview of himself,
“Father, Husband, Designer in that order.” He is the sum of all parts:
Every library I’ve ever done has had a children’s library. In the Hamptons there is a
space with elements of the General Store. Out on the shore there are nautical
elements, windmill seating elements… children actually sit in the windmill for during
story time. Literally I have installed icon lighthouses, and giant shore themed
alphabets like A equals artist, B equals boat, C equals clam, D equals and so forth and
check this out, the librarian’s desk is a real boat! The kids are touching all the parts of
their environment that they see all the time but can’t reach or can’t explore on their
own, yet it’s their history and their personal landscape, and now we signal that the
library is inseparable from their coordinates too! Augustus Buffington– Organic
(Objects)
Kai Shizi also avoids the pitfall of spectacle, noting that it is the responsibility of
designers to be intentional in their choices to support design affordances, in this case the
vital environment bonds so many experience in libraries:

105

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

It was always kind of fascinating to me how going into the big NYPL reading room,
how it managed to be grand, but also sort of warm, and for me at least it didn't come
across as alienating or isolating. Kai Shizi– Textured (Objects)
When we resumed the exercises of the DPT a week later, she shared:
I started a little mini brainstorm list for a library space I would want to build and
much of that is texture, but texture more from the sense of the things you choose to
put in the environment in terms of the materials you choose. Textures that are
evocative, and that evoking actually does shape and change behavior. Design
affordances. Like, going to something that’s sterile, like a doctor’s office, implies
certain things very differently than something like going in to a living room or a place
that was made for you to linger. I feel like the libraries that I don’t like tend to have
almost that more like, ‘ok, you’re gonna use the service and leave’ kind of feel to it
than necessarily wanting you to be there. The beige Formica uncomfortable-seating
libraries.
Recalling her recoil from the functional places I offered, “It’s a sadness.” Agreeing,
she returned to the responsibility of designers to create fulfilling self-place bonding
environments, and the possibility of achieving that even on larger scale projects:
Yeah. And I get why it happens but another part of my list that was also the magic of
the NYPL reading room is besides texture, it’s the sense of intimacy. Part of that can
be read in the direction of scale and the way you relate either to seating or to other
people or to things like individual library lights that create intimate spaces. Intimacy
you can even have happen in a larger space based on how you organize and do other
things but always in the sense of intimacy in relation to relationships and actually

106

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

connecting to people and to be in a place where everybody knows or can learn your
name. Yeah, it’s not a bar but why can’t it be a community space in that sense of
where communing actually happens and wants to happen as opposed to being a
disconnected service you just kind of deal with. Kai Shizi– Textured (Ideal Library
Place)
Rosa Dawson Loeb made the connection between a consciousness of design with the
duality of rootedness in place. As I reread her words on reading, I believe she addresses
the vital ways in which libraries, often inseparable from reading, evolve in people’s lives
as meaningful environments where bonding to place can occur. Although she never read
Israel’s words, I believe this is Rosa Dawson Loeb’s way of expressing Israel’s Point 7,
the particular responsibility of those in the design world to build places that help us
reinforce these vital bonds:
The nature of reading is a kind of vicarious experience. It’s the one kind of universal
experience you could get into someone else’s head. It’s your imagination that takes
you to a place that you can’t go on your own, right? So, the kind of magic of being
transported to another mind, to another consciousness, to another place. So, what it
seems to me [is] that the object within a library ties into both, it’s a connection in a
certain way that is twofold: it’s bringing you into an outer realm, it’s bringing you to
another place, but it’s also connecting you to a singular community—because
somebody picked that art, is it related to, you’re in a library in a fishing community in
Maine, is that a boat on the sea?—to a singular community, so it’s a personal choice
any way you look at it. And it speaks to a particular place. To a rootedness in place. I
think that’s, to me, a really interesting aspect, that almost, if you were to diagram it,

107

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

you’re going in and out simultaneously. You’re moving in and you’re moving out
simultaneously. That’s a paradox in a way. That suggests kind of a consciousness
that’s both contracting and expanding. Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Objects)
While people draw meaning from characteristics they associate with libraries and
draw environmental meaning, the idea is less about preserving a past but about
introducing new furnishings or configurations that still hold the potential for
resonating what people have drawn from mission style furniture or long New
England windows that spill in light; it is the sense of welcome-to-stay that a heavy
broad seat invites and the soothing way natural light illuminates your work and
connects you to the greater landscape rather than leaving you feeling boxed in
miserably removed from the world.
Point 8.
Design professionals who, themselves, explore their own self-place connections can
more consciously create fulfilling places for themselves and others whose lives they
touch. (Israel, 2010, p. x).
I illustrate this point with a long quotation from early on in Rosa Dawson Loeb’s
interview. It was imparted to me as though this was the primary concern that she wanted
to say when she first agreed to participate in the research. Her appreciation for libraries as
meaningful cultural environments is demonstrated her commitment to giving back
communities by using her professional talents so that others may enjoy the opportunities
she had. I follow with Avery Golden’s reflections, which articulates how she consciously
creates places that touch others’ lives. While these two practitioners approach their work
entirely differently from one another, they speak to the same point: that once a design

108

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

professional explores their own self-place connections they can proceed in an awareness
of how to create libraries that offer other the opportunity to find meaningful connection
for others.
Rosa Dawson Loeb is a partner in a firm that seeks cultural/institution projects;
library buildings are highly attractive undertakings for them. Her background in vocal
music provides an entry point for her experience of space, and gives her a wealth of
insight to draw upon in designing spaces that bring people together for the opportunity to
appreciate the programs presented there, whether or not they were originally intended as
arts spaces.
While Rosa Dawson Loeb’s statement pulls several contemporary issues together, I
include her response in its entirety with the hope that her articulation of self-place
connections is potentially helpful for others in creating fulfilling places:
We’re always asked, “Are libraries obsolete, what does the e-reader do to the
library?” And, as you point out, it's very true that Library usage is not going down. In
fact, book circulation is going up. Books are always my first love of libraries. So,
that’s counter-intuitive but it’s not all these other forms like the e-reader, audio
books, or online—none of that is what’s changing libraries, in fact Library usage is
also going up so, why—(pause) I think it’s true that a sense of place, I think this is
partly why people go to libraries and museums. I think they get out of their apartment
and they go to a beautiful environment where they go to spend time in a place with
other people in that beautiful place. I think part of it is the services that libraries are
offering. They almost operate as community centers. Which is why people arrive
early to the theater! In addition to the more traditional library programs they’re

109

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

offering job training programs, they’re welcoming non-native English speakers.
There are a lot of additional services that libraries are giving whether it’s storytelling
places for kids to go. When I think about young families, going to the library is a way
to get out of the house with the kids. Storytelling is kid’s theater. It’s more than books
if you build it to be. So, I think the library continues to be a really important public
program in the city. And New York City is going through—they're spending a lot of
time analyzing what those changes are and how buildings need to adapt to suit those
purposes. Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Family Tree)
There’s a very determinant quality about what she describes. I believe she is entirely
in-tune with the project needs and is not imposing her own love of a performance
environment as much as she is making good on what she has identified in her own
journey spent in fulfilling places and using it, enthusiastically, to benefit others. She
continues:
One library that I worked on that I felt a real relationship to was the renovation of the
[XYZ] Library, which is [one of] the last Carnegie Library that was built in the US.
… They knew they needed certain things. That Library had been renovated in the 70s.
They dropped an acoustic ceiling, they ruined the great reading room—they did all
that to install a mechanical system. They did a lot of things that essentially wrecked
the space. The outside of it was pretty much intact. So, our mission was to recreate
the grand reading room but then deal with installing an elevator to support
programming throughout the building and thinking about the offering of universal
pre-K in the library and then looking at, how do you serve the demographic of the
community which is incredibly diverse, and have them experience the grandeur of

110

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

this building as it was intended and as we can support it to be once more? So, we’ve
enjoyed getting to know it. Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Family Tree and
Sociogram)
Avery Golden wants her colleagues to know the power of arrival she achieved in
exploring her own past. She offers her understandings to help inform how design
professionals create space under her leadership. She quotes herself guiding her
colleagues, and then comments on the ‘why’ of her choice to intervene in this way:
Stop. Take your hand off the mouse, look away from the screen, pull out a piece of
paper and talk to me. What are you doing? Not in commands, not in the names of
tools you would click on, not in the language of the software but conceptually, talk to
me about what you’re trying to accomplish, what are you trying to do. What are the
relationships between the data sets that you’re trying to visualize? Sit back and
consider what we’ve heard.
She continues, now referencing herself and the human experience as the ‘data set’:
So, not only are my techniques between the physical—I’ve got all this modeling stuff
around—I draw, and eventually the data becomes visualizations, those don’t happen
by accident, those are designed, based on several different iterations, and what’s the
right way to communicate these and what’s the drawing I need to make? Software
doesn’t act like that; I designed those drawings. But I designed them from what I
heard. What I heard when I pieced together how my mind evolved to hold space. The
data sets are the lives of the people who inhabit the space, the lives they are
constantly scanning to bring in. The engineering, the costs, materials, purpose,

111

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

positioning—those data sets take a back seat now. Avery Golden– Alchemy
(Sociogram and Taste Structure)
More than any other participant in this research, Avery Golden can articulate the
moment when the library ceased to be a place where she accompanied her law-book
reading father, where she went to retrieve materials identified in the Avery Index, or
where she went for paid work. In that moment, she ceased seeing the library as a
repository and shifted to understanding libraries as places of individualized transaction.
When libraries ceased to be the spaces of and for others, and they became the repositories
of resources, she made her own self-place connection to the library and it stuck. Her
evolution of that understanding is expressed in her dedication to creating library spaces
where the same experience can happen for others. This is the intention and process Israel
refers to in Point 8 when she charges design professionals to “consciously create
fulfilling places.” Avery Golden narrates further:
We know that work flows more smoothly and workspaces are more productive if
they’re designed specifically with this question of human transaction in mind… The
visualizations I make that are part of an analytical process where I’m sorting things
out and conceptually reconfiguring what I’m looking at and testing hypotheses that
nobody may ever see, reflect that human—anticipates that human transaction—most
often by an individual. I guess my brain file structure, my organizational system for
my own files, and my own data reflects that; they follow my logic. I’m a human
library. Very different from my collaborative work with a couple of my colleagues,
like, I do collaborative research on projects very different from the things that will
eventually become public, because then, accessibility, usability, not having to …

112

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

deducing, reducing, that initiation load… It’s very important and what we think about
when we’re sharing data or sharing visualizations of the data, you can think of both of
those as a space and a data set as a sort of library collection, information structured
into a system, and you’re sharing that data. This initiation question—how closely did
you hear from the client—how comfortable and how familiar is that space going to
feel for someone—how much sense is that space going to make to someone—does
that space allow for collaboration—or, are you getting a glimpse into my private
space in a public setting? This library—is it my personal library or is it a community
resource? Avery Golden– Alchemy (Ideal Library Place)
Point 9.
Design professionals in particular stand to benefit from psychological exploration of
both larger and smaller scale sites in their lives as settings where intimate meaning may
have also been achieved (Beth, 2018).
I created Point 9, addressing scale, and Point 10, addressing the optimization of social
science tools and research, from three bodies of work: 1) my study of design
professionals’ self-exploration through environmental autobiography and Israel’s
Toolbox exercises, 2) my analysis of the data from this research, and 3) insights from my
previous studies in environmental psychology.
Every year the trade publication, American Libraries, runs a special issue called the
Library Design Showcase. The issue arrives in the mail, and librarians in lunchrooms all
over the United States gush over perfect, glossy “if-only-we-had-enough-money-to-dothat” well-lighted photographs, while eating leftovers brought to work in recycled brown

113

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

paper bags. In 2017, American Libraries introduced the issue with the phrase, “innovative
architectural feats”:
Welcome to the 2017 Library Design Showcase, American Libraries’ annual
celebration of new and renovated libraries. These are shining examples of
innovative architectural feats that address user needs in unique, interesting, and
effective ways. Renovations and expansions dominated this year, showing that
libraries are holding on to and breathing new life into spaces already cherished by
their communities (https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2017/09/01/2017library-design-showcase/ accessed September 1, 2017).
For several years, when new construction rather than renovation or repurposed
spaces dominated the Showcase, American Libraries used this introductory sentence:
New construction dominated this year’s submissions, but renovated and
repurposed spaces were a close second, showing how today’s libraries are both
conserving existing resources and adapting to economic realities
(https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2015/09/01/2015-library-design-showcase/
accessed September 1, 2017).
A look through 2017’s photographs shows much of the same splash, and in fact,
American Libraries has applied the caption to some photographs as “Wow factor.”
Indeed, they are all high-end, showcase, stunning spaces. Architects of public buildings
are rewarded for extreme architecture—spectacle if you will. Spectacle is the order of the
day for competitions, the emphasis and drive in their education, curriculum content,
demonstrations, publications, exhibitions, tours, and professional review. Architecture
schools traditionally challenge students to take on large-scale complicated building

114

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

design, complete with huge structure, infrastructure, situated planning, and surroundscape as their thesis projects. There is no requirement to demonstrate how real people are
expected to relate to such buildings or what self-place bonding is likely to occur there.
Like any large, public project, libraries can be stunning to the senses when they
too are designed to be spectacles of architecture. In their function as sacred places, it is
expected that libraries reflect grandeur and awe. But libraries serve also as the places of
the people, the last institutional vestige of true public intellectual space, a place for
common sense, open inquiry, and cost-free access to resources supporting intimate
personal journeys. In Frederick Wiseman’s monumental documentary, Ex Libris: New
York Public Library (Wiseman, 2017), he shows transactions equal in passion, relevance,
and importance taking place within very different structures, all of which are
recognizable to us as libraries. At one end of the spectrum is the landmark Beaux-Arts
Main Branch of the NYPL, located on 5th Avenue in midtown New York City, and on the
other end of the spectrum is an oppressively limited one-room library, the Macomb’s
Bridge branch, situated in a New York City Public Housing Authority public housing
complex in the New York City neighborhood of Harlem.
The literature of environmental psychology frequently investigates the ordinary
environments of our lives; social justice obligates us to apply the teachings of the field—
recognizing how the environments we transact in have an impact on us—to improve the
quality of civic and personal life. The six participants of this research called forth
memories of their formative years in local libraries. As their participation in the exercises
of the DPT progressed, they offered narratives of their library interactions over time, as
they developed from library users to designers of libraries. The research illuminates the

115

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

inquiry into the relationship between children’s experiences of libraries in which deep
emotional connections are established, and the later, larger-scale library sites in their lives
as adults where intimate meaning still has power and influence. Given the conditioning of
their practice towards the spectacular, and the professional demands on architects, I
believe they stand to benefit from psychological exploration of larger-scale sites in their
lives. In her own work with architects, Israel found that their environmental pasts and
histories were relevant not only in how they created their own homes, but “also their
well-known public buildings and/or architecture /planning philosophies” (Israel, p. ix). I
offer Point 9 to demonstrate the importance of psychological exploration of larger-scale
sites with my own participants, to bring Israel’s scholarship forward and demonstrate its
usefulness as a method of analysis.
Charles Marion described how his intellectual development paralleled his
discovery and use of ever-more architecturally captivating libraries. “The first significant
experience was a little branch library right around the corner from where I lived.” His
interview includes passages describing teachers recognizing his strength of mind and
sending him hunting for more complex lessons. He accesses increasingly larger libraries
as he gradually moves through primary and secondary school (see his quotation in Point 5
above). Remembering his post-secondary education, he unpacks memories of his college
library and the influence of scale:
There were lots of libraries on the campus like any college and they were
beautiful, you know. Neo-Gothic places. I spent the most amount of time in the
art and architecture Library because I transferred into it... I didn't know I was
going to be an architect when I went there… I spent a lot of time in there. It was

116

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

very formative for me. It opened up a lot, a whole world of architecture. I spent
hours in there. Learning about the history of architecture. I was very transfixed
with, and I have no idea why, post-war Japanese architecture... I don’t know why
because I wasn’t that sophisticated to even understand what they were doing and
what was pretty sophisticated was what they were doing. Charles Marion– Grace
(Timeline and Mental Map)
Keeping up my role as researcher, I asked, “And this library happened to have a
collection to support it?” To which he replied, “Well, it was designed by one of those
architects. It was designed by Maki who was a fairly radical architect at the time. Huh.”
He now pauses. His head tilts and his eyes wander reflectively. “I knew that, but I don’t
think I combined them until just now.”
At this moment in the interview a number of things are happening at the same time. A
design professional is experiencing new connections and awareness emerging from the
process of investigating his environmental autobiography with a partner-researcher. He
also achieves the realization that his student environment was an essential source for his
intellectual development—in a way that he had not previously imagined or considered:
his fascination with Japanese architectural forms is now less mysterious and more
traceable, finding an echo in the fact that an architectural expert of that same world
designed the building.
Then, while the objective fact remains that his college library was superb on many
levels (function, collection, etc.), as a design practitioner Charles Marion recognizes how
a larger-scale setting can nonetheless also offer a setting where individuals find more
intimate, personally transformative meanings. He mentions library transactions he has

117

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

experienced in ever larger-scale spaces where he will only ever be a transient user, but
the scale of which still allow him to achieve significant environmental meaning. In his
earlier years in smaller-scale library settings, he is working through the collection
discoveries, intellectually, in his mind alone. In larger library settings in his later years,
he is eager to share experiences of discovery and place with budding design colleagues,
as solutions to problems in the real world. Charles Marion’s experience and narrative are
not unique. While the architect’s professional training and work have their collaborative
aspects, psychological exploration of larger scale environments offer a further way to
collaborate to the end of understanding how self-place meaning forms and emerges:
I just remember spending hours looking at the stuff and being obsessed with it…
such an enjoyable experience… you’re flipping through these pages and looking
at this amazing photography and reading the articles. So, you naturally have this
social experience every time you go in there. You want to tell your classmates and
stuff like that. That was a very special experience. I wouldn’t say it was the most
beautiful library in the world, it was just the stuff that was in it and the way the
place was made for you to sit with it was really great. And then I came to
Columbia. And of course, Columbia had Avery [Library] and you just can’t beat
that… Avery was amazing. I remember at one point when I went and I said oh my
gosh I'm standing in the Avery Library. I’m standing in it. For me it’s
transformative to say all that got in there came here [he taps the side of his head].
It’s a beautiful space and just awesome what they have in there, so it was a whole
other level of study. And it had great exhibits which was a surprise to me. I never
had been to a library that had exhibits. Charles Marion– Grace (Timeline and

118

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Mental Map)
I conclude Point 9— the importance of larger-scale settings and the intimate
effect they can have on the life of the design professional—with a final quotation from
Charles Marion that addresses the future for his own practice of architecture. Many
decades have passed since he was a student and he is now at the peak of his years of
practice as an architect, the owner of a private firm. He has shared with me that in recent
years he has begun assigning colleagues to devote time to speak with the people who will
eventually be using the new project spaces and to learn about the surrounding
neighborhood, long before they sketch and spec out a building. Twice he says, “We were
just doing what we do.”
When you start to talk to people about their experience, and what defines a library
for them, they talk about what it means to have the privilege of being in libraries.
There’s something of inherent value. We learned this when we did a community
center in the Bronx that included a branch library. We were just doing what we
do. We were doing this super-nice detail, lots of natural light, lots of transparency,
you could see from one space to the next, we just detailed the hell out of it
because that’s what we do. A year later they had an open house, so I attended.
And for some reason, there were a lot of parents of the community who were
there. Mainly mothers. It was really moving. One of the women approached me
and sternly asked, “Did you do this?” I admitted I had and braced myself for what
she would say next with that serious look on her face, and she said, “I feel like we
got us a Lexus here. We got a downtown building here.” And I thought, oh my
god. I never realized the effect on somebody’s self-esteem that that would have.

119

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

And I said, “We were just doing it because we like doing it.” She called over
others who joined her in thanking me for this “Lexus.” I thought to myself, she’s
right. They don’t get this, but they see this on television. They know what it is.
There was something that really made them feel proud about themselves and
made them want to use it. I understood that they felt like it was theirs. I had never
experienced that before. Bringing the beauty into a community building, bringing
in a Lexus instead of another utilitarian space has a transformative effect on
people. Charles Marion– Grace (Taste Structure and Ideal Library Place)

Point 10.
Design professionals who recognize the importance of incorporating social science
research and social science research methods for exploring human factors stand to
enrich their future practice and project outcomes, that in turn touches people’s lives.
(Beth, 2018).
It might be fair to characterize my outreach for participants of this research as a
call and response. My flyers and in-person announcements sought, “Architects,
Designers, and Librarians who work on library building projects—whether new
buildings, renovations, expansions, design proposals, remodeling’s, or something in
between” to “share your personal memories of libraries and your professional experience
in library building projects.” Practitioners who responded were motivated to do so for a
variety of reasons, including their own love of libraries, and their curiosity about what
might be gleaned from the stories of their past for their present practice.
From my official “Call for Participants”:

120

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Libraries are often described as an environment where rich memory and
experience rest. How do Architect, Designer, and Librarian stories of our past
inform aspects of our professional work related to library building environments
and designs? Early in the practitioner-client exploration of library building
programs, stakeholders describe personal meaning and experience using libraries.
How well do we factor in these aspects alongside the evidence based metric
design demands of efficiency and patterns of use? (Call for Participants,
Appendix A)
It would be extremely helpful for librarians to undertake narrative inquiry as a
way of understanding the lived experiences of patrons. This would potentially drive
decision-making and a range of initiatives if the findings were to be discussed during the
initial stages of a building project. Perhaps the voices of those who elect to not use
libraries are the most glaringly missing narratives of them all. Including narratives of
facilities staff is also long overdue when considering the building program. Importantly,
narrative inquiry in the decision-making process would likely support greater clarity for
achieving place-attachment and could help practitioners avoid recreating negative library
design. It is mission critical to comprehend the institutional aspects that are not ideal in
our efforts to build libraries that honor not only those who do use them, but in response to
those who do not.
The participants of this research were not seeking to reform the education of
architects and design professionals. They were not clamoring to hire social scientists in
their firms. Their voluntary participation in this research demonstrated a curiosity about
approaching the practitioner/client relationship anew. Participants learning about how

121

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

self-place bonds inform place and space meaning repeatedly described the interview
process as compelling. They each took part in exploring their self-place bonds with
openness. Social science research and its place in the design world intrigued each one of
them. In Point 10, I assert my understanding, based on professional experience now
coupled with the research of this dissertation, that design professionals who optimize
social science research and social science research methods stand to enrich their future
practice and project outcomes, which in turn effect people’s lives. Enter the rich process
of environmental autobiography, Israel’s DPT, consulting narratives of stakeholders,
studying patterns of wayfinding, and an array of human factors research, data and design
considerations.
In the data collected on my participants who completed the DPT exercises, there
was almost no mention of using social science research to address design problems. In
the two instances when participants mentioned social science research it was in passing,
the value of discovery was noted only as an intellectual exercise, and not as a useful way
to meet human concerns by a professional practice. A primary goal of my research was to
provide an opportunity for library building and design practitioners to tap into their own
environmental autobiographies to explore how experience creates meaning in the
environments of our lives—and through that experience, to see the value of exploring
others’ environmental autobiographies. Another goal was to expand their awareness of
the richness of the research methods of environmental psychologists, namely the
collection and use of narrative inquiry as a highly valuable source for improving design
to serve real people. My 10th point expresses the desire for continued work with this
method to enrich their future practice and project outcomes more than my examples

122

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

provide clear evidence of that progress. I provide a brief discussion of professional efforts
that support the importance of this point following the framing and presentation of two
participant quotations.
Connie Zhōng knows her personal reclusive ways would never yield a library
with more than nooks and alcoves for one individual at a time to disappear into. Her work
in creating public library buildings is instead expected to be dynamic. At her firm where
she is the lead on library building projects, she has implemented a suggested practice for
clients prior to enumerating deliverables for any proposed library-building program. She
identified that she married a psychologist and that their conversations influenced her
decision to incorporate the suggested practice of exploring of person-place attachments
described as follows:
Her firm aids its clients in “field research” as part of the initial intake process,
immersing them in feeling and experiencing library spaces, after which they are guided
by her team to make sense of what they encountered. The office she works for puts out a
library services prospectus that speaks of creating collaborative spaces that reflect the
environment and the aesthetic of the location to foster a sense of community. During our
interview she proudly explained to me that eliciting the client’s perspectives, emotions,
and narratives creates a collaboration from which a client-pleasing design can emerge:
Our clients need help to have all the tools together that you can build the
environment you want. And then instruct them in that environment so that future
librarians can find where they are. This is becoming the formative space. Do you
understand? … They should see the space in the library and build the space based
on different weather and sun patterns, they should really experience that, so they

123

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

could know what kind of library suits them and the people who are gonna use the
space. They’re not gonna build a library from scratch. They’re gonna interview
with libraries that suits their personality that they can successfully navigate in
there and so it’s possible to find your style, per se, as a librarian experiencing it.
Right now, you’d probably have to go to 100 libraries just to look at different
libraries just so you could feel, is this me is this me is this me? Our work supports
the research first. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Sociogram and Personality and
Library as Place)
Enthusiasm aside, “tentative” might be a good term to describe the firm’s
intentions. They hire these field research consultants only on an as-needed basis. They
encourage exploration, but they list the human factors research as “optional” on their
proposals. There is no requirement for the client to pay for further research, it’s not
automatically included in the price of a design project, and the firm makes no
commitment to invest further resources to anything that may result from an investigation
into possibilities, despite it being offered. Connie Zhōng’s portfolio is full of evidence
that her work is responsive to unique client environmental needs and that there are no
cookie cutter layouts or approaches. Still, it would be difficult to consider this effort to
incorporate stakeholder participation in the process as a bona fide instance of social
science research for the purpose of eliciting valuable input; rather it is an open-ended
invitation for clients to collaborate, possibly, in the design process.
Charles Marion’s firm stands in an inquisitive posture at the time of this research:
We’ve had two strong interests, one that we’re trying to write an article about, I’m
not one of the best writers, which was all about this idea about architectural

124

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

identity and symbolism and multiculturalism. This is some of the stuff I was
mentioning coming up with clients, so that’s one thing. The other thing is because
we’ve done a lot of healthcare… there’s a lot of social research on, does nature
make you feel healthier, is it better to have the color green in this room, does that
make you heal faster, and then there’s a broader issue in the public health
movement which says, the best thing you can do to keep people out of the hospital
is to give them better housing or have less auto dependence in society so people
get more exercise … we’re kind of interested, we’ve been in a bunch of programs
at the AIA but we’re kind of interested in, this may sound kind of dumb but, does
design excellence have an effect on your health? And it’s kind of a hard thing to
pin down but a lot of people are talking about these things like better stairs, or
things like that that are certainly important and bicycle lanes and stuff like that but
if you design something that is really uplifting, if it’s a healthcare space, does that
have an effect on people’s health. Do they use it more? Charles Marion– Grace
(Sociogram and Personality and Library as Place)
He does not mention searching for or finding research that can be usefully applied
to the work. He does not mention hiring an environmental psychologist as a consultant or
a different type of trained social scientist.
This meeting of social science, environmental design, and architectural minds is
at a minimum fifty years in the making. 2 From the Environmental Design Research
Association (EDRA) “About” page:
The early years [the late 1960s] of EDRA were marked by an unbridled optimism.
2

2018 marks the fiftieth anniversary of several key institutions addressing the coupling of social
science and architecture: EDRA, the Environmental Psychology program of the Graduate Center
for The City University of New York, and the Journal of Environment and Behavior (SAGE)

125

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

There was a belief that a clear and conscious understanding of the design decision
process coupled with a similar understanding of the methods and techniques used
by the social sciences would provide the foundation necessary for ameliorating
problems in the environment. http://www.edra.org/page/about (accessed
10/1/2017).
The mission statement of the AIANY Chapter’s Social Science and Architecture
Committee reads, “The Social Science and Architecture Committee was formed January
2016 with the goal of bringing professionals and students together from architecture and
social science fields as well as many other fields to discuss, collaborate, and facilitate
programs for the community.”
https://aiany.aiany.org/index.php?section=committees&prrid=37 (accessed October 1,
2017).
In 2017, The AIA Committee on Architecture for Education’s (AIA CAE)
Research Task Force summarized results from an unpublished survey of architectural
firms in the United States doing educational buildings:
Different forms of praxis have different toolkits that they draw from. Larger firms
tend to rely on in-house “specialists” with research responsibility. These same
firms also hire outside consultants. The smaller firms have more of a tendency to
have their existing staff do research which is less reliant on expertise, but often is
more integrated into the practice, with buy-in from the top of the firm. The larger
firms share an acknowledgment that there is (some) value in expertise, but the
degree of buy-in is variable. (AIA CAE Research Task Force, 2017).
Point 10 stands more as a future wish than as a present reality. While I am

126

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

confident the mandate for services and insights is shifting, professional design education,
the firms, and the practitioners are simply not yet committed. There are some deeply
engaged innovative social researchers and fifty years of environmental psychologists to
look to. In her article, “Architecture in the Social Data Era: Transforming our practice to
engage new data sources and design intents,” Melissa Marsh describes her pursuit of new
methods for understanding, analyzing, and incorporating user behavior in the design
process. She states, “To lead this effort, we must shift our own focus as professionals,
while also expanding the definition of “architect.” We need an inclusive rather than
exclusive model of the profession: an architectural diaspora composed of many experts”
(Marsh, Oculus, 2015). The narratives of my participants, the presenters and attendees of
the annual EDRA conferences, and the audience at events crafted by the AIANY
Committee on Social Science and Architecture stand in a blend of frustration and promise
alongside a limited but vibrant array of colleagues representing architectural firms and
projects as social science research consultants. With no commitment on the part of design
firms, consulting firms, creative agencies, and others are delivering ad hoc, on-demand
services. My research involved six architects and, to a lesser extent, their respective
firms. In the conclusion chapter of this dissertation I will explore possibilities for greater
numbers and greater impact.

127

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 7
Data Analysis: Reflections on the Design Psychology Toolbox
Toby Israel created the DPT to guide people in their exploration of home as an
ideal place, with the understanding that it could be adapted for use in other more public
environments. In the Appendix of Some Place Like Home, Israel states, “The following
Design Psychology Toolbox includes a series of nine ‘tools’ derived from the exercises
laced throughout the main portion of the book. However, while the exercises previously
presented are for use by individuals, groups can do these exercises. These exercises form
a toolbox which designers can reach into as they facilitate a visioning process that helps
client groups brainstorm ideas for schools, workplaces, institutions, and other places
including even large-scale environments that users will feel connected to in the deepest
possible way.” (Israel, p. 199). My research focuses on the meaning and experiences of
self-place connections of the library, and the participants of the research were exclusively
architects, design professionals, and librarians to expand understanding and practice of
designing libraries to support social and emotional affordance.
The research questions that shaped this study included: How do library-building
practitioners describe their experience(s) of libraries in their own environmental
autobiographies, and how can this inform our understanding of libraries as environments
of significant meaning? To answer the research question, I analyzed several subquestions: By understanding the power of one’s own environmental story/environmental
autobiography (Rivlin, 1978; Marcus, 1979) on the relationship between self and place
through engagement with Israel’s DPT, would my group of practitioners 1) find value in

128

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

the exercises, and 2) consider using the DPT during client in-take or in the visioning
phase of library building and design programs?
My findings met an essential goal of my research in encouraging consideration of
DPT for work with clients and for explorations of library-building programs, with a
number of useful provisos to guide future DPT-led investigations. As you read the
paragraphs ahead, I concur with the limitations identified by the participants of this
research who determined that the strongest aspects of the Toolbox are derived from the
exercises pertaining to the Past, and that the instructions in the 11 Exercises need to be
simplified. The tools should be modified to capture the thought processes of creative
professionals who are accustomed to sketching as a way of thinking. The DPT tends to
elicit the most ideal responses, ignoring negative experiences and concerns.
All six participants expressed their interest in receiving a copy of the DPT
exercises that had structured their participation in the research. All six responded
positively to the suggestion that their firm associates experience using the DPT. All six
participants articulated the concern that, as they experienced it, the DPT process is too
lengthy for their work. The amount of time required for participation in all of the DPT
exercises exceeded what they thought plausible for typical client-work.
All the exercises of the Past held tremendous appeal for each of the study
participants. The two exercises of the Present, Library Sociogram (Exercise 5) and
Personality and Library as Place (Exercise 6) elicited mixed responses. While each
participant was comfortable sketching (Exercise 5), their professional inclination was to
reach for completed work either available through their firm website, through their
portfolios, or in some instances through rolled blueprints within arm’s reach. The

129

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

participants responded well to Exercise 6, discussing distinctions between individual,
shared, and public spaces, as this is a staple of their work when thinking about and
creating institutional building spaces. In Israel’s original conception of the DPT, Exercise
6 explores these space distinctions exclusively in the context of the private home, where
architects may not think to apply this analysis. In contrast, participants expressed a
variety of distinct likes and dislikes to exercises 7, 8, and 9, the exercises concerning the
Future. While they initially found the instructions for Exercise 7, Special Objects
Inventory, to be confusing because the words had multiple meanings, once I provided
them with examples to help them interpret the prompts, they began to offer lengthy
descriptions of the objects that have featured prominently in their memories of their own
library use, and in their own design projects (e.g. Lincoln pennies in the shape of
Lincoln’s head; the boat as a reference desk in a nautical town; art as color pairing
wayfinding, etc.). In the Future portion of the DPT Exercise 8, Taste Structure was met
with some resistance. Comments from participants expressed that they experienced
redundancy between Exercises 7 and 8, and that they felt were obliged to repeat
themselves; similarly, participants expressed that the exercise, Special Objects Inventory,
included points of reference they felt they had already described. In reviewing the
interview transcripts, it is notable that as participants opened up to DPT exercises early
on, their answers flowed and anticipated questions that were yet to come. Finally,
participants expressed something akin to disdain when being asked to do relaxation
grounding (Exercise 9) before imagining the creation of ideal library spaces for the
future. While it is impossible to quantify precisely the generosity of time the participants
gave to my study, it is reasonable to note that an exercise consisting of taking a “relaxing

130

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

magic carpet ride” exceeded the non-billable time participants were willing to donate. In
contrast, describing “ideal place visions” for libraries offered each participant a high note
for ending the DPT exercises every single time.
Final/follow-up interviews with participants demonstrated that the DPT was wellsuited for adaptation to guide practitioners involved in library design and building
projects, meeting two central goals of my research: to allow design professionals to tap
into their own environmental autobiographies to explore how experience creates meaning
in the environments of our lives, and to explore how narratives in the form of library
stories hold rich information about place and space. Each of the six research participants
viewed the DPT exercise process as enriching for their personal and professional
development. All six participants found exploring self-place attachment through the DPT
exercises to be beneficial for their thinking about building libraries: it reinforced their
own understandings that articulating attachment to place creates buildings we want to use
and return to. All six expressed unsolicited enthusiasm for having had the chance to
restimulate their experience of finding meaning in the space and place of the library. All
six visibly demonstrated a palpable energy as they went through the paces of the DPT
exercises. From my field notes: “Gratitude; enthusiasm; huge energy upswing (push away
from the table, the need to walk and talk), watching their eyes look back into memories;
an urgency expressed to get to the drafting table; holding their heads in a gesture of a
rush of ideas and then using their hands to indicate a need to draw; interjecting emotional
outbursts of “I love talking about this!”; watching a flash through the mind—a cinematic
review of libraries through life with tremendous facial expressiveness.” Despite their
concerns for the time-demand of the exercises, they recognized the worth of the DPT for

131

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

their work during client in-take or visioning process, just as Israel described—meeting
my research goal to “Encourage consideration of DPT exercises that can be incorporated
into future client intake exchanges and explorations for proposed library-building
programs.” That participants also asked me to return to administer abbreviated versions
of the DPT exercises to their colleagues also bears out the success of my research.
Discussion of the Toolbox: Past, Present, and Future
In Chapter 3: Methodology, I described the DPT at length. My adaptation of
Israel’s DPT is best described as having substituted “library” or “libraries” in place of
“home.” The Toolbox in its entirety is comprised of a total of nine exercises. In keeping
with Israel’s original formulation, I designated the Past, Present, and Future as three
distinct periods of exploration, reflection, and thought. The data analysis of this chapter is
also organized as the Past, Present, and Future, but my findings do not always correlate to
each of the nine exercises on a one-to-one basis. Often participants’ responses bled from
one exercise into the next. To avoid redundancy in reporting I have chosen to write about
the responses that emerged from each of the three distinct periods, as well as from the
exercises. My iterative process—listening and re-listening to the recordings, of
transcribing, reading, and digesting what was said, of consulting my field notes and notes
taken from the transcripts—led me to an analysis from which specific themes emerged. I
have paired those themes with the distinct periods, Past, Present, and Future, that Israel’s
Toolbox provides with the understanding that other adaptations are possible. The themes
are a reflection and a distillation of the exercises according to my analysis and are
designated as follows:
Past: Personal Journeys; Intellectual Development

132

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Present: Libraries as ___ Space; Professional Journeys
Future: Reactions to Participating in the Research; Objects; Future Ideal Libraries
Personal Journeys
The initial session addressing the Past incorporated grounding exercises and
generated more response from participants than any other single exercise. The Past
exercises are comprised of the following: Library Timeline, Library Timeline Graph,
Library Family Tree, Library Family Tree Graphic, Mental Map, and Favorite
Childhood Place. This DPT section introduced the concept of ‘environmental
autobiography,’ and elicited the most detailed responses to the exercises. Consistent with
Israel’s DPT, tools like the Library Timeline Graph (Figure 7) and Library Family Tree
Graph (Figure 8) aimed to expand memory of the past beyond one’s own roots and to
acknowledge the genealogy of libraries from ancestors. Libraries were not strictly defined
as a building or place but also include ideas about libraries that have been passed along to
us through family stories and in other ways, so the Library Family Tree exercise included
the inheritance of influence. I include Rosa Dawson Loeb’s responses to illustrate how a
participant might respond to these tools, creating information that then became a
supporting instrument in the research as she referred to them time and again in
demonstrating her points. In addition to recalling libraries in the home or community,
books and reading were described as significant.
My research results led me to understand that, in environmental terms, we not
only possess environmental autobiographies but environmental genealogies. Participants
filled in the Library Family Tree indicating significant people in their genealogy with
past library experiences of their own. While it may have only taken a participant 20

133

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

minutes to complete the exercise, their narrative included a more lengthy exploration of
the influence this environmental genealogy may have had on their lives. Once
participants filled in the family tree boxes—their comments overflowing along the
margins, arrows connecting links to people and the related geographies of their lives—
they repeatedly returned to that page with enthusiasm for the remainder of the interview
session.

Figure 8: Past: Exercise 1: Library Timeline Graph

134

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 9: Past: Exercise 2: Library Family Tree Graphic

Initially, participants had to warm up to the tools. Professional meetings are typically for
the business of generating business, and individuals attend to represent the interest and
expertise of their firms. My research participants invited me to meet with them and came
prepared to show completed, polished work. Instead, they were each asked to represent
themselves, and to present ideas about their personal evolution. Once they understood
there was no competitive edge to anything they would share with me, they relaxed into
the exercises and an expanse unfolded. They would complete something like the Library
Family Tree, begin to tell me what they had included, why, and what memories it evoked.

135

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Then, as memories continued to build, they would return to the graphic with more
narrative to offer. While none of the participants expressed hesitation that I keep the
materials that they generated, some shyly asked if they could make a photocopy for
themselves: for several, the exercise took them to new understandings of themselves and
had personal resonance. In some sessions I was asked for a blank copy of the exercise
materials for the participant to keep, and in one instance a participant said of her husband
who is also an architect, “I have to make [him] do this, he’s gonna love this.” As the
researcher, it became fascinating to watch the shift about 20 minutes into the start of a
session, seeing a participant go from puzzlement at the outset of our meeting to then
landing at an energized, talkative posture about libraries in their past lives. This shift
reveals that the study was successful in the goal of offering participants the opportunity to
tap into their own environmental autobiographies in exploration of how experience
creates meaning in the environments of our lives.
Once the ice was broken, Exercise 3 (Favorite Childhood Place Visualization) just
flowed. Participants sketched silently for only brief portions of the allotted time. In fact,
some referred to the Library Family Tree and genealogy, which included describing their
Favorite Childhood Place memories, after which they were hardly ever silent again
throughout the interview. In all instances, participants chose a favorite childhood library
place, which meant that they had already launched themselves into Exercise 4, the Mental
Map. Figure 10 shows both a Favorite Childhood Visualization and a Mental Map from
participant Kai Shizi. She captures the specific memory of peeking through the shelving
and how that transformed the library into a place of secrets and discovery. Her leanings in
architecture and design, as noted in Chapters 5 and 6, are frequently about texture. Here,

136

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

she has visualized the effect of lighting against the texture and weight of bookends. The
opportunity to draw in Exercise 3 and 4 allowed for some “delight” to surface.
Exercises 3 and 4, respectively Favorite Childhood Visualization and Mental
Map, called forth memories of the experience of going to the library. The ritual of the trip
to the library was sometimes described in such intimate detail that I could imagine myself
along with them. In one instance I felt like I was on the seat of the bicycle holding on to
the belt loops of the young boy (who would grow up to be an architect) as he did all the
pedaling while standing, our books in the handlebar bike basket, racing to the library.
Sensorial memories of place told of the cold displeasure of beige Formica library tables
and counter tops; the librarian with a skinny upper lip who drew in a thicker, fake one
with a lipstick pencil liner; the way a hand was held by a mother until being released
inside the library where it was always safe and they would go their separate collectionseeking ways; the wood on the arms of the tapestry upholstered chairs, the pull of your
attention to the worn places in the staircases; the smell of ink and paper and wood all
rolled into one; the sounds of whispers that carried in the tall ceilinged rooms; and the
natural light pouring in through long, arch-topped windows. Using libraries as the
timeline, their environmental autobiographies were rich with references to experiences,
objects, people, the specific books they could recall having read. They remembered, their
relative smallness as children in relation to the library, their body movements at various
ages handling books with more or less difficulty, the discovery of computers, and
navigating their ways of going to and coming from the library.

137

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Figure 10: Past: Exercise 3 and 4: Favorite Childhood Visualization and Mental Map

Note: Figure 10 drawn by participant Kai Shizi
It’s important to distinguish properly between the success of the DPT—exhuming
a design practitioner’s own environmental biography of libraries to stimulate their
favorable participation in the work—and the further success of having the same design
professional use this newfound awareness in client-commissioned library-building
projects. This distinction between enthusiasm, on the one hand, and the application of the
Toolbox to encourage library projects is at the heart of my research: to support
consideration of the DPT for client intake exchanges and explorations of library-building
programs. The critical question remains: what would it take for tools such as a modified
DPT or an environmental autobiography exercise to be deemed as necessary as any other

138

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

customary meeting protocol or intake data, and to be incorporated into the standard
design practice of professionals?
While the interview process of my research allowed insight and enthusiasm to
surface, nothing indicated in the early research steps or volunteered by the participants
shows a commitment to incorporating the exercises into the participant’s commissioned
professional work, nor where the money to do so might come from. Still, detailed
participant responses such as this one from Augustus Buffington provide evidence that
DPT-based exercises incorporating past influences on present projects can hold meaning
for practitioners:
“Having grown up in New England, I hold an affinity for barns. Utilitarian
agricultural structures draw me in. Mill factory buildings alongside running water
are an inspiration to me. Gable houses or saltbox structures appeal to me. If you
can build a library that stands as “the house,” then the barn is the complement to
it. So, I have drawn up projects where the barn is where the community space
happens in the library design and exhibits and meeting spaces are intended to be
held there. For me it’s explicit, the influence of my past. I’m interested in that sort
of nostalgic aspect. Particularly if others have never been in that kind of space or
building before, I have a longing to bring it to them.” Augustus Buffington–
Organic (Mental Map)
The Past section of the environmental autobiography offers a fertile method for
design professionals, accustomed as they are to taking pencil to paper. None of the
participants showed any hesitancy in using drawings to impart a narrative. The
recounting of their relationships to libraries (e.g. in the homes of relatives, situated in

139

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

their neighborhood, affiliated with a school they were attending, or encountered as they
traveled) provides us with the journey of discovering belongingness in buildings, of
literacy, and of the love of reading and books. The participants’ responses—verbal and
drawn remembrances of library experiences—offer narratives of identity formation,
emotional growth, attachment to place, elements of environments that participants found
satisfaction or dissatisfaction with, as well as relationships to the people in their lives
who were part of their personal journey.
Connie Zhōng’s personal journey to libraries is layered in her relationship to
books; the authors who are “the people who wrote in there,” the people who she learned
from as she “grew up,” and developed her into the professional she was to become.
Connie Zhōng’s narrative succinctly expresses my research imperative to understand how
library stories hold rich information about the significance of library environments in our
lives. Her words are a call for the inclusion of human factors in the education of design
practitioners:
“The library is not necessarily where I made friends, but it was where I grew up.
Because I found myself, because I realized who I was. Because the people who
wrote in there are not in my family, but they made me realize, I learn something
from them, even though they didn’t realize that I learn something from them.
When I say I learn something I don’t mean technical knowledge or intellectual
knowledge or whatever but just something about myself. I found myself just by
interacting with these people. And that contributed to who I am.” Connie Zhōng–
Sanctuary (Timeline and Mental Map)

140

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Connie Zhōng’s narrative includes an implicit demand that library building design
practitioners pause to understand that the end-user experience is less about the
efficiencies of information-finding than it is about the relationship to the place where
exploring and becoming occurs, the place of the library echoing the narratives collected
and made available in libraries.
To share outtakes from participant narratives where they describe memories and
aspects of their personal life journeys in relationship to libraries, I have developed visual
plates (Plates 1 - 3), for “Discovering Environments,” “Expressing Meaning,” and
“Experiencing Scale.” A discussion of some of the findings included in the research
follows the visuals. In total 21 plates (or visuals) were created to extend the reporting of
the Toolbox. I did so to demonstrate how themes emerged and how data can be highly
effective in grasping the importance in eliciting narratives even when presented in brief
form. I gave extensive thought to future moments when I will share the research of this
dissertation and need to gain the interest of practitioners who will be making a shift from
applying an ear towards economic efficiencies to instead consider ways of incorporating
human concerns and values.

141

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 1: Personal Journeys: Discovering Environments

Note: Plate 1 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

142

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 2: Personal Journeys: Expressing Meaning

Note: Plate 2 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
143

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 3: Personal Journeys: Experiencing Scale

Note: Plate 3 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

144

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Intellectual Development
Distinguishing intellectual development from personal journeys of the past honors
the ways in which the research participants came to understand their strengths as people
with visual intelligence, creative force, and ideas about how things are formed and can
function. Each participant took risks to invest in their own education. Architecture and
design fields are competitive, demanding practices that require years of applied training
as well as licensing and credentialing for professional practice. Practitioner narratives
articulate humility in discovering each individual’s capacity to join the world of brilliant
creators who had come before them and whose work had influenced them. The
participants of this research are highly educated individuals who took the time to
carefully recall the sources of encouragement in their intellectual development (e.g.
teachers, relatives, books, or projects) and the relationship of “becoming” specifically to
libraries. In each narrative there is a moment in time, a change in what fed their
intellectual development, that specifically names the role of a library or libraries that
made a difference in the who and the how of what each participant becomes.
The Intellectual Development Plates, “Childhood,” “Young Adult,”
“Professional,” “Adult,” and “Sage” (Plates 4 - 8), contain quotations that are grouped to
reflect the period in the participants’ development during which experience informed
thought. Naturally, experience does not constitute a correlation in time to thought.
Kristeva (1981) spoke of this temporality, how thoughts expressed are derived from all
narratives and environments that contributed to that very moment. Participants
consistently shared reflections of having had experiences that first informed and then
evolved into the articulation of their narratives they hold today.

145

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Four quotations from three different participants illustrate how retracing their
formative experiences with libraries where place-attachment and environmental meaning
were created leads to an articulation of their intellectual development:
I’m not there because I feel good being there, I’m there because I have a need and
it becomes more extrinsic and intrinsic in terms of why I am there, in a weird
way. I shelf-read casually when I go through the library and kind of straighten out
the books, still…. I strongly believe that there’s an effective layer to space in
terms of what it facilitates in terms of people coming together, in terms of people
staying, people being more comfortable and how that effects their willingness to
accomplish things in that space. Kai Shizi– Textured (Mental Map)

My 6th grade teacher really complimented me on a book report I had to give out.
She pushed me to read even more difficult books, and then pushed me some more.
She said, “Alright, let’s go to the library and I’ll show you some more.” I vividly
remember like, “wow, I really have some ideas here,” and I was hooked. … I had
a very significant English teacher in 7th and 10th grades who definitely took a
liking to me and pushed me. He too took me to the library and got me to love
books more and again recognized that I had ideas. … I had a couple of art history
and architectural history teachers at XYZ University that definitely opened my
mind. He was teaching us about famous modern African architects. In the early
70s I was like, what are we studying this stuff for? But I think something clicked
for me that this was not the usual stuff, you know we’re not just studying
Renaissance and that kind of stuff, so he had a lasting impact on me and it

146

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

definitely made me go back to the library to look this stuff up. Charles Marion–
Grace (Library Family Tree)

The lack of confidence, would that count? Lack of self-esteem. Solace in printed
words and books. Trying to find myself in these written forms. That became home
to me. Libraries became a home to me. My second home. Connie Zhōng–
Sanctuary (Library Family Tree)

It’s all about discovery. When I was little I really loved Legos and I still love
them. But I obviously don’t get to play with them anymore. I remember when I
was little one of my aunts—I said something to her about how I’m finally done
with this model—and she’s like, “Well that’s no fun, because the fun part is when
you build it, which is true. So, the fun part is how I found the book. So, I don’t go
to a library with a perceived notion in mind. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Library
Family Tree)

147

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 4: Intellectual Development: Childhood

Note: Plate 4 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

148

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 5: Intellectual Development: Young Adult

Note: Plate 5 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
149

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 6: Intellectual Development: Professional

Note: Plate 6 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

150

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 7: Intellectual Development: Adult

Note: Plate 8 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

151

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 8: Intellectual Development: Sage

Note: Plate 8 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

152

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Present: Library Sociogram; Personality and Library as place; Professional Journeys
Session 2 was scheduled within three to six days of an initial interview session.
Whereas an intentional period of reflection was useful, keeping the self-place topic
current and retaining the participant’s internal clarity and articulation was most important
to the process. At the second session, the participants greeted me with entirely different
body language. Even if our schedule was tight, each one openly expressed delight in
meeting with me again, and appeared more relaxed to roll up their sleeves and dive into
whatever steps were next.
In our second sessions, the DPT exercises addressed the Present including
investigations of the social dynamics of the use of space and the “who” of library
stakeholders. DPT Exercise 7 was called Library Sociogram and Exercise 8 was called
Personality and Library as Place. Participants drew a library with which they were
familiar and spoke about space as individual, shared, or public, and the anticipated
experience of those differentiated spaces. The distinctions between these types of spaces
support exploration of the social dynamics and personality of these spaces. This exercise
provides a clear example of the organic flow of the DPT, where participants started on
one exercise (social dynamics of the use of space) and subsequently arrived, unprompted,
in the work of the upcoming exercise (Library as ___ space). Each time a participant
spoke of how space plays out for different constituents they began to draw comparisons
to other spaces that, like libraries, face similar challenges or considerations.
In speaking about differentiated spaces, the participants described the library as a
place where individual space is sometimes defined by furnishings, but more often by
behavior. A long table might have a total of eight possible seating places, but given a

153

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

choice of seating at a shared table, individuals typically first seat themselves opposite
each other, at either end of the table. The implication is not that the table occupants must
spread out because their study materials take up significant space. Rather, people have
come to be alone in a shared space. If space efficiency and low-budget decision-making
didn’t dictate project decisions, a variety of comfortable seating could instead be used to
delineate spaces within an entire floor or section of a library.
Kai Shizi spoke extensively of her awareness of how libraries had a culture of
people, like airports, who came together under one roof to undertake individual and even
very private transactions. While they were likely to perform those transactions in the
presence of others, yet they never intended to connect with the others with whom they
shared the space, and had parallel experiences. Rosa Dawson Loeb had a very concrete
comprehension of the workings of libraries:
There’s the library staff and there’s the people who visit your library. You might
have a private office but mostly staff has private spaces in shared offices. If you
are the public, you might use a group room alone even if you are not supposed to,
but a carrel is much more likely where you will get private space, and even those
are right alongside other carrels, so it might be the illusion of private space but
really you are in a shared area. Public spaces are all over libraries in lobbies and
activity and meeting rooms and reading rooms, rest rooms, court yards, book sale
rooms, video storage rooms—the children’s rooms are always public spaces,
which should be kind of scary but it’s mostly not—maker spaces, and all of the
service points are always public spaces. I tend not to notice if I am in a public

154

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

space because I can tune out the cacophony, but that doesn’t mean I don’t have to
build them well for people who can’t! Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Sociogram)
While Rosa Dawson Loeb’s statement captures the many different spaces that
may make up a library building, neither she nor any other participant addressed their
ideal for what percentage of a library might be allocated to one type of space versus
another. Because not all libraries are public or academic libraries, the guidelines for
allocation of space must shift in accordance with the mission and purpose of each library.
Augustus Buffington reflects:
Distinctions between individual space, public space, and shared space. There were
nooks and crannies; it was a draw for me when you went in. Is that the kind of
space people seek? A lot of young people want to be at the big open tables to see
and be seen because that’s developmentally where they are. Shared space is an
example of a lot of the office space in the back where people need to organically
have contact with one another for ideas to flow and that’s different from public
space which is intended for the author lectures or the AA meetings that take place
in libraries, or the atrium in libraries intended as social space where you can have
sound and art. So, I’m mindful of those distinctions of individual, shared, and
public spaces when I build buildings. Libraries aren’t the only ones. We face this
in museums all the time and we face it in places where restrooms are really
important, but you don’t really want to call attention to them either. Augustus
Buffington– Organic (Sociogram)
Charles Marion has clearly given the topic of space careful thought as well:

155

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

All the time. I have to be. There are separate human needs. You need to have
those public spaces, you need to have a sense of arrival, and you need to have a
sense of the community of that building. In other words, to kind of come into a
space and say, “oh, I’m in the blah blah library,” is important and uplifting for
people. That doesn’t mean it has to be a noisy space. It can be a very quiet space.
I’m always amazed at how quiet Grand Central actually is. You walk in there…
it’s actually a hushed feeling in there. I don’t know how it works acoustically, but
it’s not a loud space. I think it’s just so big that the sound just gets lost, so it
almost feels quiet. I think that’s one of its appeals. There’s something very nice
about going into a really big space that’s quiet and there’s this sense of awe that
you have of it. Whether it’s awe over a large group of people that are rushing to
go to their places or when you go into the main space… But then there’s always
the question of the transition to the more private spaces, which you have to have,
and so we have our work cut out for us. The one thing we can’t be sloppy about is
compromising—building the library as a place that still gives you that sense of
awe every time you enter. Charles Marion– Grace (Personality and Library as
Place)
This question of individual space, public space, and shared space evokes thoughts
of how libraries as a space are experienced. The frequency with which people—
architects, design practitioners, librarians and people who use libraries alike—speak of
libraries as places that are akin to, or likened to another space, or are experienced
similarly to other spaces is remark-worthy. In my prior research responses to libraries
included, “notions stores, hardware shops, the post office, gardens, churches, and sewing

156

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

pattern stores” (Beth, 2010). From the transcripts of this dissertation research, I provide a
wide array of examples of how libraries were thought of or described by the participants.
After sorting through the data, I arrived at five distinct categories for organizing
responses. They are captured in Plates 9 – 13 and are labeled with the lead header of
“Library as: ___ Space” filled in by the categories of “public,” “shared,” “personal,”
“emotional intellectual,” and “sacred.” When people describe other places as having
likeness to their library experience, it is most often a place where people are aware of a
structured system, with categories and order. The act of speaking of libraries as akin to
other places makes their eyes light up as they emote fascination and enthusiasm. People
recognize each of these environments as places where sometimes information is stored,
and where knowledge can be accessed, and where sometimes objects are ordered and
accessed. When some interviewees say “the subway”—a response that might conjure up
thoughts of noise and movement completely antithetical to libraries—their comments
express awe for environments similar in their vastness and complexity, blending transient
and familiar people, with distinct features specific to that environment. Subways and
libraries both serve public demand and public need, offer layered systems that intersect
and rest situated apart, that blend individual, shared, and public spaces all in one. Beyond
the comparison of libraries to other recognized, structured environments, there is the idea
of libraries as sacred places. The descriptions of “Library as: ___ space” reveal people’s
passion for this place, and the significance of its societal symbol and its civic offerings.

157

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 9: Library As: Public Space

Note: Plate 9 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

158

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 10: Library As: Shared Space

Note: Plate 10 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

159

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 11: Library As: Personal Space

Note: Plate 11 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
160

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 12: Library As: Emotional/Intellectual Space

Note: Plate 12 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

161

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 13: Library As: Sacred Space

Note: Plate 13 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

162

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

It is hard to consider how people use space and not impose assumptions based on
personality or style preferences. This tendency among architects and design professionals
can be countered by examining social science research in creating human environments.
Post Occupancy Evaluation (POE) yields critical information on the quality of a building
and the expectations of people who use the building that corrections or improvements be
made to support its best or intended use. POE scarcely makes up for the lack of research
undertaken in the beginning of building projects that would otherwise bring greater
harmony between social scientists and design professionals. In the fifty years since
environmental psychologists and related social scientists have leaned into architecture,
design education, and professional practice, there is little evidence for other formal
practices that transform the projects by emphasizing human experience and meaning
(Sutton, et al. 2017). In responding to my call for participants, and in their responses to
the exercises of this section, the practitioners interviewed for my research reflected this
absence.
Professional Journeys
To qualify for participation in this research, participants needed to have
experience with library-building projects. Accordingly, the participants’ professional
journeys referenced these projects and reflected the keen interest they have in working on
library renovations, expansions, or new building projects. Participants were all in their
mid- to mid-late career stages, many of them experiencing the rewards of seasoned
professionalism, with peak career opportunities and accomplishments. To bridge the
impressions and influence of the past into a demonstration of their current practice, they
often spoke enthusiastically about when, where, and how their professional journeys

163

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

included libraries. As sharing their professional portfolio is a common practice with
potential clients, participants referenced their recent or current work with delight and
ease. Their professional journey narratives flowed without difficulty into descriptions of
the significance of objects, of social commentary on the ever-evolving place we know of
as libraries, and of the libraries of our imaginations and future libraries.
Connie Zhōng is utterly in tune with how she uses her skills for projects and
clients:
I think, as an architect, I thrive on tension. This push and pull is very important to
me. I’m not an artist, in other words, if you were to say, “Oh, you have an island
and there’s no building code, build anything there,” I’d be lost. I need boundaries.
I need very strict boundaries. My thing, I think, to become a very successful
architect, you know those little games where you only have one empty spot and
you have to move all the empty spots; it’s like a puzzle where you only have 12
empty squares and there’s one sliding box? I’m in there. I gotta have to scoot
around and get myself somewhere in here and this is what I am good at. If I don’t
have boundaries I’m totally done. So, the stake holder, that tension, for me to play
the marriage counselor, the mediator, for me to find a way to incorporate the two,
to make a space dual-function perhaps… When you talk about stakeholder push
and pull, my job is to sell these spaces so that it fulfills everyone’s desire. That’s
my job. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Sociogram and Personality and Library as
Place)

164

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Future: Objects; Taste Structure; Future Ideal Libraries
Session 3 followed the same scheduling pattern, and was set to occur within three
to six days of Session 2. The Future exercises, 7, 8, and 9, centered on Objects, Taste
Structure and finally Ideal Library Place. Objects from libraries are often referenced in
people’s narratives and hold importance as touchstones of memory and significance.
Participants were asked to recall objects from their library pasts and objects they have
chosen intentionally for their library-related work. They were then asked to talk about
meaningful objects in their personal attachment to libraries or specifically about objects
they incorporated professionally. While it was expected that design professionals have
style, taste, and aesthetics derived from their training and experience, these exercises
asked how they brought these influences to client work, and what, if any, value they held
in bridging their past aesthetics to their current work. The work of envisioning Future
ideal space, Exercise 9 occurred after many hours of probing and recalling past
experience, and served as the final invitation of this research: to visualize ideal library
places for the future. Transition and grace emerged as significant themes in exploring
future ideal library places.

Objects
In Israel’s research on memories of ideal places and home, objects proved to be a
way of referencing culture, aesthetics, class, and place attachment. With libraries, objects
have been used most frequently for wayfinding, but simultaneously they are referenced as
ways of defining local culture, memories of place attachment, and unique signifiers of
building textures that meet the senses and express the experience of using libraries. As
some of the comments and the plates (Plates 14 - 17, Objects) that follow show, people

165

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

associate certain distinct objects with libraries. While some are highly specific—the
sound and touch of clear plastic covering book jackets or the banker-style library table
lighting—other memories are of the materials associated with the sensory experience of
libraries, such as wood, paper, and ink, all rolled into one sensory memory. In the
“Narratives of Environmental Meaning” data analysis section preceding this chapter and
in other selections of this dissertation, those interviewed rejoiced as they described
features they incorporated into libraries. This included objects from the surrounding
environment where the library was located, or from the institutional inheritance that gave
rise to its fame, variously, the bust of a founder; a windmill placed in the children’s
section; the reference desk made from an actual boat; seating built from retired,
repurposed card catalog drawers; mosaic tiles in the floor memorializing the fame of
authors whose works line that library’s shelves; themed art; and an Asian Studies library
study room outfitted with Japanese tatami mats.
For those of us who spend extended time in the library once it is built, we observe
the reliance people have on objects for wayfinding, or the interest they hold for things in
the library that ground them, such as a spectacular mobile hung in an atrium, or a 14-foothigh carved wooden soccer player at the library’s entranceway, each time they return.
Objects may serve as functional in wayfinding or may meet an aesthetic need in the
process of place attachment, but they also provide us with insight and meaning as the
stories of objects are narrated and inherited. They may provide us with stability or
rootedness as the larger landscape of our lives evolves and changes. As I listened to
participants recall objects in libraries of their past that made an impression or impact on
their genealogy of libraries, I came to wonder whom else, and how many other

166

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

generations of libraries might carry memory of those same objects as a shared
environmental genealogy—whether pleasing, or memorably unfavorable. Sculpture
might be an artifact of personal identity or key to the development of personal values—or
both. My findings show that objects are indeed a significant aspect of how people achieve
fulfillment and self-place bonding in their experiences of libraries over the course of their
life.
Legos that you can keep in an old wooden card catalog drawer. You just need to
label them like an apothecary. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Objects)

I think that the artifacts—and let’s say the meaning of art as an object is [as an
artifact]—it’s almost in a funny way a programmatic tie-in, because what the art
does is command you to consider why this piece, why in this library, why here in
this spot. Rosa Dawson Loeb– Sensory (Objects)

Of books—touch held comparable to brick—designed by hand to have a
relationship to masons by hand. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Objects)

The following quotation, from author Ann E. Michael, a lover of libraries but not
a non-participant of the research, is included here to demonstrate the way objects in
libraries capture the soul of the place and experience of its devotees, its. It depicts
libraries as akin to houses of worship, a way that libraries are described commonly by
people the world over as “sacred places.” An entire set of plates themed Libraries as

167

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

___Space depicts just such associations commonly expressed by people who hold the
library as sacred space:
I grew up, physically and intellectually, in churches and libraries. Different in
purpose, they were nonetheless both built to impress upon the visitor admiration
for the possible. Their architecture varied from grand to bland, but their missions
as I grew up remained intact, as did certain expectations of what you would find
inside. In the church, there would be a pulpit, candlesticks, bibles, hymnals. The
sanctuary’s role was to provide a shared contemplative space for congregants and
their God. In the library, there were likewise tables or desks for quiet study and
contemplation, a reference area, and—most important—shelves and shelves of
books where you could lose yourself while seeking information, inspiration, or
entertainment. (Michael, 2016)
Plates 14 - 17 show groupings for objects named in and pulled from the
narratives. I have assigned the themes of Objects as “precious,” “Libraries are
synonymous with,” “tactile,” and “purposeful/intentional.” Acknowledging overlap in my
categories, I invite the reader to review the plates with curiosity rather than precision, and
to appreciate the objects named and the strength with which they emerged as shared
themes.

168

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 14: Objects: Precious

Note: Plate 14 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

169

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 15: Objects: Synonymous with

Note: Plate 15 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
170

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 16: Objects: Tactile

Note: Plate 16 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

171

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 17: Objects: Purposeful

Note: Plate 17 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
172

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Taste Structure
While participants almost uniformly believed their past experiences of childhood
place, are rarely if ever expressed in their work as designers, both Israel and I would beg
to differ. Augustus Buffington may not have built actual barns in children’s reading
rooms, but he brings the environmental equivalent of that New England icon into the
creation and furnishing of his designs for library spaces. Rosa Dawson Bloom, who as a
child loved the scale and experience of the bookmobile, would later build a staircase
library in her own home that clearly carried forward that sense-memory and aesthetic into
her adult world. In Israel’s 2010 publication, several astonishing visuals illustrate this
point, among them an example from the work of the renowned architect Michael Graves.
In reviewing sketches and historic photos of his past, Graves realized how the scale and
lines of the stockyards he grew up with are incorporated into his designs for the Denver
Central Library, the Los Angeles Public Library, and the San Juan Capistrano Regional
Library (Israel, p. 76, 124-125). A repeating element in Charles Marion’s work is how he
offers the library goer the opportunity to look out from the building onto nature or a
landscaped open space—a direct carryover from the municipal library of his young
adulthood, where a window onto nature saved him from the monotony and grind of that
cement slab building. Kai Shizi has successfully fended off use of beige as a color in a
commissioned space, and my guess is that if she had to pull the dollars from her own
pocket to keep Formica from having anything to do with a space associated with her
name, she would do so gladly. The value of this exercise is that it enables participants to
revisit their histories to become aware of the importance of the past’s presence in their
professional lives, and to arrive at an articulation of the past’s impact on the present.
Once they had this understanding incorporated consciously into their thoughts and
173

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

reflections, the participants readily spoke of future ideal spaces.
Ideal Libraries
Throughout our sessions together, participants frequently mentioned “the future of
libraries,” and their visions of ideal features, elements, or types of library they would like
to create in their professional future. I have collected the topics that emerged repeatedly
under the heading Transition and Grace. Increasingly, libraries are multi-purpose use
facilities. Design professionals are challenged to create spaces where even the dedicated
collection browsing and consulting rooms serve more functions. Some typical examples
include: library space made available for community use, after-hours, when the
collections are closed, yet without compromising security and nonetheless permitting
access to exhibition spaces and restrooms; where meeting space is situated adjacent to
service points; creative maker-space, 3-D printing, performance space, and concert areas
built into libraries. The broad function of the contemporary library is reflected in designs
that understand that sound and noise are to be expected, but must also be contained so as
not to travel to those areas where quiet is preferred. This understanding of the library is
seen in buildings where technology is secure, privacy is considered, demonstration is
possible, and seating for both individual and collaborative use of technology exists. The
well-designed, multi-use library contains accessible storage for the objects of daily life
such as strollers, skateboards, luggage on wheels, and even cumbersome outerwear to be
securely retained for the duration of its owner’s visit. This type of library is experienced
in spaces designed to welcome people to congregate while at the same time keeping
service points, and points of egress clear. The message of Transition and Grace is that
visitors experience being invited to enjoy the library’s traditional resources even while

174

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

they arrive to participate in community calendar offerings, without ever feeling that they
exited one space to enter the other.
“The way I conceive a space is as a choreography and facilitation.” Kai Shizi–
Textured (Taste Structure)
When asked to describe in words the sketch he created of a future ideal place,
Charles Marion articulated how transition and grace work in his imagination:
I’ve thought a lot about the word ‘grace’ in the last few years. Graceful. What
does that mean? And so, there’s something nice about having transitions from one
type of space to another that feels easy… part of this is from a modernist
predilection [for] spaces that are open to each other and flow into one another.
At this moment in our session, he crumples up his sketch, swivels to the office trash
basket, and makes the two-point shot. Turning back to me, Charles Marion offers this
uninterrupted discourse on transition and grace (ellipses indicate pauses, not omitted
words):
There’s something that’s very nice about something when one space sort of leads
into another. And there are a lot of devices to do that. You can do it with lighting;
you can do it with layers. You can do it with all kinds of stuff. But I think the
word graceful kind of means something that goes from one movement to another
and seems effortless… you see it in athletes, right? They go from one movement
to another and it feels like you can’t even notice…there’s no jerky motion or
anything. It’s actually taking a giant amount of effort to do that, and an amount of
strength and control… so I think you can do the same thing in architecture where
you’re going from a public space to a less public space to a private space…but
they have different needs. Private’s…the ability to get away, to think by yourself

175

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

or be sad or contemplative or whatever; it’s very important. Or to work. But I
think it all has to be linked architecturally; maybe that’s what gives it sort of that
grace—is that there’s this overriding aesthetic to the whole building, the whole
interior, whatever. But you’re subtly modulating that with different types of
lighting or [it] gets smaller or whatever, but you’re not going into like a
completely different aesthetic when you go into a private space. So, the message
of what this environment is about is kind of all throughout… Charles Marion–
Grace (Taste Structure and Ideal Library Place)
Connie Zhōng is bursting with ideas about libraries of the future, particularly as
spaces that can be created for dual purposes. However, she assumes the role as guide
rather than as deliverer of the future right now:
I’m gonna talk to you as if you’re my client now. I’m the tool for you to create what
you wanted or, you don’t even know what you wanted, and I extract it out of you.
You have to present me with what you are, what your past is, what your present is,
and whatever you aim to be—not as a person, as a community, as a demographic, as
something, so that I can build around it. It’s not about me. I don’t pick. … You don’t
know this vocabulary? Fine. I’m helping you with them but by the way you dress, by
the way you talk, by the way your community’s statistics, by the way you want your
community represented, by all these things, I suggest something. I’m just the tool. …
Future spaces should have some guidelines, general guidelines. Goals, or intent. I
think a library should be should be suggestive and not definitive. It should have areas
that are not telling you what you should be doing here but this is what you could be
doing here but if you’re creative enough, you can do something else here. Or, you can

176

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

be that person that fits into the room, but you don’t have to be. So, it has to be open
and accepting enough to appeal to a large group of people that all are different but
because people don’t usually necessarily know what they want, you need to suggest a
path and they can follow it or any other path. So, this is what I would suggest a
library should look like. Connie Zhōng– Sanctuary (Ideal Library Place)
For the most part, participants shied away from sketching out their ideas of future
ideal spaces. For me, this moment revealed the essence of their professional practice:
creating real solutions to work in specific physical conditions and to meet actual
requirements. In this context I was not a client. We were not brainstorming to find
workable solutions. Nor were they physically situated in the familiar places where they
produce initial sketches. My box of colored pencils and sketching pads were only rough
tools, the equivalent of a bar napkin. They were happy to use tools for exercises
describing the past, but sharing ideas of the future was almost entirely a “hands-off”
event. As discussed in this chapter’s introduction, the participants were wholly turned off
by the visualization exercise that preceded the request that they draw or articulate a future
ideal place. With the exception of Kai Shizi, they distanced themselves from the drawing
tools on the table, instead relying on their words.
While the “Future: Ideal Spaces: ___” plates (Plates 18 - 21) provide ideas gathered
from participant narratives, I will state again that the conversations of transition and grace
dominated what they shared. The themes of the “Future: Ideal Spaces: ___” plates are,
“people,” “space,” “things,” and “transactions.”
Connie Zhōng longs to build and protect intimate spaces in bustling public libraries,
both in a nod to the hallowed halls of libraries of the past and in offer to the next

177

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

generation. She designs while keeping in mind the isolated individual who needs a library
space, as she once did, that is place to escape to, separate from the fray. Kai Shizi is
interested in how people can be alone while together, and draws from a variety of
industries to bring sensibilities of the modern age to libraries. She described her ideals to
create a sense of ‘zoning.’ For her future ideal spaces she had us seated on tall chairs at a
high, long bar table complete with affixed tablet computing and power outlets, with
individual space subtly indicated by separate, hanging lamps or by a change in the rug
pattern color beneath each seat. She spoke of imagining modern technology situated on
furnishings built of heavy, enduring materials, conveying old-world library solidity in
easy partnership with the continuously upgrading tools of the new world. Kai Shizi
described her future libraries as being:
Less spatial, but more programmatic… more interactive adult program and not just
interactive program focus space for kids’ programs. Overall use of space is subtle and
calm, warm and inviting, with small, subtle, splashes of surprise and joy. And bring
on the laptop cart-style access to the Internet rather than a fixed bank all the time.
You should be able to walk in, borrow one, heap your stuff on a shelf or bin that it
comes with, or hooks, and move about doing what you need to be doing with your
hands on the computing device and not having to worry about your stuff, like the way
the vet[erinarian] wheels one in. To appear thoughtful, considered, like someone
cared about your experience rather than it being an after-thought or cost driven
measure. Inexpensive can be thoughtful. Kai Shizi– Textured (Ideal Library Place)

178

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 18: Future: Ideal Spaces: People

Note: Plate 18 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

179

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 19: Future: Ideal Spaces: Space

Note: Plate 19 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

180

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 20: Future: Ideal Spaces: Things

Note: Plate 20 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth
181

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Plate 21: Future: Ideal Spaces: Transactions

Note: Plate 21 designed by Terry Marks and Amy Beth

182

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Chapter 8
Conclusion
No dissertation combining environmental autobiographies, narratives, and library
building projects would be complete without the story referencing itself. The work
concludes where it began, the research coming full circle. The first time I read Some
Place Like Home (Israel, 2010) I marveled at the frequency with which libraries were
referenced as ideal places in reflections on “home.” Beginning on page 13, the author
quotes her mother saying, “The best thing about this house was that it was right next to
the library where I spent hours reading.” Israel’s work explores in-depth interviews from
three superstar architects, all of whom discuss libraries in their homes and in the homes
of their ancestors, and who also provide examples and images of the famous libraries
they have built. Israel demonstrates how the places of their past informed the inclusion of
ideal aspects into their (present life) design work. When I tallied the instances of libraries
discussed, and the images of libraries used to demonstrate the self-place bond, I couldn’t
help but wonder if Israel noticed how extensively the experience of ideal places of home
bled into libraries. Our correspondence began with that question, and with my mention of
the more than one dozen times libraries were explicitly discussed and shown in Some
Place Like Home. We live fifty miles apart. I followed up our correspondence with a call;
she gave me an invite, and together we sat in her home—featured in her book—and
talked about the significance of libraries in people’s lives, the interest that libraries as
ideal places hold for architects, designers, and people in general, the beauty of
environmental autobiography, the work of the Design Psychology field and of the
Toolbox. We talked of raising our children and our thoughts about communal

183

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

scholarship. As with the vast majority of other environmental psychologists, libraries
hadn’t figured among the settings explored during her graduate education, but the
scholarship she had created on self-place bonding and ideal places provided a distinct
way to include and consider libraries going forward.
For more than two decades I have gathered narratives about how people
experience libraries, while seeking how to present narrative as useful data in the design
and redesign process of library building projects. In the field of architecture, both in
design and theory, qualitative studies most commonly appear as post-occupancy
evaluations. The education of architects and design professionals lacks well-honed
intersections with social science research. Concerns of aesthetics, technology, structure,
and theory dominate architecture school curricula and ultimately control the field. The
architecture school tradition of challenging students to take on large design projects to
demonstrate their competencies in imagining and handling huge structures,
infrastructures, and spectacular presentations does not assist the budding professional in
creating human environments. I recommend, as part of the architect’s education process,
tuning in to one’s own environmental story, such as Leanne Rivlin documented in the
Childhood City Newsletter of 1978, and as Clare Cooper Marcus did through
environmental autobiographies with her students at UC Berkeley in late 1970s (Marcus,
1979), work that was expanded by Toby Israel through her creation of an adaptable
Design Psychology Toolbox. Drawing from some of the readings listed in the
bibliography of this dissertation, I implore my colleagues who teach in the field of
environmental psychology to incorporate libraries as environments in their programs of
study. Libraries should not be environmental anomalies. Understanding one’s own

184

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

environmental story and considering the meaning of space in the lives of people can
offset an emphasis on learning about design gurus and design meant for image, and
instead calls forth the invaluable, innate environmental knowledge that architecture and
design students bring to their education, training, and eventually to the field. The core
notions that make up a design professional’s sense of place start in the childhood
experience of the spaces they inhabit and in which they are encouraged to grow. These
understandings continuously develop throughout a designer’s life, and influence the work
produced throughout a career. I entitled this dissertation Libraries and the Missing
Narratives, because I consider the environmental stories of design professionals to be
missing from general cultural understandings of the way libraries work, and how libraries
can be better imagined and built when we consider the human possibilities. My findings
support my belief that learning how to tap into one’s own great reservoir of
environmental knowledge would be best started in the early stages of formal practical
training, but that it’s never too late to benefit from tuning in to one’s own innate
knowledge while becoming a seasoned practitioner. Whether considered in the context of
an architecture and design program, or by colleagues at a firm, or by stakeholders
creating a library project, an exploration of environmental meaning might transform the
overarching emphasis of the practice of architecture from form and function, to the
realization of architecture as both form and culture.
This dissertation discusses the significance of libraries as an environment of
important meaning over the life course for architects, designers, and indirectly, for
librarians. I investigated and examined the value of narrative data as qualitative research
with practitioners who design and plan library buildings and renovations. The central

185

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

question of this research asked whether the DPT could be adapted from exploring home
as ideal places to exploring libraries as ideal places in architecture and design projects.
When I sit with Israel’s Some Place Like Home (2010) alongside the data compiled from
the participant-narratives, I affirmatively conclude that, “yes, the DPT is adaptable for
use in exploring libraries as ideal places for architects and designers.” The research stems
from the observation that meaningful ways to capture, analyze, and include prior library
experience in the design of libraries are missing. I believe that my research indicates the
possibility for an examination of human relationships to libraries that are likely to inform
new project planning, and to guide architects to seek data that will affect the project
outcome positively.
The specialized environmental experience of architects, designers, and librarians
forms a critical piece of the puzzle in understanding the social, emotional, and
interpersonal attachment to the library as place, and toward building human-centered
libraries.
This dissertation investigated the memories, thoughts, ideas, and experiences of
six architects and designers who participated in the exercises of Toby Israel’s Design
Psychology Toolbox (DPT), adapted for an exploration of libraries. The analysis of the
completed DPT exercises provides empirical evidence that there is benefit in using the
Toolbox and methods of Design Psychology to prepare practitioners for visioning and
client in-take work and as they engage with library stakeholders and building clients.
The study participants agreed that taking part in environmental autobiographies, narrative
reflections, and ideal place-visioning helped them better understand what influences their
professional concerns, their taste, their sensitivities, and their concept of ideal places.

186

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Projects that prioritize cost measures for efficiency and metrics of use fall short of
creating spaces that are responsive to human needs; they have also been known to disrupt
the project plan in untimely ways. Space plans that are intentionally designed to support
individual and group relationships to libraries as a significant human environment are
much more likely to achieve self-place fulfilling outcomes, and in turn, are more highly
regarded by those who come to claim them as their own. The relationship of people to
libraries described in personal narratives holds rich data in what the building program
should consider. Exploring the relationship of people to libraries yields rich data about
libraries as environments of importance where people develop self-place bonding and
where the journey through personal, intellectual, and professional development may
occur. The six design professionals who agreed to explore the DPT for this research
found that understanding, analyzing, and incorporating a qualitative environmental
autobiographical tool revealed much in their own self-bond place awareness.
In conclusion, the participants identified two valuable applications of this inquiry
for their own practices: as a tool for increasing their own capacity as library design
project leaders, and as a tool for guiding clients and stakeholders in articulating more
fulfilling, inclusive, place-based decisions while in the initial, creative stages of library
planning.
I believe that the DPT, adapted for libraries, also has relevance for librarians. As
essential partners with architects and designers in library planning, it is necessary for
librarians to understand the tools, methods, and experiences that literally can shape where
and how the work of libraries takes place, and that has substantial impact on various
library-users. The DPT can be adapted for use at all-staff meetings, not only as an

187

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

exercise for reflecting on the work environment, but also as a way to consider how
patrons navigate in library spaces. If facilitated properly—with consent for sharing
responses and memories that emerge—this process can generate rich conversation
amongst colleagues. Committees tasked with rethinking space needs may embrace the
DPT tool to allow them to foreground human self-place attachment at the beginning of a
design process, thereby avoiding the pitfalls of projects that only privilege budget and
efficiency of space-use metrics. A committee of library colleagues who have experienced
using an adaptation of the DPT for libraries are likely to have a better command of spaceplanning concepts for communicating human and facility needs as architects and
designers join the table. While architects and designers regularly work in teams, the
hierarchical culture of librarianship stunts individual input and participation. Empowering
library staff to explore the DPT to lend their insight to a project as peers can break down
some of the natural reticence that becomes second nature in rigid workplaces. It might
take committee members to explore the tool prior to extending it to groups of library
stakeholders to build a more inclusive building program, but the awareness of input from
various stakeholders may prove invaluable in their participation in the project and
certainly in project outcomes. The DPT provides an opportunity not only to work with
the narratives of those who are deeply invested in the building program, but also with
those who are less familiar with how the library functions, and those who do not use the
facility, those who are not as conversant with its systems, and to learn more about how
the library can better reflect and serve them, too.
My experience as a librarian has included many people volunteering their “library
stories,” wanting to relate their meaningful remembrances to me. Over many years, I

188

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

have learned that receiving library stories from members of the public is a transactional
or performativity norm in librarianship. This abundant data, if explored formally by
environmental psychologists, architects, urban planning designers, and library educators,
can move us toward a deeper understanding of narrative data and developing theories of
place and space with profound implications for the libraries in our lives.
In the Ten Points section of Chapter 6 under Point 6 I state that in my work on
library building and renovation projects, architects and designers have pulled me aside,
one by one, in almost confessional tones, to impart their own library narratives. They
describe a yearning to incorporate something specific from their past, a library memory, a
library space they loved, or simply the chance to re-create space with deep meaning for
newer generations. I expand this recounting to address how their hopes are repeatedly
dashed by the bare-bones utility of the project specifications, budgets reduced to durable,
long lasting materials, and only “justifiable” expenses. As virtuous and fiscally
responsible on the part of institutions and governing bodies with oversight for libraries as
this may sound, the reality of creating library spaces with this “frugal first!” mindset
produces libraries with a tendency to be mechanistic and graceless. If the end goal is to
create spaces that people want to return to, library boards and stakeholders must rethink
economizing for the sake of economizing. Designers attest it takes vision more than
funding to create outcomes.
August Buffington, in discussing future libraries, shared:
“Walls are super expensive. You take a busy urban library and you need to factor
in things like people, flow, and sound. You have to factor in skateboards and
people on canes and people congregating. There’s no end to behaviors in libraries.

189

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

You need design to navigate behavior. But the committee wants it to be austere
and ascetic, so it doesn’t get a taxpayer scowl for spending—even if the taxpayer
wants it to be beautiful when they get there. So, we looked at the requirements for
the number of feet for bookcases that needed to be built into the project and we
used this furniture to create different zones and connections to bigger experiences
and spaces while still retaining the experience of an intimate, visually engaging
space.” Augustus Buffington– Organic (Ideal Library Place)
In the attempt to be civically and financially responsible, building project boards
and committees can make shortsighted decisions to save money that end up more costly
in the long run. My experience serving on library building projects and supporting
stakeholders in preparing to work with designers has taught me that different, more
productive conversations occur when people take the time to acquire the tools.
A classic example is the shortsighted way a board or committee will turn down
the more expensive lighting attached to the outside of the library building or parking lot
when they learn it is LEED certified and jump to the conclusion it is costing more just for
the LEED designation. In reality, there is ample data showing the cost of the LEED
fixtures are a return on investment in record time because the maintenance and
replacement lighting mechanisms have drastically higher endurance rates. Fear from
having to defend the high cost of an appropriate fixture at the next Town Meeting will
drive stakeholder decisions that not only cost more over time but also compromises
safety when lighting is faced in the wrong direction. In rural areas where libraries are
depended upon for high speed Internet access a cost efficient well-lit parking lot can
literally serve as an extension of library hours.

190

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

Architects dream of going beyond joyless, conservative, static spaces to create
welcoming and desirable library spaces such as they once knew. Libraries ride on the
laurels of being libraries, that is, places considered time honored and sacred just by virtue
of being a library. Libraries didn’t start out as storefronts in strip malls where you need to
be transported by motor or with extreme caution by bicycle, and least of all by foot.
Buildings are a part of the experience of experiencing libraries. While it is important to
respond to the client, often the culture of responsible and thrifty project committee
members can diminish outcomes as well.
To support the work of staff and committees involved in library building
renovations, redesigns, and new visions for library-building projects, I have incorporated
aspects of environmental autobiography exercises, and in more recent years, DPT
exercises into my workshops. The design teams assigned to these projects have
responded favorably to the client preparation, and have remarked on their ability to
discuss the projects at hand more deeply. When the team enters the project with a
discussion of the meaning of the place rather than the specifications and design steps, the
outcome of the project, while keeping in budget, is inevitably different.
In my experience, given the enthusiasm of both design teams and the project
stakeholders for doing the work of a fuller consideration of the library, and the potentially
positive impact this work can have on project outcomes, we need to shift from wondering
why approaches like the DPT are not yet standard, and instead seek leadership and
accountability for structuring this important work into guiding the project steps.
Architects, including those in this study, have told me that it is not uncommon that twothirds of the way through a building project, clients will inform them that concerns have

191

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

surfaced; the project, however seemingly on target it is to meet its stated requirements
and deadlines, is somehow lacking the very qualities they sought to make the library
resonant for their users. Even in those cases when architects often agree with client
complaints and are willing to revise the project to make adjustments to the human
environment, there is a high cost in revising the project at a later stage. The practitioners
who have experienced this moment on any number of projects attest that costs would
have been considerably lower had two things occurred at the outset: if the design firm
had felt secure in guiding conversations about the human environment at the project’s
beginning, or if they knew that the client might have been open to considering the human
environment as much as the more utilitarian aspects. When asked directly if there is any
financial gain in waiting two-thirds of the way through a project to increase the price tag,
architects have definitively answered in the negative. New projects with new deadlines
are waiting in the wings. The reputation of their firm is at stake. Refitting is uninspired
work in comparison to creating. A large-scale project typically has spending timelines
with bureaucratic mandates. Everyone stands to lose financially when a project is delayed
and redesigned. The client in-take process, planning, and proposal stages are the
appropriate periods in a project’s development for examining meaning and attachment to
a library. This happens best when qualitative research tools, including the partnership of
social scientists, the skills of architects, and the insights of librarians are all brought
together.
The findings of this dissertation support that the effectiveness of the DPT begins once
the practitioner—an architect, a designer, or lead librarian on the project—has finished
many if not all of the exercises in the Toolbox. Having done so, practitioners will have

192

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

experienced a personal exploration of connection to place that gives them a deeper
understanding of how the library comes to have meaning in the lives of patrons.
The client can then be invited to participate in DPT exercises, before the conventional
closed-door committee design process begins, and before square-footage cost figures,
efficiency of information use, and retrieval metrics dominate the project landscape. I am
advocating that library narratives inform the work of these committees from all reaches
of people who use the library, who work in the library (at all levels!), who support the
library (as volunteers, board members, administration outside of the library, fundraisers,
etc.), and who do not use the library at all. If utility becomes the exclusive driving
exploration of the project, the opportunities to support design, use, and the reasons why
people have sought to return to the library, or to avoid it, get lost. Efficiency must make
way for calculations that honor human connection, fulfillment, and place attachment.
Adapted for work in library settings, the DPT requires a substantial investment of
time and focus. Simply stated, the DPT is too long. Research participants who would see
the study through all the way through were not easy to find. Several participants dropped
out of the research having completed eight of the eleven exercises. There was no lack of
enthusiasm for the research, they simply could not take more time away from the
demands of their professional work and were not inclined to donate personal time when
no continuing education credits could be offered. I consulted Dr. Israel about this
dilemma, and she shared that completing the research with her three superstar architects
was an exercise in patience and repeated efforts to secure their time.
While the DPT can be used in degree or certification granting educational settings
as is, or for those private clients investing in projects that involve exploring home as an

193

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

ideal place, then its length is not at issue. I strongly recommend it be modified
appropriately for commissioned or tax-funded institutional projects where ample funding
is not the case. Full exploration of the Toolbox stands to strengthen it adaptability and
saliency. Mentors and guides can make a world of difference in the process of applying
new skills and studying its efficacy. I recommend that design professionals and
environmental psychologists form partnerships to work with clients when using
qualitative research tools like environmental autobiography and the DPT. This
partnership will not only make for a stronger interpretation of results with the client, but
it will strengthen the ability of the practitioner to manage the findings and incorporate
them into the early project programming phase. Last, I believe that architectural firms
should include tools like environmental autobiography and the DPT as a standard part of
initial project planning. Making the process optional only diminishes the likelihood that
this necessary approach to human design concerns will be understood as an integral to a
positive outcome.
The participation of six architects in this research fully introduced them on a
personal level to the DPT as an instrument and an approach to working with library
clients for future library-building and design projects. The research was limited to
explorations of how the participants’ sense of self and sense of place are entwined and
might be relevant in creating library environments, and did not extend to an investigation
of how the six practitioners might use the Toolbox more broadly with their clients. I can
only speculate how they might use DPT exercises as a formal aspect of the initial
practitioner-client project intake process. The impact of this research may go beyond the
six participants, as each one works collaboratively with colleagues in their firms and in

194

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

their professional lives. Some participants explicitly indicated they had already shared
take-aways based on their study participation with their immediate colleagues. In addition
to incorporating elements of the DPT at their firms, the participants shared that they were
likely to use some of the exercises with clients, and that further educational, public, and
professional programs of interest would be places for them to share their experiences and
findings. In addition to having clients, several of the participants teach on the university
level, and some of them serve on committees in professional associations; all of them
actively attend professional programs. My commitment to this work and my curiosity
about its usefulness might lead me to follow up on their intentions in the future. Until
such time, their enthusiasm and good will toward my research project is sustaining:
•

“In listening to myself, there’s the experience of remembering coming to a place
of self-awareness.”

•

“The exercises elicit memories—interesting! —about libraries and being book
related.”

•

“The opportunity of this interview to articulate these emotions is powerful.”

•

“That was enjoyable to rethink.”

•

“I am reflecting on learning about the Avery Index, thank you.”

•

“This is why I love talking about this with you… This is so great to name.”

•

“I never thought about it until now.”

In conclusion, I am wholly appreciative of the memories and insights the six
participants shared with me for this study. There were times during the interviews when I
wanted to pause to reflect on and to fully integrate the depth of their narratives into my

195

LIBRARIES AND THE MISSING NARRATIVE

understanding. Furthermore, with each participant, there was at least one moment when
they asked me to stop the recording to say something off the record; they continued
describing a sensitive private experience or an intimate event in their life or a set of
emotions that shaped them because of the trust that had developed between us.
To undertake this particular type of work, at its core an investigation of meaning
and memory, the researcher must be prepared to sit in the presence of personal truths
earned through trust and respect, and to receive the gift of an individual’s narrative,
including those beyond the usual professional comfort zone. The many hours that I spent
getting to know the participants as individuals and reviewing participants’ words made it
difficult for me to categorize their experience simply as patterns of data for analysis. I
repeatedly felt honored to be the recipient of their sketches and stories. There were
periods in the process of analyzing the data that I held their stories too close to my
protective instincts to be able to zoom out and see patterns while the voice of the
individual proved too intimate to release into the summary data. To be the keeper of
narratives, to be a librarian attuned to how environments affect human experience in the
evolution of libraries, and to be an environmental psychologist determined to bring the
gifts of our insights, methods, skills, and analytical abilities to the place where
architecture and design professionals meet us, is a privilege every day.