LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE EDUCATION IN THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING
CARIBBEAN

By
SIMONE CLUNIE

“Libraries are palaces for the poor, rich markets for the hungry, oases for the thirsty,
parliaments for the unfree, playing fields for the mind, temples for the prosecuted.
Libraries are symbols for much that is best in mankind as it slowly reached upwards to
civilization and wisdom. They stand for quiet study, knowledge, honest entertainment,
scholarly research, private improvement, freedom of thought, independent opinion. No
education system- however well equipped with school buildings and laboratories;
however well-staffed-can be complete without its networks of libraries open to the
general body of citizens throughout the land. Especially for children of the poor-living
perhaps in cramped, ill-lit, noise-torn quarters-the public library is an essential haven of
peace and learning to supplement the schools which these children attend. The welllibraried land is a literate and learned land. A nation particularly a new nation, does well
to build, promote and nurture its free and public libraries”. (Ian McDonald, Georgetown
Free Public Library. (1969). Diamond Jubilee: Public Free Library, 1909-1969. Page 35.)


ABSTRACT
Regional cooperation has been a focused thread from the beginning for the development of
libraries, the training of staff and the general sharing of resources in the English-speaking
Caribbean. Historically, from the eighteenth century onwards, libraries have consisted of private
libraries, cleric libraries, community collections for reading groups and one or two early
academic libraries in educational institutions in the English-speaking Caribbean. With time,
more public libraries in the form of subscription libraries were established, which eventually led
to libraries being fully funded as governmental entities. Staffing for these early libraries took
many forms, and early on, expatriates were the main librarians. Prior to national independence,
regional training was executed through “on the job’’ apprentice-like situations or through
correspondence and examination via the Library Association in Britain. There were a limited few
‘West Indian’ trained librarian who went to the United Kingdom, Canada or the United States of
America to study at significant cost. Early training of library staff was also supported by
organizations like UNESCO and the British Council which added to the continued attention of
the need for professionally trained staff for the libraries of the English speaking Caribbean.
Looking at the growth of public library services in the English speaking Caribbean and the need
for trained staff to manage these institutions, this thesis looks at the early training and education
of library professionals in the English-speaking Caribbean through to the establishment of the
Department of Library Studies at the University of the West Indies.

vii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
The islands of the Caribbean have been associated as those washed by the Caribbean Sea
and located at latitude 23.50̊ to 10̊ north and between 85̊ and 59̊ west. With a wide mix of
historical, political, linguistic and cultural affiliations influenced by the varying interactions with
the British, French, Spanish and Dutch, both in colonial and post-colonial arrangements, this
region presents a slightly different approach to the establishment of libraries. The Englishspeaking Caribbean, all former colonies of Britain are now mostly independent states with their
own governments or have some form of limited self-government as overseas territories of the
United Kingdom. The independent nations (but still members of the British Commonwealth) are
Barbados, Belize (formally British Honduras), Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St Lucia,
and Trinidad & Tobago. Nations who are independent, but have various administrative aspects
like security taken care of by the United Kingdom, include Antigua & Barbuda, Anguilla, the
British Virgin Islands, Cayman, Monserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent & the Grenadines,
and the Turks and Caicos Islands.
Library development for the sixteen island nations and two mainland countries in the
Caribbean, all former colonies of Britain and often called the West Indies, follow a similar
pattern for first, the establishment of private libraries by the more affluent and educated
colonists, with the move to more public libraries but with subscription fees for borrowing
material, then into the creation of various levels of public libraries for use by the general
population funded with government monies. Contained within those groupings of peoples and
reading societies who started libraries there also existed collections by various cleric orders and a
few early college and school libraries. With a very broad approach to library development in the
English-speaking Caribbean, there is great variety in library development patterns in the area
delineated which would make it difficult, if not impossible, to prepare a unified synoptic
overview of the subject and to avoid overlap.
Following the Emancipation Act of 1834, the countries of the former British Empire
moved towards a more literate society with the introduction of public education for all. With the
changing economic structure away from plantation production of sugar and the use of slave
labor, fortunes being affected with the new employment structures and civil government
1

expanding, a more literate population was needed. As education for the masses became more of a
government funded endeavor, libraries were seen as the place, particularly public libraries that
offered the opportunities and resources the masses needed to assist with their educational goals.
With the many disparate ways libraries in the English-speaking Caribbean have developed, one
of the central themes that has run through this development has been the constant need for
trained professional library staff. Because of the colonial history of the region, librarians initially
were British expatriates or citizenry from fellow colonies, like Canada, who trained people on
each island or mainland colony prior to independence; to be clerks and various levels of support
staff. The then Honorary Secretary of the Library Association and Librarian of Edinburgh Public
Library, Ernest Savage, in his 1934 report for the Carnegie Corporation focused on the need for
educated and professionally trained staff for the libraries of the English speaking Caribbean that
he travelled through. Of the four main points noted in his recommendations for Caribbean
libraries on a whole, point number three, professional staffing was highlighted. The need for
professionally trained staff was also strongly suggested in Nora Bateson’s Library Plan of
Jamaica, published in 1945.
The role which the library will play depends on the quality of the staff. If the book stock
is to be well selected and fitted to the needs of the people. Properly cataloged and
distributed there must be librarians with education, wide book knowledge and library
training. If the library is to play a part in the education of the masses of people it must
have on its staff, men and women who are aware of their needs and possibilities and who
can cooperate with all other organizations concerned with the welfare of the people.
(Bateson, 1945, p. 6)
Bateson further suggested that training be set up within the national public library service in
Jamaica, similar to what existed in Trinidad, “For those who cannot go abroad a local training
centre should be set up or with that already being established in Trinidad” (Bateson, 1945, p. 9).
Professional library education in the English speaking Caribbean has been influenced by
a combination of events which helped move towards the eventual 1971 establishment of the
Department of Library Studies at the University of the West Indies. Two of those factors are
context and regional cooperation. For both context and region, an identity separate from the
former ‘mother-country’, Britain, may have also played a role. Regarding context within the
region, these nations have similar interconnected histories resting in the colonial past, population
2

combinations, the constant movement of people across the region and to various first world
destinations and back again through multi-generations affected by economic and social
influences. Additionally, since the 1930s there had been a growing focus on nationalism, which
moved to the forefront after the Second World War. With the ever changing political and
economic challenges for these nations being formerly tied to the influences of the plantation
economy, changes in sugar and cotton prices, varying wars and so forth, regional cooperation at
all levels became important as they looked to sustain themselves. As Ackbarali states,
The period 1934-1939, characterized by popular disturbances and riots throughout the
British Caribbean, marked a turning point in its history. In an upsurge of political energy
West Indians threw themselves into the work of building a nation; people were organized
into political parties and trade unions, and worked for self-government, for a greater
measure of social justice, and a fairer share of the yield of agriculture and industry. The
region’s nationals began to accept themselves as West Indians, and there was a new
emancipation of mind and spirit. (Ackbarali, 1992, p. 3)
In 1958 the Federation of the West Indies was created with the capital seat located in Port of
Spain in Trinidad. The members of the federation included: Anguilla, Antigua, Barbados,
Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, Monserrat, Nevis, St Kitts, St. Vincent, and Trinidad & Tobago.
The Federation of the West Indies lasted until 1962 when Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago
were granted independence from Britain. Regional cooperation continues today through
organizations like the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Caribbean Development
Bank (CDB).
Regional cooperation has also been a focused thread from the beginning for the
development of libraries, the training of staff and the general sharing of library resources in the
English-speaking Caribbean. The early recommendation of the Central Library Scheme in the
1930s, established in Trinidad and Tobago in the early 1940s, with an aim to build library
services locally and eventually spread out to the eastern Caribbean, was based on that thread.
Interlibrary cooperation has also been a fundamental theme in the research and documentation of
library services in the English speaking Caribbean. Regional cooperation is also the central
theme in the work of Dr. Alma Jordan’s 1966 thesis that was eventually published as, The
Development of the Library Service in the West Indies through Interlibrary Cooperation, which
has become a foundational resource when researching library services in the region. With those
3

factors in in mind, and investigating the growth of public library services in the English speaking
Caribbean and the need for trained staff to manage these institutions, the central query for this
thesis investigates the early training and education of library professionals in the Englishspeaking Caribbean through to the eventual establishment of the Department of Library Studies
at the University of the West Indies.
From the beginning ‘campaign’ to attain a professional library education program
situated in the Caribbean, one of the central reasons was to address the complex needs of the
region. Because of similar histories, economies, and population groupings, having professional
library staff trained within the Caribbean context was seen as a beneficial enterprise. Having
‘outside’ people, whether from the Caribbean or other nationals trained in other countries and
under other library education models, though at times helpful, could hamper the ongoing
development and maintenance of the library systems of the region. Although ‘outsiders’ may
bring in new and innovation ideas and ways of doing things, without contextual knowledge these
new ideas can prove impractical to the needs of the territory. Because of the way public libraries
developed in the region, and the many factors that have influenced this development, such as
funding challenges, bureaucratic processes, natural and political upheavals, preparing library
professionals from a Caribbean-focused standpoint assists professional staff with decision
making that is practical and appropriate for the library systems in the English-speaking
Caribbean.

4

CHAPTER 2
THE ENGLISH SPEAKING CARIBBEAN
Brief Description of the ‘British West Indies: Greater and Lesser Antilles
Table 1. English speaking Caribbean nations.

Country

Flag

Size

Population
17,087 (July
2017 est.)

Independence date

Anguilla

91 sq. km

Antigua &
Barbuda

442.6 sq. km

94,731 (July
2017 est.)

1981

Barbados

430 sq. km

292,336 (July
2017 est.)

1966

Bahamas

13,880 sq. km

329,988

1973

Belize (British
Honduras)

22,966 sq. km

360,346 (July
2017 est.)

1981

British Virgin
Islands

151 sq. km

overseas territory of the UK;
internal self-governing

Bermuda

54 sq. km

35,015 (July
2017 est.)
70,864 (July
2017 est.)

Cayman Islands

264 sq. km

overseas territory of the UK

Dominica

751 sq. km

Grenada

344 sq. km

58,441
73,897 (July
2017 est.)
111,724 (July
2017 est.)

Guyana

214,969 sq.
km

737,718

1966

1962
overseas territory of the UK

Jamaica

10,991 sq. km

2,990,561 (July
2017 est.)

Monserrat

102 sq. km

5,292

5

overseas territory of the UK

overseas territory of the UK

1978
1974

Table 1 continued.1

Country

Flag

Size

Population

Independence date

St. Kitts and
Nevis

261 sq. km

52,715 (July
2017 est.)

1983

St. Lucia

616 sq. km

164,994 (July
2017 est.)

1979

St. Vincent &
the Grenadines

389 sq. km

102,089 (July
2017 est.)

1979

Trinidad &
Tobago

5,128 sq. km

1,218,208 (July
2017 est.)

1962

Turks and
Caicos Islands

948 sq. km

52,570 (July
2017 est.)

overseas territory of the UK

The English-speaking Caribbean has historically been known as the British West Indies.
Because of the expanse of the geographic distance between all the islands, they have also been
historically divided into the Greater and Lesser Antilles or otherwise also called the Leeward and
Windward islands. The English-speaking Caribbean includes the islands and mainland nations of
Anguilla, Antigua & Barbuda, Barbados, Bahamas, Belize (British Honduras), the British Virgin
Islands, Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Monserrat, St. Kitts
and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & the Grenadines, Trinidad & Tobago, and the Turks and
Caicos Islands. The Greater Antilles refers to the larger non-English speaking islands of Cuba,
Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, with Jamaica and the Cayman Islands as the
English speaking nations. The Leeward Islands consist of Antigua and Barbuda, the British
Virgin Islands, St. Kitts and Nevis and Monserrat and the divisions of the English-speaking
Windward Island include Dominica, Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.

1

https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/resources/the-world-factbook/geos/bf.html

6

The island nations were settled at various times by the Ciboney, the Arawaks or the
Caribs, predominantly in the eastern Caribbean and originating from groups from South
America. Columbus’s journeys through the areas, allowed for the initial Spanish proclamations
of ownership of the islands and both France and Britain would eventually stake a claim over the
next two centuries. For two centuries, the 1600s to 1800s, the Caribbean was a location where
European domination and rivalry were keenly acted out (Hinds, 2016). All of these former
colonies of Britain participated in one way or another in the plantation economy and the Atlantic
Slave Trade. Whether the location for vast sugarcane plantations, smaller free holdings and the
accompanying industries of inter twined mercantile businesses and the sea trade were connected
to this economic structure. The 1840s was a difficult period for many in the Caribbean. The end
of slavery during the previous decade and falling sugar prices in the mid-1840s had a great
impact on the economy (Frohnsdorff, 2003). As various of the islands and mainland colonies
struggled to keep their economies going under the administration of the British Crown, different
economic streams developed associated with the push for literacy and the changes made due to
the Industrial Revolution’s expanding uses of technologies. As Jackson (1981) has stated with
regards to the change within the political arena for the status of the British West Indies in the
1940s, ‘If anything was obvious at the time, it was that the end was in sight for the old British
Empire” (p. 568). From the 1960s onwards when Jamaica and Trinidad were the first to be
independent nations, most of the islands have come to be self- governing. Those not falling
under that rubric are those who are still associated with the United Kingdom as their
administrative head.
Today, tourism is a major source of income for most of the English-speaking Caribbean
nations. Agriculture in the form of sugar cane and bananas are still cultivated for export but are
not as lucrative as they once were. Local agriculture includes citrus, cocoa, mangos, peppers of
varying kinds, ground provisions like cassava and dasheen, fruits, vegetables, poultry and
livestock. The larger English-speaking Caribbean nations of Belize, Guyana, Jamaica and
Trinidad, are involved in selected types of extractive industries; oil for Belize; bauxite and gold
for Guyana; bauxite and alumina for Jamaica; petroleum, natural gas and asphalt for Trinidad.
Other countries like Cayman Islands, Anguilla, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines offer
offshore financial and/or international banking services. The independent countries have formed
the Caribbean Community, formerly known as the Caribbean Common Market and Community
7

(CARICOM). Established in 1973, the organization’s main goals are the economic integration
and development of economic and development planning for the region. It also operates a
regional single economic market for its members. The Secretariat is located in Georgetown,
Guyana. The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States is an inter-governmental organization
established in 1981 that is “dedicated to economic harmonisation and integration, protection of
human and legal rights, and the encouragement of good governance among independent and nonindependent countries in the Eastern Caribbean” (Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States,
n.d.).
The population of the Caribbean is a combination of peoples that have arrived in various
waves of early settlement, through the colonial period of European nations, and into
contemporary times. The Ciboney, Arawak and Taino and other groups were some of the early
settlers across the whole region. In the English speaking Caribbean, after European contact and
peoples started arriving from that region, they came predominantly from the British Empire with
folks coming from Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Simultaneously, the Atlantic Slave Trade
brought peoples like the Ibo, Yoruba, and Asante forcible to be the labor force for the plantation
economic structure and its many off-shoots. Indentured labor arrived, mostly after 1834 with the
passing of the Emancipation Act, in the form of others in the British Empire; from China and
India. Some small groupings of earlier settlers, before European contact, remain in the form of
the Carib in St. Vincent and the Garifuna, who are now located in Belize, Honduras and
Guatemala.
Table 2. Demographics for English speaking Caribbean.2

Country

Nationality

Anguilla

Anguillan

Antigua & Barbuda

Antiguan, Barbudan

Ethnic groups
African/black 85.3%, Hispanic 4.9%, mixed
3.8%, white 3.2%, East Indian/Indian 1%, other
1.6%, unspecified 0.3% (2011 est.)
black 87.3%, mixed 4.7%, hispanic 2.7%, white
1.6%, other 2.7%, unspecified 0.9% (2011 est.)

2

Information and ethnic descriptions are copied exactly as they are documented on the webpage directory of the
Central Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/resources/the-worldfactbook/

8

Table 2 continued.

Country

Nationality

Bahamas

Bahamian

Barbados

Barbadian or Bajan
(colloquial)

Belize (British
Honduras)

Belizean

British Virgin Islands British Virgin
Islander
Bermuda

Bermudian

Cayman Islands

Caymanian

Dominica

Dominican

Grenada

Grenadian

Guyana

Guyanese

Jamaica

Jamaican

Monserrat

Montserratian

St. Kitts and Nevis

Kittitian, Nevisian

St. Lucia

Saint Lucian

St. Vincent & the
Grenadines

Saint Vincentian or
Vincentian

Ethnic groups
black 90.6%, white 4.7%, black and white 2.1%,
other 1.9%, unspecified 0.7% (2010 est.)
black 92.4%, white 2.7%, mixed 3.1%, East
Indian 1.3%, other 0.2%, unspecified 0.2%
(2010 est.)
mestizo 52.9%, Creole 25.9%, Maya 11.3%,
Garifuna 6.1%, East Indian 3.9%, Mennonite
3.6%, white 1.2%, Asian 1%, other 1.2%,
unknown 0.3%
African/black 76.3%, Latino 5.5%, white 5.4%,
mixed 5.3%, Indian 2.1%, East Indian 1.6%,
other 3%, unspecified 0.8% (2010 est.)
black 53.8%, white 31%, mixed 7.5%, other
7.1%, unspecified 0.6% (2010 est.)
mixed 40%, white 20%, black 20%, expatriates
of various ethnic groups 20%
black 86.6%, mixed 9.1%, indigenous 2.9%,
other 1.3%, unspecified 0.2% (2001 est.)
African descent 82.4%, mixed 13.3%, East
Indian 2.2%, other 1.3%, unspecified 0.9%
(2011 est.)
East Indian 39.8%, black (African) 29.3%,
mixed 19.9%, Amerindian 10.5%, other 0.5%
(includes Portuguese, Chinese, white) (2012
est.)
black 92.1%, mixed 6.1%, East Indian 0.8%,
other 0.4%, unspecified 0.7% (2011 est.)
African/black
88.4%,
mixed
3.7%,
hispanic/Spanish 3%, caucasian/white 2.7%,
East Indian/Indian 1.5%, other 0.7% (2011 est.)
predominantly black; some British, Portuguese,
and Lebanese
black/African descent 85.3%, mixed 10.9%,
East Indian 2.2%, other 1.6%, unspecified 0.1%
(2010 est.)
black 66%, mixed 19%, East Indian 6%,
European 4%, Carib Amerindian 2%, other 3%

9

Table 2 continued.

Country

Nationality

Trinidad & Tobago

Trinidadian,
Tobagonian

Turks and Caicos
Islands

none

Ethnic groups
East Indian 35.4%, African 34.2%, mixed - other
15.3%, mixed African/East Indian 7.7%, other
1.3%, unspecified 6.2% (2011 est.)
black 87.6%, white 7.9%, mixed 2.5%, East
Indian 1.3%, other 0.7% (2006 est.)

History of Public Libraries in the English-speaking Caribbean
With similar historical trajectories as colonial holdings of the former British Empire, the
establishment of public service libraries was influenced by those of the former ‘mother country’
in inception and growth. Additionally, the influences of the United States of America and
Canada played a role in library development in the English-speaking Caribbean. As a regional
endeavor concerning the effectiveness of library development, Jordan (1972) describes it in
ambivalent terms in her discussion of the ten former members of the West Indian Federation.
“The history of libraries and librarianship in the Commonwealth Caribbean countries presents an
interesting mixture of outstanding achievements on one hand and dismal stagnation on the other
(p. 43). Library service development in the larger countries of Barbados, Belize, Guyana,
Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago have been more sustained as opposed to the more sporadic
growth of the smaller nations because of limited financial and human resources. The course
followed for providing library services in the English speaking Caribbean has first, been based
on the provision of private libraries by the more affluent members of the community, church
based libraries to encourage religious knowledge and practice or those associated with the book
trade or publishing industry. Private subscription libraries then transformed into public
subscription libraries, with some variations where free access was available for specific material
onsite in reading rooms.
Public library services were conceptualized and influenced by the growing philanthropic
contributions in the international arena. Major surveys of the English-speaking Caribbean islands
were undertaken by Ernest Savage for the Carnegie Corporation in 1933 and by Arthur Gropp on
funding from the Rockefeller Foundation between 1937 and 1938 that helped with seeding some
10

public library services. The introduction of demonstration libraries, at first directed at rural
Trinidad & Tobago and the Eastern Caribbean islands through the Central Library Scheme,
which later became the Eastern Caribbean Regional Library, helped to cement the growing move
towards free public libraries (Thompson, 1970). As public libraries continued to develop
government legislation and dedicated consistent funding has helped establish and sustain the
public library services more frequently in the cases of Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados
and Guyana. In other circumstances, where the want was there but no consistent funding, the
effects of natural disasters, and insufficient infrastructure hampered growth in some of these
Caribbean nations. Natural disasters have proved a continued source of instability for providing
public library services. An example is the repeated effects of hurricanes across the region
hampering sustained library services through the destruction of collections and equipment,
damaging or ruining buildings, and halting services for unlimited periods of time. In the case of
Grenada, later discussed under its section, the Carenage location of the library, used since the
early 1900s, is still feeling the effects of Hurricane Ivan from 2004. Cassell (2001) in Library
Services in Monserrat: Helping People Realize Their Full Potential writes of her experiences as
a working librarian through three hurricanes, Hugo, Luis and Marilyn, and Soufrière Hill’s
volcanic re-awakening on the island. Peltier-Davis (2011) has noted the limited approach to
library service development in some of the smaller islands as seen as not well developed, but she
dismisses the sentiment as a chronic state of affairs for these nations.
Library development in the smaller islands (so defined given their size geographically
and demographically smaller populations) such as Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has been perceived as being
somewhat sporadic, hampered by limited resources and severely impacted by natural
disasters as was the case of volcanic eruptions in Montserrat (dormant until the early
1990s) and the widespread destruction caused by hurricane Tomas in Saint Lucia in
October 2010. It is worth noting however, that in recent years the pace of library
development in these territories has been steadily progressive under the guidance and
leadership of a group of committed library administrators, ably supported by a team of
dedicated information professionals as they attempt to meet the challenges and demands
of the 21st century. (Peltier-Davis, 2011, p. 2)
11

Running concurrently with the development of public library services on most, if not all
of the island nations, were school libraries located in both primary and secondary schools.
Simultaneously, where there was the independent development of earlier libraries in tertiary
institutions like the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture in Trinidad, founded, with its own
library in 1921, and varying religious libraries, the focus of this thesis is on the growth and
development of free public library services in the English-speaking Caribbean, with attention on
those that came to be funded by public monies. As library services have developed, there has
also been the push for the conservation and preservation of material specific to each country,
which has seen the development of national libraries, a few of which are independent of the
general public library services. In other cases, there is a combination of national and public
library functions for some of the English-speaking Caribbean due to history and resources both
financial and human.
Throughout the research process for this thesis, the availability of some of the secondary
material regarding public library development in the English-speaking Caribbean has proved
intermittently difficult. Traditional searches through library catalogs were conducted, in addition
to consultation with OCLC and other databases.3 Interlibrary loan was utilized to acquire
material not available locally, but in quite a few cases, the ability to acquire material was
hampered by ILL policies with regards to the lending of material with only one holding in the
USA, the costs to acquire the material, and some of the copy right concerns for sharing material.
It was found that certain public library systems of the larger Caribbean English-speaking nations
were better documented than those of the smaller nations in the material generally available.
Additionally, approaches were made through email correspondence with the Department of
Library and Information Studies at the University of the West Indies, the National Library and
Information System Authority of Trinidad and Tobago, and the Alma Jordan Library at the
University of the West Indies (UWI), Trinidad and Tobago. Some of these queries resulted in
some good informational leads. On other occasions, these leads were subjected to a complete
break in correspondence with follow up emails going unanswered. Additionally, some website
links to public library sites and contact emails no longer existed.
In the brief discussion to follow on the growth of public libraries in the English speaking
Caribbean, the focus is predominantly paid to the contemporary development of these public
3

It should also be noted that the author’s searching abilities may be faulty in areas.

12

library systems through to the end of 2016. The resulting alphabetic arrangement of each
nation’s public library development is a kind of re-imagining of the ship-bound trajectory that
was followed in Ernest Savage’s The libraries of Bermuda, the Bahamas, the British West Indies,
British Guiana, British Honduras, Puerto Rico, and the American Virgin Islands: a report to the
Carnegie Corporation of New York as he made his way around the Caribbean surveying the
history and conditions of libraries in 1933. Further information is also gleaned from a Caribbeanwide survey that was conducted through distributed questionnaires in March of 1963 by Enid
Baa. The survey resulted in the publication of, The library and bibliographic activities in the
Caribbean. The survey responses included budget expenditure for the previous year, collection
numbers, brief histories of each library’s inception and types and number of staff in place.
Additionally, attention is mainly paid to the contemporary development of public library systems
of the English speaking Caribbean through to the end of 2016.
Antigua & Barbuda
Circulating libraries have had a place in Antiguan society as far back as the 17th century
with libraries established by the likes of an Anglican clergyman, Thomas Bray, who in 1690 sent
books worth 100 pounds to the island (Frohndorff, 2003). Libraries concentrated on the religious
were also prominent and early newspaper accounts detailing advertisements for the want or the
arrival of new publications were prominent in a local publication like the Antigua Gazette. As a
follow on from Bray’s earlier works, the Clerical Library, established in 1837, started with
donations from the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and came to include theological
material and prominent works of literature like Shakespeare. The Antigua Library Society was
originally established in 1830 as a private venture with membership chosen by ballot. Under the
influences of external forces like the earthquake of 1843, which damaged the building housing
its collection of books, newspapers, “…and left… the proprietors ruined” (Savage, 1934, p. 10),
the effects of decreasing payment of subscription fees by its membership and the formation of
other libraries like the Presbyterian Church Library, the Antigua Book Society and the Library of
the Polytechnic Association, the Antigua Library Society became a public library in 1854 when
it was taken over by the government because of financial issues (Frohnsdorff, 2003). The
government appointed Trustees who managed the library until 1900 when a City Board replaced
them. Ordinance No. 4 of 1907 dissolved the City Board and Government Trustees were
appointed to administer the library (Savage, 1934).
13

According to the current website that describes the National Library of Antigua and
Barbuda, it states,
After four decades since the public library was damaged by an earthquake, construction
of the new national public library of Antigua and Barbuda has been completed. The work
which was started in the 1990's has been completed under the United Progressive Party
administration signaling another campaign promise fulfilled by the People First
Government. The 20,000 square foot multi-level complex building located on Hails
Prominard Road is a replacement for the nation's first library which was damaged by an
earthquake in 1974. The country has operated a temporary library on Market Street since.
(National Library of Antigua and Barbuda, n.d.)
In addition to the website the National Public Library of Antigua and Barbuda maintains a
Facebook presence at https://www.facebook.com/NPLAntiguaBarbuda
Anguilla
Free library services came into being in Anguilla in 1950, replacing the subscription
libraries that were the first approach to library services for the island, originally initiated in 1938
(Anguilla Library Service, n.d.). Financing and administration of the public library system is
directed by the Department of Library Services under the Ministry of Social Development. “The
Department is charged with the responsibility of developing national library services and is
dedicated to improving the human and material resources essential for service delivery”
(Anguilla Library Service, n.d.). The Anguilla Public Library maintains a website at
http://www.axalibrary.ai/ in addition to a Facebook and Twitter presence.
Bahamas
In Bahamian Public Libraries, an overview, Ballance and Bain (2001) state that the
earliest mention of any type of library in the Bahamas comes from an advertisement by a
Thomas Williamson in an 1804 issue of the Royal Gazette about his ‘circulating library’. On
offer were 500 novels and plays that could be borrowed for up to three months for payment of a
fee. Accordingly, Boultbee declares in his, A National Library for the Bahamas that the library
services particular to Nassau was influenced by the 1820 formation in the United Kingdom of the
Mechanic’s Institutes. These institutes were formed by mechanics, artisans and working men
“who wished to enjoy the benefits of education particularly in relation to their trades and
occupations” (Boultbee, 1981, p. 27). The Nassau Public Library was created by combining an
14

un-named reading society and the Bahamas Society for the Diffusion of Knowledge in January
1837. Boultbee also states that there were several libraries on Family Islands established in the
1850s and libraries established on New Providence in the twentieth century.
“The Public Library in Nassau was founded by Law 35 of 1847. This law and 18 of 1874
are incorporated in the revised laws, ch. 29, 1929” (Savage, 1934, p. 66). The administration was
to be executed by seven trustees annually; four chosen by the Government and three by the
subscribers. Additionally, a ‘branch library’ existed in Grant’s Town, which Savage noted had no
effective cooperation with the Nassau Public Library. The Grant’s Town Public Library was
opened in November 1929 at the behest of the Legislature that made 200 pounds available for a
library and reading room to be situated above the Grant’s Town Post Office. The library opened
May 30th, 1930 and Savage observed, “This library, although so small, is in many respects a
model of its kind, and if the West Indies were well provided with similar rooms in sparsely
populated areas, the people would be well served” (Savage, 1934, p. 68). On a number of the
outer-lying islands small library stations existed, funded by Government expenditure and
founded under Law 15 of 1909; the Out Islands Public Libraries Act. In 1978, Boultbee states,
“presently, there are five public libraries in Nassau and thirty five public libraries in the Family
Islands. Freeport is served by the John Harvard Library, an independent institution” (1978, p.
27).
Barbados
Like the other islands, subscription libraries were the first form of early public libraries in
Barbados in the 18th century. The Barbados Public Library Act of 1847 established the
Bridgetown Public Library and the Barbados Museum (Wedgeworth, 1993). The administration
of the library was conducted by five Trustees nominated by the Governor. The book stock
holdings that comprised the library’s collection came from the Literary Society of Barbados and
the Clerical Library (Savage, 1934). In 1904, funding from the Carnegie Corporation helped
build a library to which the Barbados Public Library and Museum relocated. “An Act to
consolidate the Acts of this Island related to the public library” (Savage, 1934, p. 18) was passed
on December 10, 1904 which made the library open and free to access for the Barbadian
population. The Governor was made the patron of the library with the authority to nominate five
trustees to administer the library, and to appoint a librarian and clerk. Apart from the general
administration and maintenance of the library, monies were also granted for the establishment of
15

a branch library in Speightstown. Savage noted in his report on Barbados that, “this was the first
public library I visited in the West Indies. No charge is made for the use of the library. A special
fee of 5s. a year is paid for access to the shelves; there are thirty four open shelf subscribers”
(Savage, 1934, p. 20).
Since the 1980s, the public library services have undergone many changes and under the
Ministry of Information, the National Council on Libraries, Archives and Documentation
Centers (NACOLAD) was set up to investigate the possibility of a national library service.
Under its auspices two reports were submitted which influenced the eventual establishment in
1982 of a national service titled, the Barbados Library Archives and Information Center
Network. This was replaced by the National Library Service in 1985 (Wedgeworth, 1993). “The
National Library Service has direct responsibility for planning, developing and administering
public library services and for coordinating and supervising government department libraries”
(Wedgeworth, 1993, p. 103). Additionally, Wedgeworth documented the existence of two main
libraries aside from the National Library’s location, and seventy six public library service points
for 1990. The original Carnegie library has been closed for renovations and the library has been
“temporarily relocated near Independence Square” (Barbados Tourism Encyclopedia, n.d.). The
Barbados National Library Services currently maintains a Facebook presence at
https://www.facebook.com/Barbados-National-Library-Service-671362686276959
Belize
Belize’s library service has existed since 1825 and between that year and 1902, seven
libraries and reading rooms existed (Wedgeworth, 1993). Between that timeframe and the
eventual creation of a public library, at least two attempts at starting libraries were noted by
Savage on his trip to Belize, previously known as British Honduras. Initial book collections for
the public library were, on two occasions, destroyed first, in 1918 by fire, and the second in 1931
by a hurricane. With the help of funding from the Carnegie Corporation in New York and
additional aid coming provided by the central government, the Jubilee Library was opened in
1935. Baa states in her 1963 publication, The Library and bibliographic activities in the
Caribbean, “The British Honduras Library Service was established in 1935 and now it has seven
branches and fifty sub-libraries” (p.6). The development of the branch libraries were established
in district capitals after government funding increased after 1955. By 1964, Jordan’s survey
showed that the library was under the purview of the Ministry of Education, Health and Housing
16

and was being administered by a board of nine members. Public library services now fall under
the Belize National Library Service and Information System, which was established under the
Belize National Library Service and Information System Act that was passed in 2006. The
BNLSIS serves as both a national and public library for the country. The Leo Bradley Library in
the former capital city of Belize Town serves as the headquarters for the library system, with an
additional four libraries located around the district (Belize National Library Service and
Information System, n.d.). The Belize National Library Service and Information System
maintains a website at http://bnlsis.org/
Bermuda
Prior to the establishment of the Bermuda Library, members of the public created
organizations among themselves where ‘useful books’ were collected and circulated within a
community of various interests. Examples of those community reading groups are the Somerset
Bridge Club, which was created in 1765 and the Hamilton Club (Wedgeworth, 1993). In 1839
the Bermuda Library was established by an Act of government as both a national and
subscription library for the small nation with the arrival of a new Governor, Lieut-Col. William
R. Reid. (Thomson, 1979). The Act, known as the “Act of Establishing a Public Library” passed
on July 7, 1839, also made provisions for a nine member Board of Trustees, which was overseen
by the Governor. Although enacted as a public library, subscription dues were required. Located
in the capital city of Hamilton, the library, and accompanying museum, was housed in a private
residence known as Par-la-Ville, leased to the Government for that purpose (Savage, 1934).
Access was available to all residents of Hamilton but those wanting to borrow material
had to be paid subscribers. The Library Act was passed in 1921, which saw the replacement of
the Governor as the Chairman of a Board of Trustees with the President of the Legislative
Council. The Head of Library was then named as Secretary to the Board. Members of the board
remained government officials until 1946 when the administration of the Bermuda Library was
changed to a body known as the Bermuda Library Committee. In 1968 with the passing of the
new Bermuda Constitution, the administrative responsibilities were transferred to the Ministry of
Education with the Bermuda Library Committee acting as an advisory body (Thomson, 1979).
The Bermuda Library serves both as public and national library and is free to all the residents of
Bermuda. A second library branch was opened in 1951 in the town of St. Georges and in 1957
another in Somerset. The Bermuda Library is now known as the Bermuda National Library,
17

administered under the Ministry of Social Development and Sports and it maintains a website at
http://www.bnl.bm/
British Virgin Islands
At the time of Ernest Savage’s travels around the Caribbean, it was noted in his report
that there were no public libraries in existence on any of the islands (Savage, 1934). In 1942 a
free public library was developed at Road Town in Tortola and because of its location, close to
the American Virgin Islands, assistance from the St. Thomas Public Library described by
Thompson as, “a well-organized and well administered library on the continental American
model with reasonable good finances…” (Thompson, 1970, p. 71) helped maintain services on
Tortola. “The Public Library Service evolved from being just one library established by Mr. T.
D. Green in 1943 in the J.E.W. Georges building on lower Main Street, Road Town which also
served as a Senior School, to a library system which consists of five libraries. There are
presently two libraries in Tortola, one each in Virgin Gorda, Anegada, and Jost Van Dyke”
(Glasgow, 2016). According to the library’s website, maintained under the Government of the
Virgin Islands, the Public Library Services was established in 1974 under the Public Library
Services Ordinance (Public Library Service of the Virgin Islands, n.d.).The library is a
depository for all of the nation’s legal and governmental documentation, in addition to all
publications produced in the British Virgin Islands. The library falls administratively under the
Ministry of Education and Culture. Five additional libraries are listed and they include, Anegada
Community Library; East End Community Library; Jost Van Dyke Community Library; Virgin
Gorda Community Library. Road Town Library was closed in 2016 and its services moved to
another location to facilitate repairs.
Cayman Islands
According to the current website for the Cayman Islands Public Library Service, public
library services were first offered in George Town in 1920 in a room above the courthouse. A
building was commissioned and built in 1939 by a Captain Rayal Bodden. The new library was
opened in 1940 (Cayman Islands Public Library Service, n.d.). Books were acquired through
donation and the Cayman library was a recipient of the book collecting project of Lady Ranfurly.
There are four branch libraries; East End Library; North Side Library; Bodden Town Library and
Cayman Brac Library. A professional librarian took over the running of the public library in
1980. The Cayman Islands Public Library Service currently maintains a website at
18

http://www.cipl.gov.ky/portal/page/portal/libhome in addition to a Facebook presence at
https://www.facebook.com/CIPLS/
Dominica
Joseph A. Brome’s Origin and Growth of the Public Libraries of Dominica, published in
1970 has detailed the development of public library services in Dominica up to the early 1960s,
which has followed the same pattern as other English speaking Caribbean nations, of
subscription libraries moving to public libraries. Earlier endeavors at subscription libraries were
private matters between citizens and it was at the instigation of H. Hesketh Bell, and approaches
to the legislature on April 4, 1902, the Victoria Memorial Library opened in Rousseau as a public
subscription library. (Brome, 1970) A second library, The Free Public Library built by funds
from the Carnegie Corporation, initially meant to expand the Victoria Memorial Library, opened
in 1906. Although subsidized by some government funding, the library still operated as a partial
subscription library by taking in fees from those who wanted to borrow material. The
administration of the library was executed by a committee of six; three persons chosen by the
government authorized under Ordinance No 5 of 1907 and the additional three elected through
ballot by library subscribers (Savage, 1934). By 1962 there were two branch libraries (Baa,
1963). The current public library system in Dominica is known as the Dominica Library and
Information Service and is administered by the Ministry of Education and Human Resource
Development. The Dominica Library and Information Service maintains a web site at
http://dlis.gov.dm/

The site describes the history of the Dominica Library and Information

Services as developed since 1843 “with the establishment of Reading rooms and more formally
with the opening of the first library on island ‘Victoria Memorial on April 4, 1902’” (Dominica
Library and Information Service, n.d.). Education and the provision of information for the
country is the main focus of the Dominica Library and Information Service and it does this
through three departments: Public Library Services, Documentation and Research Services and
Archival Services. It has also expanded its services with the development of branch, school
libraries, and mobile library services. As the website states,
The Service expanded in the 1990’s to include special and sectoral libraries, with the
establishment of the National Documentation Centre. That service employed information
systems in the management and provision of information with co-ordinated approaches to
ensure the availability of information generated within Dominica and accessibility to
19

information generated outside the country.

In 2001 the DLIS further enhanced service

provision with the addition of archival services focus on educating the population
regarding the importance of the nation’s documentary and historical heritage and
provision of access to material within the archival collection. (Dominica Library and
Information Service, n.d.)
Grenada
The public library, existing first as a subscription library from 1846, became a free library
in 1949 when the government took over as administrator on a permanent basis; taking over
responsibility from the joint facilitation of the Eastern Caribbean Regional Library and the
library itself. Within the previous 100 year span, the administration had been reorganized and
handled as a special project by the Colonial Secretary, the Hon. Edward Drayton from 1888 until
he left the colony in 1914; moved from its “old quarters to a warehouse first floor between the
Government Offices and St. Georges Club, quite near the landing place on the Carenage”
(Savage, 1934, p. 34); had a Library Ordinance passed in 1896 for its administration by
Committee through the Governor in Council, with no subsequent legal changes (Savage, 1934).
As the need for public library services developed, access to the Public Library in Georgetown for
school aged children were offered starting in 1934 due to a legislative Act to do so. Students
were required to pay a subscription, in addition to furnishing letters from their schools. The
Eastern Caribbean Regional Library’s initial involvement started in 1947 with demonstration
libraries and, as stated above, the library became a government entity, “when the government
accepted the principles of free library service by providing the necessary funds for carrying out
the work begun by the Regional Library through its demonstrations” (Pitt, 1951, p. 36). As the
free public library services continued to develop in Grenada, after 1949 branch locations were
opened in the more rural areas.
The Grenada Public Library also serves as the National Library and Archives/Repository
for the island nation. There are eleven branch libraries and a mobile library that services the
schools. After 100 years of library service, the main building was renamed the Sheila Buckmire
Memorial Library in 1992, named for Ms. Buckmire who had been the librarian at the time Baa
(1963) conducted her survey. Buckmire served 37 years in her post and was instrumental in
developing all the library’s services, in addition to focusing on the preservation of archival
material (National Archives of Grenada, 2014, March 14). The building ‘on the Carenage’
20

serves as an aging multi-purpose facility with many challenges, such as the annual threat of
hurricanes, having enough technical and human resources, in addition to “the apathy exhibited
by our government” (National Archives of Grenada, 1974, Feb. 7).

In some of the literature

there is ongoing concern for the condition of archival material in Grenada and the lack of
attention they are receiving. The Grenada Public Library and Archives was closed at some point
due to damage from Hurricane Ivan; “although the Carenage building was not officially
abandoned it was closed and the archive continued to suffer” (National Archives of Grenada,
2014, March 14). After over ten years of the building’s closure, indecision remains as to the
type of action to be taken to remedy the situation. “Little or nothing has been achieved to build a
more appropriate Archive premises and even under its hat as simply a National Library hasn’t
motivated the building’s repair or replacement” (National Archives of Grenada, 2014, March
14).
There also exists the Grenada Community Library and Resource Center Inc., which is a
non-profit organization that maintains Facebook presence,
https://www.facebook.com/mtzionlibraryhrc/ and a website http://grenadacommunitylibrary.org/
The organization is focused on providing library services, particularly reading material and
programming for children.
Guyana
Private subscription libraries were in existence prior to the rise of wider literacy in the
island, which influenced the move towards public library services. In a description of the history
of the first public library in a publication honoring the library’s Diamond Jubilee celebration
written by ‘staff of the Public Free Library’ as noted on the title page of the publication, the
following observation is made,
Before Andrew Carnegie donated the funds to erect the library there was no public library
service in Guyana. Rodway in his ‘Story Georgetown” writes of the existence of private
libraries, circulating libraries and subscription libraries and states that in the nineteenth
century ‘There were coffee houses in America Street and Rob’s Town where newspapers
were kept for the convenience of the customers. (Georgetown (Guyana), 1969, p. 15)
The first public library service was established in Guyana as a Carnegie Free Library in 1909
(Wedgeworth, 1993). Named the Georgetown Public Free Library, it received its name from
Ordinance No. 12 of 1908 under which it was constituted (Savage, 1934). The library was
21

administered by a nine person committee of, “a Chairman, who is either the Governor or
someone appointed by him, four members nominated by the Governor, and four members by the
Mayor and Town Council of Georgetown…” (Savage, 1934, p. 45). Additionally, it was noted in
Savage’s report that no subscriptions were charged. One special mention though in Savage’s
report was the condition of the library building, which was in need of repair. Built as a central
two story block with one story wings on either side, the central structure had sunk ‘five inches’
because of the soil’s inability to sustain the weight, “so that the building is seriously cracked at
the juncture of the wings with the centre” (Savage, 1934, p. 45).
In 1950, with the assistance of the Eastern Caribbean Regional Library six book centers
were established in the ‘immediate hinterlands of Georgetown’ with the Georgetown Public Free
Library overseeing their activities (Thompson, 1970). A few years later, branch libraries
affiliated with the Georgetown Public Free Library were created at the behest of the communities
of New Amsterdam and McKenzie in 1953 and 1955, respectively, under the 1950 Public Free
Library Ordinance No. 13 (Georgetown (Guyana),1969). By 1962 there were small library
centers in nineteen rural areas that were housed in community centers, in addition to subbranches in Anna Regina and Bartica (Jordan, 1964).
In September, 1972, in the midst of the rising feeling of nationalism, the Library
Ordinance was amended to establish the National Library – the Public Free Library was
renamed the National Library with dual responsibility for National and Public library
service. This library extends public library service to the people in the country through
branches in cities, through prison libraries, book deposit collections book mobiles, etc.
(Mangla, 1979, p. 4)
Through the Publications and Newspapers Act (Act 4 of 1972), the library also became a
depository of books printed in Guyana (George & Thompson, 2009, May 14). “In 2009, the
National Library of Guyana celebrated its centenary. It marked the event with a series of public
readings and discussions that focused on oral and folkloric narrative traditions in Guyana”
(Allicock, n.d. p.5). The National Library of Guyana currently maintains a Facebook presence at
https://www.facebook.com/NationalLibraryofGuyana/
Jamaica
Roger Cave in his discussion of subscription libraries, Early Circulating Libraries in
Jamaica (1980) states that libraries were a mainstay both for book sellers and publishers in the
22

17th century. He even indicates that there was a parish library in Port Royal in 1721, and another
‘sent out in 1724’. An early documented circulation library was set up in 1779 by a William
Aitken, a Scotsman who’d moved to Jamaica in 1775 to be a bookseller and stationer. By 1781
his library collection was dispersed by auction but his businesses remained. This pattern for
circulating libraries continued in other parts of the island; setting up book selling companies and
or publishing houses and subscription-based circulating libraries. One of the more successful
endeavors was undertaken by a Thomas Stevenson, who had been a manager of Aiken’s
business. Stevenson’s Circulating Library, according to Cave’s investigations of historical
newspaper advertisements, lasted from 1788 and into the early 1820s with a few changes to the
proprietorship of the parent businesses. With regards to the types of patrons for these libraries,
Cave describes them as follows, “the users of the early Jamaican libraries were the planters and
their families; the merchants, lawyers, doctors and tradesmen who plied their li[b]ing in
Kingston and half-a-dozen smaller towns in the island” (1980, p. 54). Other towns throughout
the island like Montego Bay, St Jago de la Vega (Spanish Town), Morant Bay, Savanna-la-Mar
and Buff Bay started their own non-commercial circulating libraries or reading groups.
After commercial subscription libraries, the first ‘public’ library oriented institution, the
Institute of Jamaica, was founded by Law 22 of 1879 in Kingston. It was established as a reading
room, museum and public library that housed the library collections of the House of Assembly,
the Legislative Council and the collections of the Museum of the Royal Society of the Arts and
Agriculture. “Under the librarianship of Frank Cundall from 1891 to 1937 an unusually
handsome collection of West Indiana was built…” (Thompson, 1970, p. 68), which later become
the foundation collection of the Jamaica Library Service. The Institute was governed by a twelve
member board with eight member nominated by the Governor, four of whom were from the
Legislative Council. The remaining four were elected by the membership of the Institute.
Through the Institute’s attempts, free public library services were extended to young people in
1940 with the establishment of the Junior Center across the street from the Institute, with funding
from the Jamaica Welfare Fund and the Callahan Bequest. A year later a second Junior Center
was created at Half Way Tree, due to the overwhelming response to the first center. The Institute
also provided deposit libraries for rural elementary schools, community centers and clubs.
“In 1944 the Board of the Institute demonstrated its concern with the island problem by applying
to Colonial Development and Welfare for a grant to finance a survey of library needs” (Jordan,
23

1964, p. 145). The resulting report, authored by Canadian librarian Nora Bateson, advocated that
public monies be spent to fund a library service in Jamaica, and suggested two models that could
be practical for the needs of the Jamaican public. Bateson states, “In Jamaica it would have a
primary obligation to supply information of a practical nature on the various occupations in
which people are engaged keeping them abreast of current practices and new ideas” (Bateson,
1945 p. 1). The first suggestion was for a central library system with branch libraries located in
every parish. The second was for the creation of semi-independent libraries in each parish.
Prior to Nora Bateson’s report the first free public library on the island nation was the
Manchester Free Public Library, established in April 1938. Three other public libraries also
existed; a small public library in the parish of Portland established in 1943; the St. Elizabeth
Public Library established in 1944, and the St. James Public Library in 1945. “By Jamaica Law
no. 62 of 1949 an island-wide library service was established” (Thompson, 1970, p. 74) to join
the four other free public libraries that existed. Under the Jamaica Library Service Act, the
Jamaica Library Service was to be administrated by a government appointed body known as the
Jamaica Library Board. By 1963 the main library, located in Kingston was “supported by
thirteen parish libraries, six branch libraries, one hundred and sixty five book centres, six book
mobiles stopping at eight stations and seven hundred and forty school libraries” (Baa, 1963, p.
11). In discussing the establishment of the Jamaica Library Service, Jordan made special mention
of the staff being one of the greatest assets of the organization, “the energy and drive of this
young and almost entirely female staff make a lasting impression” (Jordan, 1964, p. 147). Jordan
also discusses the professional credentials of the senior staff and the ongoing attention to training
staff at every level. Junior staff, prior to its closure were sent to the ECRL on a regular basis.
“With the assistance of senior staff, a full program of in-service training, lectures, seminars and
conferences is maintained for all levels of the staff, including volunteer book center workers …”
(Jordan, 1964, p. 147).
A second national survey was conducted concerning library services in Jamaica by J.P.
Danton in 1968. The resulting report was a comprehensive look of all the types of libraries that
existed at the time. In depth visits and discussions took place with regards to the Jamaica Library
Service, the library at the University of the West Indies, Mona campus with some reference to
the libraries at the campuses in Trinidad and Barbados. Other libraries included, the Institute of
Jamaica, governmental agencies where libraries were present, Teacher’s Colleges, the College of
24

Arts Science and Technology and the Jamaica School of Agriculture. In 2010 the establishment
of a national library for the country, one of the fourteen points of the principal recommendations
from the Danton report, was legislated under the National Library of Jamaica Act of 2010.
Monserrat
According to Savage’s 1934 report, The libraries of Bermuda, the Bahamas, the British
West Indies, British Guiana, British Honduras, Puerto Rico, and the American Virgin Islands: a
report to the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the first public library was established in
Plymouth by the Monserrat Company, but was taken over by the Government in 1890. At the
time of Savage’s visit the library was being housed in the Court House, which had been damaged
by a hurricane in 1923. The library was administered by a five person committee; three
appointed by the Government and two by the subscribers. Accordingly, Savage recommended a
complete review and overhaul of the conditions of the building and the book stock, in addition to
recommending that, “a central West Indian service would be beneficial to this library, when it
has been re-established” (1934, p. 14). Baa’s questionnaire response detailed the history of the
Monserrat Public library as follows, “There is a part-time public library, established since 1899
with paid subscription for its use, but in 1951 it was made a free library” (Baa, 1963, p. 8). The
Monserrat Public Library currently maintains a Facebook page at
https://www.facebook.com/MontserratPublicLibrary/ . The last posting is dated April 17, 2017.
St. Kitts and Nevis
As stated on its website, “the evolution of the St. Kitts Public Library can be said to have
parallel the socio-economic pattern of the country” (National Library of Saint Kitts and Nevis,
n.d.). The St. Kitts Public Library was founded by government under Ordinance No. 4 during
the governorship of Sir William Haynes-Smith (Savage, 1934). At the time of Savage’s report he
noted the library, being located in a small apartment in the Courthouse at Bassaterre, stated that a
separate building would be an improvement and that, “this library ought to benefit considerably
from a West Indian central service, whence a regular inflow of fresh book stock would be
assured. The most urgent demand is for additional books” (Savage, 1934, p. 7).
The Nevis library located in Charlestown, formerly associated with the St. Kitts Public
Library from 1907, was granted through Ordinance No, 6 of 1911 a means to separately
administer its own affairs (Savage, 1934). The Charles A. Halbert Public Library serves as the

25

main library for St. Kitts and Nevis, in addition to being the National Library of St. Kitts and
Nevis. The institution maintains a website at http://www.nationallibraryofsaintkittsandnevis.org/
St. Lucia
“The library was founded in October 1847. The site was acquitted by the Castries Town
Board for 500 pounds, and was vested in the Government by Ordinance No. 7, 1923. The present
building of red and grey stone was erected for 2500 pounds, given by Mr. Carnegie. It was
opened in December 1924” (Savage, 1934, p. 27). Administration of the library was an
amalgamation of varying approaches prior to a change under Ordinance 88, 1916, where a
committee was chosen through the nomination of two members by the Governor, one nomination
from the Castries Town Board, and two selected by subscribers. Simultaneously, a library existed
in Soufriere, approximately fourteen miles from Castries, but operated independently. The
Carnegie library in Castries was completed destroyed by fire in 1948. Plans were pursued for the
replacement of the library that was moved and temporarily housed in a property offered by a
community member, a Reverend, E.C. Mural, Superintendent of the Methodist Church of St.
Lucia (Hinds, 2016). The Town Council between 1948 and 1952 pursued various plans and
funding avenues, from discussions with S.W. Hockey from the Central Regional Library Scheme
in Trinidad, applications to the British Council, and requests to the Carnegie Corporation, with a
resulting limitation to the amount of funds that could be procured. The issue was no longer
discussed after that and it was with the advocacy of a citizen, George Cooper that the public
library scheme in St. Lucia gathered steam. Adding to that voice in the media was that of the
Minister of Public Works, H.B. Collymore (Hinds, 2016). The ‘new’ library was rebuilt on the
old foundations of the former Carnegie construction and opened in 1958. By 1963 there was one
branch library and six deposit stations (Baa, 1963). The St. Lucia Public Library currently
maintains a website at http://www.slupl.edu.lc/
St. Vincent & the Grenadines
A public library existed in Kingstown, St. Vincent from 1888 and was reestablished with
the construction of a Carnegie funded library in 1907, which opened in 1909. Considered to be
more of a municipal entity than a governmental department like the other islands he visited,
Savage noted that administration was conducted by a committee who, “were to consist of the
Chairman of the Kingstown Board for the time being (who was to be Chairman of the
committee), two persons nominated by the said Board, and two persons nominated by the
26

Governor” (Savage, 1934, p. 31). Existing outside of Kingstown, in Georgetown and Barrouallie
were smaller libraries who received small grants to operate and provide services for their
communities (Savage, 1934). A demonstration scheme was established in 1947 with the help of
the Eastern Caribbean Regional Library. Law No. 4 made the government responsible for library
services in 1950, “removing all municipal responsibilities” (Thompson, 1970, p.72).
The national library for St. Vincent and the Grenadines, which also serves as a public library, is
now the responsibility of the Ministry of Education. According to the Facebook entry for the
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines National Archives concerning library services in St. Vincent,
“The first Librarian in St. Vincent was Benjamin Scott Wilson and he served in that capacity
until 1901. In 2001 the old National Library (Carnegie Building) was sold and it wasn't until
December of 2010 that a new purpose built library was opened” (St. Vincent and the Grenadines
National Archives, n.d.). The new library building was constructed with the financial assistance
of the Taiwanese government and a formal opening took place in 2011 attended by “Sir
Frederick Ballantyne, Governor of St. Vincent, as well as the President Dr. Ralph Gonsalves and
his wife, in addition to more than 200 people from the related governmental posts as well as from
other fields” (Eklund, 2011). The Carnegie building is now the headquarters for the St. Vincent
and the Grenadines National Trust (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines National Trust, n.d.). The
National Public Library of St. Vincent and the Grenadines maintains a Facebook presence at
https://www.facebook.com/NPLADSSVG/
Trinidad and Tobago
Public library services in Trinidad and Tobago has developed through three separate
institutions, the Central Library, the Carnegie Free Library and the Trinidad Public Library, and
is now administered by the statuary body known as the National Library and Information System
Authority (NALIS).
Trinidad Public Library-Port of Spain
The Trinidad Public Library, founded in 1851 in Port of Spain was supported through
‘ordinance-established grants from the government and the city council,’ and was not able to
make its collection completely and freely available without subscription fees until 1961
(Thompson, 1970). The library served the city of Port of Spain and three suburban areas. In
Jordan’s study, Public Libraries in the British Caribbean, by 1964 the library was being
administered by an appointed board “and supported by a government grant, which is
27

supplemented by small items of revenue from rental of the library premises” (p. 157). This
action, according to Ackbarali (1992) was initiated by the political party, the People’s National
Movement in 1956, which resulted in the library becoming a charge of the Ministry of
Education.
Central Library of Trinidad & Tobago
The Central Library Scheme was one of the results of Ernest Savage’s 1933 survey of the
English speaking Caribbean. Officially known as the Eastern Caribbean Central Library, it was
established by Dr. Helen Gordon Stewart in 1941 to provide for free library services in the form
of demonstration libraries outside the capital city of Port of Spain. It came under the central
government legally in 1949 through a Legislative Act that made it a government department.
“Since 1949, the Trinidad and Tobago Central Library Service has been administered as a
nationwide public library under a director and deputy director” (Ackbarali, 1992, p. 31). It
provided library services to “remote areas in both Trinidad and Tobago by three book mobiles,
while larger towns are served by nine full-time branches. Two regional branches serve the towns
of San Fernando and Scarborough, the capital of Tobago” (Jordan, 1964, p. 158). Eventually, the
ECRL was totally dissolved and folded into the services of the Central Library and it grew to
encompass by 1952, seventy-six service points, seven branch libraries, sixty-five book centers,
and one deposit collection at the Imperial College of Agriculture (Thompson, 1970).
Carnegie Free Library-San Fernando
Built from funds awarded in 1919, the library serves the southern part of the island in the
second largest city of Trinidad and Tobago, San Fernando. “The Carnegie Free Library operates
as a regional branch of the Central Library, but administratively it is a distinct library authority
with separate finances” (Jordan, 1964, p. 160). By 1992, the library was being administered by a
statutory board governed by a management committee under the Ministry of Education, with
funding supplied through the Trinidadian government and the City Council (Ackbarali, 1992).
National Library and Information System Authority (NALIS)
With the growth of library services needed, particularly to help support educational
endeavors after independence, various studies were undertaken from 1962-1983, in which all the
public libraries were involved. It was eventually thought best that a national library would be
pertinent as an overall administrative authority for all information services available in Trinidad
and Tobago. Influenced by the NATIS concept initiated by UNESCO extensive consultancy
28

endeavors were undertaken. The eventual local and international consultancy processes resulted
in the following reports: The Moore Plan or Moore report, 1972 by Ursula Raymond; the
UNESCO supported report, Trinidad and Tobago: Development of Library Services submitted
by E.H. Morton in 1974; the Dyer Report, A Development Plan for a State Library prepared in
1976; Roy Flood and Godfrey Thompson. Draft Summary Report – Trinidad and Tobago
National Library Complex, Consultative Report, 1980. The reports encourage the establishment
of a governmental body and,
In July 1980, the Cabinet agreed to the establishment of a statutory body for a new
service to be known as the National Library, Information and Archives Service
(NALIAS). This body would be responsible for implementing the future development of
library services on the basis of a national policy of coordination of the library, archives,
and documentation and information services of Trinidad and Tobago. (Ackbarali, 1992,
p. 66)
By 1987, with the change in government, a shift in priorities was made and the proposed
NALIAS became defunct.
The endeavors of over two decades of planning resulted in the following: NALIAS had
no existence as a statutory body; the archives continued to remain a separate entity; the
integration of the three public library services never materialized and the Central Library
Service continued to be housed in temporary quarters. In twenty-five years not one public
library facility had been built in Trinidad, and many areas were still without public
library service. (Ackbarali, 1992, 101-102)
With the failures to put together an authority in which to incorporate the three separate libraries,
each continued to administer according to its historical antecedents.
“On 18 September 1998, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago repealed the Acts that
governed these three separate bodies and established the National Library and Information
System Authority (NALIS) as a Statutory Authority under the NALIS Act, No. 18 of 1998”
(National Library and Information System Authority, n.d.). NALIS maintains a website at
http://www.nalis.gov.tt/
Turks and Caicos Islands
The Victoria Public Library was built in 1889, paid for by public subscription to celebrate
Queen Victoria’s Jubilee. Hudson (2015) describes, in the 2015-2018 Strategic Plan for the
29

Turks and Caicos Library System, a cursory history of the development of the Turks and Caicos
Public Library Services, starting with the passing of An Ordinance in 1951 to establish a ‘Public
Library in the Turks and Caicos Islands’, which was administered by a Board of Trustees.
Hudson goes on to describe the legislative history of the Turks and Caicos Public Library
Services has having three periods,
The first period can be dated between the first Library Ordinance of 1851 and 1977 when
the public library operated as a subscription library, that is services made available on the
payment of a fee. The second phase began with the enactment of the Library Ordinance
of 1978 which created a Board of Trustees appointed by the Ministry with responsibility
for the library services, and the provision for receipt of a subvention from the TCI
Government. The third period, the present period in TCIs library history is dated to
September 1, 2012 when the Library Ordinance was repealed and the Board terminated.
The Library Services, mainly public library, is administered centrally from a headquarters
located in the Victoria Public Library on Grand Turk and with service points in
Providenciales, South Caicos (Bottle Creek and Kew) and North Caicos. (Hudson, 2015,
p. 9)
Currently, the Turks and Caicos Public Library Services fall under the portfolio of Ministry of
Education, Youth, Sports and Library Services and the library departmental function is described
on the website as follows, “This Department is responsible for development and promotion of
library services throughout the Turks and Caicos Islands” (Ministry of Education, Youth, Sports
& Library Services, n.d.). Unfortunately, the historic building for the Victoria Public Library
was destroyed by fire in March of 2017 (Rose, 2017).

30

CHAPTER 3
EARLY LIBRARY TRAINING IN THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING
CARIBBEAN
As a reaffirmation concerning the complexity of dealing with the region Robinson’s
opening sentence to her article, Public Libraries with Special Reference to the Commonwealth
Caribbean Area states, “a brief survey of any field of endeavor in the English speaking
Caribbean area is a hazardous undertaking. Any coverage of the area is complicated by the
variations in geographical regions, political structures and historical backgrounds” (Robinson,
1975, p. 14), and, to this I would add financial concerns, which is further reiterated in
Robinson’s article in discussing the growing centralization model used for public libraries in the
English speaking Caribbean. Financial concerns as a common thread has always been a focus for
the provision of library services across the English speaking Caribbean from the early days of
keeping subscription libraries running through the provision of budgets for the construction of
library buildings, their maintenance, acquiring book stock and caring for them. Hiring trained
professional staff, particularly degreed librarians has proved to be a challenge the last two
centuries. In the 1940s, early librarians in the English-speaking Caribbean were primarily
qualified expats from Britain and Canada. As Jackson (1981) notes, “…the two or three West
Indians trained during the decade were precious few” (p. 569).
Home grown librarians, in the form of clerks, were people trained by those expatriate
librarians as support staff. Similar to the earlier models for library training in the United
Kingdom and the USA, both a self-study approach and a form of apprenticeship were followed.
Those interested in the ‘profession’ learned the daily processes involved in running a library.
Processes focused on circulation processes for book stock, organizing periodicals and
newspapers that had already been acquired in addition to making available, on site, general
reading material of other newspapers, magazines and periodicals that were acquired at intervals.
Early approaches for access to books in a ‘public library’ could take the form of closed stacks
where items were stored behind a barrier-closed stacks- and had to be requested through a clerk,
who would then retrieve the item and pass it on, but not before determining the status of the
borrower. Because of location, history and the lack of an actual professional school in the
31

Caribbean region, the acquisition of a professional degree was conducted through ‘distance
learning’ or travelling to the United Kingdom, the USA and Canada.
With the development of library services in the West Indies, particularly after World War
II, professional training for librarianship in the region was usually obtained through the
prevailing British pattern of pre-professional recruitment, followed by in-service study
for the examinations of the Library Association leading to the Associateship (A.L.A) or
Fellowship (F.L.A) of the Association. (Collings, 1975, p. 129)
A combination of events eventually led in the direction of the development of a professional
program at the university level for the English speaking Caribbean. Influenced by the complete
discontinuation of the ECRL’s training program in 1968, by those in the profession and wanting
to go into the profession, and the efforts of two library associations, of which Danton observed,
“the Library Associations of Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago have been exceedingly energetic
in efforts to secure the establishment of a proper school” (Danton, 1968, p. 34), the Department
of Library Science was established in 1971. But, prior to the inception of a degreed program
associated with a tertiary institution, the training and education of library staff had been
conducted, funded and in some way influenced or supported by the following institutions
discussed below, the (British) Library Association, the British Council, the Eastern Caribbean
Regional Library, UNESCO, and several national and regional library associations.
(British) Library Association
In the United Kingdom modern library development began with the passage of the Public
Libraries Act in 1850 (Quinn, 2014). As library services grew, so too did the need for
professional organizations. Founded in 1877 at the close of the first International Conference of
Librarians, the Library Association is the longest and most prominent professional library
organization in the United Kingdom. The former name, the Association (LAUK) was changed in
1898 upon incorporation when the organization was granted a Royal Charter. This new status
allowed the Library Association the ability to award Chartered (professional) status to its
members. The Library Association established the first examinations and awarding of certificates
in 1885, in addition to setting up correspondence courses, summer schools and other forms of
education for budding librarians (Quinn, 2014). In 1927 the Library Association was joined by
the Scottish Library Association and other independent regional library groups to form one
entity.
32

“The Library Association’s examination and registration system has had a significant
influence on the development of library services, not only in the United Kingdom, but also in
other countries, particularly those of the Commonwealth” (Jackson, 1982, p. 443). But, with the
proliferation of library school after the Second World War, the Library Association began
exempting graduates with degrees from having to sit the professional examinations. Eventually
the whole examination system was phased out. The Library Association has been prominent in
the library profession for assessing and validating library school curriculum, providing
professional development opportunities by way of courses and providing career guidance for its
members. In 1986 the Association was granted a supplemental Royal Charter. In 2002 “the
Association was effectively dissolved and a new organization, CILIP was created through a
merger with the Institute of Information Scientists” (Feather and Sturges, 2003, p. 374). CILIP or
the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals has varying roles which
includes accrediting library and information courses and conferring status on professionals who
meet certain requirements.
British Council
The British Council was founded in 1934 to “promote abroad a wider appreciation of
British culture and civilization, by encouraging the study and use of the English language, and
thereby, to extend a knowledge of British literature and of the British contributions to music and
the fine arts, the sciences, philosophic thought and political practice” (Feather & Sturges, 1997,
p. 39). As a facilitator for the development of libraries in the Caribbean, the British Council has
provided financial support both for the development of public library services and for the
training of staff. In 1945 the British Council took over the training aspect of the Central Library
Scheme in Trinidad and Tobago. With more funding and under the leadership of S.W. Hockey,
the scheme expanded and assisted with supporting various public library projects across the
English-speaking Caribbean, particularly in the Eastern Caribbean. The provision of information
is central to the British Council’s work and library and information services lie at the heart of its
role. Over the decades of its existence it has helped develop libraries in India, countries on
continental Africa and in the Caribbean. One such example is the development of an integrated
public library program in Jamaica as a result of Nora Bateson’s 1945 report, Library plan for
Jamaica. This library system was jointly funded for ten years by the British Council and the

33

Jamaican Government. Additionally, the British Council was also instrumental in the
establishment of the then Jamaica Library Association.
Eastern Caribbean Regional Library
With funding of $70,000 from the Carnegie Corporation, the Central Library System was
established in Trinidad to serve the Eastern Caribbean region. Thirty thousand pounds was
earmarked for the direct establishment of the Central Library System with the rest of the funding
going towards operating expenses for the first four years, after which the government of Trinidad
& Tobago would be financially responsible for maintaining the scheme. Set up in 1941 by Dr.
Helen Gordon Stewart, described by Hockey as ‘a distinguished Canadian librarian’ was known
for her success in establishing public library services in British Columbia. Named Director for
the Central Library System, Stewart was responsible for taking book stock and resources into the
country districts of Trinidad and Tobago by way of demonstration libraries. Dr. Gordon
Stewart’s initial placement was to be only for a year but she stayed on a second year in order to
establish the Trinidad Central Library, which the Central Library came to be based on.
The Regional Scheme, to extend the model and include other island nations in the Eastern
Caribbean region was to be a part of the initial Carnegie funded plan. This did not come to
fruition due to a lack of funding and the decision that the box demonstration method would not
be productive as a long-term endeavor for establishing library services (Hockey, 1951).
Additionally, Dr. Stewart was the sole administrator of the Carnegie project and all her time and
focus was taken up by the Central Library. Douglas Coombs (1988) states in, Spreading the
Word, “in fact the development of the Central Library itself occupied most of her time during the
war years; and this was hardly surprising given her total lack of qualified or trained staff together
with the wartime difficulties of communications” (p. 74). Despite these complications, Stewart
continued to train people needed to maintain the scheme, and graduated a group of library
assistants in March of 1944 (Hill, 2007).
In January of 1945, the government of Trinidad and Tobago assumed the responsibility of
the Central Library Scheme, while the Regional Scheme, having become a separate entity, and
being now funded by the British Council, sought to undertake to initially fund free public library
services in the regional islands that would then be taken over by each local government.
The training of staff was a constant theme for the initiation and operation of the Central Library
Scheme’s demonstration libraries. To perform the work for all aspects of these libraries, Dr.
34

Gordon Stewart, the only professionally trained librarian, was responsible for all the staff
training. In his report, Hockey (1951) noted that this initial training was geared specifically to
preparing staff and the certificates granted, “…were of purely local value but by this system of
training a body of library assistants who were capable of carrying out the routines of the
“demonstration libraries” was formed in spite of high wastage of trained assistants, who for one
reason or another did not stay in library work” (p. 14). The general consensus across the region
had always acknowledged the need for locally, professionally trained staff with qualifications of
international standing and “from 1948-1962, training courses were held to prepare candidates for
the first professional and the ALA examinations, conducted by a tutor provided by the British
Council, and attended not only by students from Trinidad but also from the other islands,
especially Jamaica” (Collings, 1975, p. 129). The Regional Library negotiated with, and became
an official examination site for the Library Association with stipulations that included the
Director of the Regional Library supervise the training of the students; those accepted be suitably
educationally qualified, and training be conducted by Chartered Librarians of the Library
Association.
The first six-month course ran from January through to June of 1949. The eleven students
all passed the Library Association’s Elementary Examination, with the observation that other
levels of LA Examinations would need to be included in the future. The on-site fulltime
requirement was changed to a five-month correspondence course, with “one month before the
examination the students come to Trinidad for a four-week course of personal tuition, which
consists mainly of lectures and demonstrations , with visits to other libraries (such as the
Caribbean Commission), printing houses and so on” (Hockey, 1951, p. 16). Because of
decreased funding affecting the consistent operation of the training programs, and the changes to
the requirements for the Library Association, the ECRL training program came to an end in
1962, with its final dissolution, according to Danton, by 1968. This initial training has been
responsible for a number of librarians moving into administrative positions in libraries, library
associations and governmental capacities throughout the English-speaking Caribbean. Some also
became the cadre of lecturers when the Department of Library Science was founded at the
University of the West Indies in 1971.

35

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) is a
specialized unit of the United Nations that focuses on education, the sciences and culture of its
members as a humanistic endeavor. Founded in 1946, the organization promotes peace and
mutual understanding through dialogue. “As an initiator and founder of projects and
programmes in the information field it proved extremely influential in the past and is still looked
on as a source of leadership in the cultural sphere…” (Feather & Sturges, 2003, p. 642). In the
1950s, as it continued to help member states rebuild after the Second World War, it turned its
attention to the libraries of the developing world.
UNESCO’s principal long-term goal in the field of libraries and information has been to
assist the developing countries in building up the basic facilities needed to offer the best
possible service to information users of every type in many countries and cultures and to
enable these countries to participate in regional and international information systems.
(Ackbarali, 1992, p. 19)
It has been responsible for library seminars in Asia, Africa, Latin America and several Arab
countries by sending senior librarians as consultants to help where needed and it also assisted
with the establishment of library schools (Quinn, 2014). In the English-speaking Caribbean the
organization has helped with providing training for library professionals and in its endeavor to
lend its assistance with the building of library schools where needed. Keresztesi (1977) has
described UNESCO as being a catalytic agent in the case of the Department of Library Science’s
formation at the University of the West Indies.
Library Associations
As the profession has grown, area specific library associations have developed to support
all aspects of the profession; anywhere from encouraging and providing continuing education,
organizing conferences or as observers of the ongoing state of librarianship. As Feather and
Sturges (2003) have noted in their section on Library Association in their International
Encyclopedia of Information and Library Science, “The associations unite the profession and
thus assist it in representing the interests not only of librarians but also of libraries and
information science” (p. 376). Nationally specific library associations in the English-speaking
Caribbean have had a prominent place in assisting with the training of library personnel, and the
larger English-speaking Caribbean nations of Barbados, Jamaica, Guyana, and Trinidad and
Tobago have fared better in continuity, whereas for the smaller areas, “their fortunes have waxed
36

and waned” (Feather & Sturges, 2003, p. 57). The Guyana Library Association has been a leader
in facilitating the training of library para-professionals and for the ongoing updating of skills for
professional librarians in Guyana. The association has, since its inception in 1972, facilitated
training for the many types of libraries that exist in Guyana, some of which include, the
CARICOM library, governmental, academic and industry focused libraries. “The Guyana
Library Association, as an active professional organization, has been providing a platform to the
staff working in these libraries to discuss ways and means to develop library and information
services in the country” (Mangla, 1979, p. 4). One such example was a very detailed training
course for library assistants which took place January to March of 1979 that involved the
cooperation of UNESCO, the National Library, the University of Guyana Library, the Public
Service Ministry Library, the National Archives, and the Ministry of Information (Mangla,
1979). 4 The Library and Information Association of Jamaica (LIAJA), formerly the Jamaica
Library Association, which was created from British Council funding has since its inception in
1948, featured ‘planned staff development as a notable feature of its work’.
The JLA has been especially active in establishing itself as the authoritative voice of
librarianship in Jamaica, and its opinion is sought on a variety of matters. It was
instrumental in the creation of the library school at the University of the West Indies, and
before that it ran voluntary classes for suitably qualified library workers taking the British
Library Association professional examinations. (Douglas, 1981, p. 572)

The Library Association of Trinidad and Tobago (LATT) was incorporated by Act no. 11
of 1985 by the government of Trinidad and Tobago. 5 The origins of the organization has roots
much earlier in January of 1960 where “the inaugural meeting was attended by over sixty
persons, including book sellers, teacher-librarians, and information officers, as well as clerical
library assistants and professional librarians” (Jordan, 1964, p. 161). Of note, after the
discontinuation of training programs through the ECRL, both the Library Association of
Trinidad and Tobago and the Library and Information Association of Jamaica organized in-

4

A more recent Library Management course was facilitated through the GLA in June of 2017
http://www.motp.gov.gy/index.php/2015-07-20-18-49-38/2015-07-20-18-50-14/2224-first-lady-commendslibrarians-on-completion-of-library-management-workshop
5
http://www.latt.org.tt/sites/default/files/documents/history-incorporation.PDF

37

service volunteer courses on a volunteer basis. These two organizations were also very important
in the sustained activities for promoting the idea that a regional library school program be
associated with a university. The Library Association of Barbados “(1968) is the sole
organization for the profession. It includes librarians, archivists, documentalists, and other
interested persons” (Wedgeworth, 1993, p. 104). The Bahamas Library Association was created
in 1979 through an amalgamation of two other professional library organizations; the Bahamas
School Library Association and the Bahamas Public Library Association, both formed in 1975
(Johnson, 2007). The organization has over the years sponsored annual conferences and
workshops for professional development, and summer reading programs to support literacy. The
association work has also been influential with contributions to the development of standards for
school media programs, which were adopted by Ministry of Education schools.
The Commonwealth Library Association (COMLA) was founded in 1972 at a meeting in
Lagos, Nigeria. In 1983 the LIAJA hosted the secretariat in Jamaica, first at the Church Teachers
College in Mandeville, Jamaica (Swaby, 1989) and now the offices are currently located in
Kingston, Jamaica.
It aims to support and encourage library associations in the Commonwealth; to forge,
maintain and strengthen professional links between librarians; to promote the status and
education of librarians and the reciprocal recognition of qualifications in librarianship; to
improve libraries; and to initiate research projects designed to promote library provision
and to further technical development in libraries in the Commonwealth. (Feather &
Sturges, 1997, p. 63)
The organization supports an annual student award for excellence in the Department of Library
and Information Studies at the University of the West Indies.
In countries throughout the region, librarians in the different types of libraries have united
and formed national library associations. These associations serve as vehicles through
which libraries are promoted and issues related to the profession of librarianship are
addressed. They also facilitate professional development activities and intra-regional
cooperation through membership in ACURIL. (Johnson, 2007, p. 48)
The Association of Caribbean University Research and Institutional Libraries (ACURIL),
established in 1969, links all the associative library professionals from Dutch, English, French
and Spanish-speaking territories. Formed out of discussions about the need for cooperation
38

between universities and research libraries in the Caribbean region, the Association of Caribbean
Universities solicited a general conversation and hosted a conference for librarians in 1969. It
was at this conference ACURIL was voted into existence under the name Association of
Caribbean University and Research Institute Library (Jordan, 1989). The name was changed to
its current state in 1979. In its 1986 constitution it listed four major aims and objectives: 1. To
facilitate development and use of libraries, archives and information services and the
identification, collection and preservation of information services in support of the whole range
of intellectual and educational endeavors throughout the Caribbean region; 2. To strengthen the
archival, library and information professions in the region; 3. To unite workers in them; and 4.
To promote cooperative activities in pursuit of these activities (Jordan, 1989). The secretariat is
based in the José M. Lázaro Library of the University of Puerto Rico. The organization was
responsible for the establishment of the publication, CARINDEX: Social Sciences and
Humanities in 1977, which continues. As a multi-lingual organization, the Association of
Caribbean University Research and Institutional Libraries maintains an active presence through
various projects and hosts an annual conference on one of the island nations across the region.
Over its forty-eight years in existence the organization, under its very broad focus, has hosted
two conferences on library education: the 1975, Education for librarians of the Caribbean and
the 1986, Continuing education of librarians of the Caribbean. (Association of Caribbean
University, Research and Institutional Libraries, n.d.). ACURIL maintains a website at
https://acuril.org/?lang=en_us

39

CHAPTER 4
LIBRARY EDUCATION IN THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING CARIBBEAN
Library Education
Library education in the English speaking world has its roots in countries like the United
Kingdom and the United States of America who have longer library histories, and where library
training and education were first executed through ‘self-direction and experimentation’. With
the development of more university affiliated library education, library education in the Englishspeaking Caribbean has predominantly followed the British model. Over time, though there has
been a turn towards a North American model. Because of the colonial history and approach to
education and the structure of the Department of Library and Information Studies’ affiliation
with the University of the West Indies, the department has been heavily influenced in its
administrative structure, resources and approach to the curriculum by Britain. With the
influences of the information sector and technological developments like the internet, the
department’s attention to international trends and changes has seen a shift to a more North
American model as executed in Canada and the USA (Mohamedali, 2004). Additionally, since
the eighties, the increased travel and immigration trends of the Caribbean to the USA and
Canada has generated further changes.
With a focus on the USA, Roy gives the following description of the image of the
librarian prior to more formalized training. “The librarian was foremost a scholar, a pleasant
bibliophile with a predilection, if not fastidious aptitude for creating order out of chaos who
acquired these abilities through genetic disposition, self-education and formal education” (Roy,
1998, p. 1)6. Library education, or rather training, was executed predominantly on an
apprenticeship styled model where a person interested in working in a library, learned ‘on the
job’ whilst educating themselves about their material on hand, in addition to providing and
maintaining said resources for use by the public. As the interest in libraries grew, and
philanthropists like Andrew Carnegie and Julius Rosenwald provided resources for the
construction of buildings, book resources and sometimes maintenance, the need for staffing also
grew.

6

Roy is here quoting Lloyd Pearsall Smith, 1876.

40

Library Education in the USA
Changes to the approach in higher education in the USA and the growth of universities
under the influence of government legislation like the Morrill Act in 1862 saw the need for a
different kind of librarian. A differently trained librarian with a more broad-based education was
seen to be practical. Influenced by discussions out of Europe for more professional training for
librarians, Melville Dewey, in 1879, wrote about the lack of professional training and proposed
to establish a school. In 1887, Dewey founded the School of Library Economy at Columbia
College in New York City, after three years of planning when he was employed in 1883 as the
chief librarian at the college. By 1889, the school was transferred to the New York State Library
when he accepted the appointment of state librarian and secretary to the regents of the University
of the State of New York after resigning from Columbia College because of disagreements with
the trustees of Columbia College over his enrollment of women in the school. In 1905 Dewey
was forced to resign from his position as state librarian because of the restrictive admission rules
of his Lake Placid Club, a rest and recreation club for librarians, which allowed no Jewish
members (Quinn, 2014). While Dewey continued to champion professional training for those
interested in librarianship, a number of large public libraries across the USA offered formal
courses. The Los Angeles Public Library’s training classes started in 1891 were reorganized and
became the Library School of the Los Angeles Public library in 1914 (Quinn, 2014). Roy (1998)
describes the availability of other types of training programs located at state colleges such as
Albany School and Columbia University in Washington D.C. Additional programs partnered
with universities and some with technical institutes.
Three of Dewey’s protégées established library schools at technical institutes within six
years of the founding of the Columbia Library School of Economy. These programs were
established by Mary Wright Plummer at Pratt Institute (Brooklyn) 1890; by Alice Bertha
Kreoger in 1892 at Drexel Institute in Philadelphia; and in 1893 by Katherine Lucinda
Sharp at Armour Institute in Chicago. (Roy, 1998, p. 8)
Training programs multiplied to include summer programs and continuing courses supplied by
varying organizations, which would eventually result in a call for a more uniform approach to
library education.
After about two decades of library education as other areas of study like nursing and
social work were undergoing general evaluation, the Carnegie Foundation commissioned a
41

survey on the status of library education. Charles C. Williamson was appointed by the foundation
as chief investigator to carry out the research. Between 1919 and 1921 Williamson made fifteen
site visits to institutions and collected data through correspondence and interviews with librarians
(Roy, 1998). Williamson’s results, published as Training for library service: a report prepared
for the Carnegie Corporation of New York in 1923 found a lack of uniformity in the programs:
some were too long or short in duration, faculty were unprepared and less than half of the library
school students has college degrees. Overall, Williamson found that library education to that
point in time was too rudimentary and preoccupied with the everyday mechanics of library work
with no attention to philosophical underpinnings of the profession (Quinn, 2014). In Shera’s
(1972) discussion of the effects of Williamson’s report on library education in the USA in his
The Foundations for Education for Librarianship, he quotes directly some of Williamson’s
arguments about what his investigations found:
Each of the two general types of library work, which may be called “professional” and
“clerical” demands general education of different grades and vocational training quite
distinct in character and method….Professional training calls for a broad, general
education, represented at its minimum by a thorough college course of four years, plus at
least one year of graduate study in a properly organized library school. For the clerical
work of libraries, training may consist of a general education of high school grade,
followed by a comparatively short period of instruction in library methods combined with
sufficient practice to ensure proficiency and skill in clerical and routine work…Library
schools should confine themselves to training of the professional type. Training of the
clerical type will be provided through the so-called training classes conducted by
libraries. (p. 238)
Williamson’s Report, as it has come to be known, set the stage for the foundation of professional
library education and its link to the accreditation process that has maintained to the present.
Simultaneously, in an effort to oversee some of the professional requirements and ensure that
they were matches for the needs of the professional library education in library schools, the
American Library Association Committee on National Certification and Training was formed to
endorse standards.
With changing rhetoric about the status of the professional librarian and the affiliation
with universities, the first graduate school for librarianship was established by the University of
42

Chicago in 1928. Following a trajectory of the four year undergraduate liberal arts program,
then unto one year of graduate studies, this became the ‘norm’ within the USA as the
professional requirement. Later, Joseph L. Wheeler’s Progress and Problems in Education for
Librarianship (1946) “indicated a need for a fresh approach to library administration and for
research and reorganization of the library science curriculum to relate to the needs of the field”
(Jackson, 1982, p. 528). To encourage potential librarians to take up graduate studies in the
profession, the Carnegie Corporation made funding available in 1926. Further monies was made
available by the US government for the training of library personnel after World War II as part
of the funding for the operations of public libraries. The passing of the 1965 Higher Education
Act provided additional funding avenues for the education and training of librarians. It also
provided funding for research and demonstration projects that enhanced library services. As
Miles Jackson (1981) observed in his essay for the International Handbook of Contemporary
Development in Librarianship, the graduate degree in library is still considered the standard
professional degree for the practice of (and employment in) librarianship.

Some societal

changes had consequences for library schools in the 1980s. The closure of USA library schools
was based on declining enrollment in programs and waning interest in librarianship. Library and
Information programs discontinued at the time include the University of Chicago, which closed
in 1991, and Columbia University in 1992 (Quinn, 2014).
Library Education in the United Kingdom
“Formal education for librarians, however, remained an essentially American
phenomenon until after the First World War” (Feather & Sturges, 1997, p. 264). In the United
Kingdom the training of professional librarians continued an apprentice-ship like system until the
formation of the Library Association in 1877 and its pursuit and establishment of formal training
for UK librarians. The Library Association’s examination and registration system was developed
in 1885 and became the norm. The establishment of the School of Librarianship at University
College London (UCL) in 1919 was the first formalized, full-time program in the United
Kingdom (Feather & Sturges, 1997, p. 265). With funding supplied by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust, it remained the only program until 1946, when the Library Association arranged
for the establishment of five schools for librarianship. After WWII, library education at the
college level started to grow with the curriculum planned by the Library Association, which also
conducted the examination processes required. Further changes were made to the Library
43

Association’s syllabus, where ‘full time education and training became the norm’ and the basic
admissions requirements of the host universities were adopted. From the late 1960s, the focus of
the Library Association started to change, shifting toward the role of accrediting library
education programs rather than administering examinations and creating curricula. In 1992 when
polytechnic and a smaller number of higher level colleges gained university status, this further
changed library education. “The change placed education firmly in a more research-oriented
environment and the syllabus became to an increasing extent modular in its structure” (Feather
and Sturges, 2003, p. 382). Additionally, curricular content was changing. More variety was
added, influenced by changing labor market needs and ‘the development of institutional profiles
for attracting students.’ Library education at the undergraduate and graduate level is described
by Feather & Sturges (1997) as generic in the sense that professional librarians were being
educated to take positions in any type of library; special, public or academic. With the impacts of
technology and the general incorporation of the subject area of Information Science into
librarianship since the eighties, education for librarianship has had to change to incorporate those
influences. “Information science education has to a large extent been integrated into the library
schools in Britain, although it is the subject of specialist courses as well as being part of the
generic professional programmes” (Feather & Sturges, 1997, p. 266).
Development of the Department of Library Studies at the University of the West Indies
A combination of influences made it clear that there needed to be a place where
professional library education could be acquired in the English speaking Caribbean. Librarians in
the region had long concluded that a dependable supply of professionally trained library staff
was needed for the competent and effective performance of library services in the territory. Any
type of organized professional training would have to take into consideration the specific context
and the needs of the varying library services of the English speaking Caribbean. Additional
influences came into play, such as the changes to the 1964 curriculum of the British Library
Association that required residential study at British library schools. As stated by Yvonne V.
Stephenson in World Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science, “Professional librarians
in Guyana were trained exclusively in the United Kingdom, the United States or Canada, until
the Department of Library Studies was established at the University of the West Indies in 1972”
(Wedgeworth, 1993, p. 333), and as Collings noted the cost of such an endeavor was
‘considerable.’ This effectively limited library education to a few and also influenced the acute
44

shortage of professional staff needed to manage public libraries. Keresztesi (1977), in his thesis
suggests that setting up a library school in the region was also influenced by the changing
political climate of the time. Many of the nations were looking towards Caribbean autonomy
with regards to their political and economic identity, and in 1958 the Federation of the West
Indies was created, although dissolved in 1962.
In 1962 Jamaica and Trinidad gained full independence. In the realm of culture, the
founding of the University of the West Indies in 1948 had marked the beginning of the
education of a new intelligentsia on native ground. The libraries on its campuses on the
islands as well as in the mainland countries of British Honduras and Guyana had been
growing, increasing the demand for professionals to service them. (Keresztesi 1977, p.
195)
The same argument could be applied to the growing establishment of public library services and
developing discussions concerning national libraries across the region. With the growth of
compulsory education towards the extension of free secondary education after independence, the
public library system was seen as both, spatially and resource-rich support for this new group of
students. Additionally, as the penchant for looking to build new independent nations with strong
national identities and an educated population flourished, tertiary education was highly
encouraged, with thoughts of public libraries playing a supporting role.
With the final closure of the Eastern Caribbean Regional Library School in Trinidad and
Tobago there were ardent discussions about the need for a university based program in the
Caribbean through which professional degrees could be attained. A proposal was made to the
University of the West Indies in 1962, “detailing the urgent needs of the rapidly developing
library services in the region—public, academic and special—and requesting initiation of the
degree program” (Collings, 1975, p. 129). This first go round to the university passed but was
refused by the University Grants Council due to a lack of funds, and “for six years University
authorities tried to secure the enabling funds from foundations and various philanthropical
organizations but their efforts did not bear fruit” (Keresztesi, 1977, p. 196).
In 1968 the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization sent a
consultant to Jamaica at the behest of the Jamaican Government, who had been asked by the
Jamaica Library Service, to conduct a survey of the library services and the possibilities for a
library school in the region. Professor J. Periam Danton of the School of Librarianship,
45

University of California, Berkeley visited Jamaica, and between June and September of 1968,
consulted on the proposal that a school for library education be set up at the University of the
West Indies. Within the overall research directed by Danton’s comprehensive look at the various
types of libraries existing in Jamaica, he conducted an analysis of the overall staffing needs for
the available libraries against expected international library services, the empty postings waiting
to be filled and the growth of all areas of library services as time passed. Taking into
consideration population growth and growing educational needs for the newly independent
nation’s developing economy Danton stated,
The number of librarian posts under present circumstances is bound to increase. The
number will increase because of the marked developments at all levels of education
discussed at the beginning of this report. The number will also increase because
numerous libraries, like those of ministries and governmental agencies, and the teachers’
colleges, will sooner or later find it necessary to employ librarians. (Danton, 1968, p. 35)
Danton further expanded on the status of the librarians employed in institutions in Trinidad and
Tobago and Jamaica and their growing needs. Although taking the two largest island nations as
an example, Danton emphatically stated the need for a program to serve the entire Englishspeaking Caribbean,
The present needs and the needs of the immediate future of libraries of Jamaica alone
would almost certainly warrant the establishment of a school on the island
…but…substantial need and potential demand clearly exist elsewhere in the Englishspeaking Caribbean. There is real evidence that some recruits from these areas would be
attracted to a good school in Jamaica—or probably anywhere else in the Englishspeaking Caribbean. The firm conclusion, therefore, is that strong need and demand to
exist. (Danton, 1968, p. 36-37)
Results of his research came down decisively on the side of establishment a library education
program in the English speaking Caribbean. A five year grant was offered by UNESCO, and the
University of the West Indies agreed to ‘accept and supplement’ the funding for the
commencement of a library education program on site. The amount of funding was differently
noted as four years in Collings’ Library education in the English-speaking Caribbean that
“UNESCO agreed to provide assistance for four years starting in 1971, in the form of the
services of two full-time faculty members, thirty regional scholarships to assist students within
46

the area to attend the school and small grants for equipment and secretarial services” (p. 2). The
total funds designated by UNESCO amounted to $526,940, obtained through the United Nations
Development Program (Keresztesi, 1977). In April 1971, the Grants Council of the University of
the West Indies approved the establishment of a library school and agreed to assume full
financial responsibility for the program once the UNESCO funding ceased. Dr. Dorothy Collings
was recruited as the new director and lecturer for the program.
Born in Connecticut in 1911, Dr. Dorothy Collings, nee Williams grew up in New
England, a child of Jamaican-born parents who had immigrated to the USA and eventually
settled in Connecticut where they were proprietors of a hotel. She received her undergraduate
degree from Hunter College in 1932, and a B.S.L.S from Simmons College in 1933. She
matriculated at Columbia University where she received her MLS in 1936 and then went on to
receive a Ph. D. from the University of Chicago in 1947. Her dissertation was entitled, The
treatment of the second Roosevelt Administration in three popular magazines (Jackson, 2001).
Dr. Collings worked at various academic institutions throughout the USA during her career
including, Atlanta University, Fisk University, and North Carolina Central University, as the
Dean of the School of Information and Library Science between 1946 and 1947. 7 Collings also
worked with the New York Public Library’s Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture as
a cataloger between 1939-1940, and then again in 1948 as the Curator for six months. 8 As Chief
of the Documentation Center for UNESCO, Dr. Collings went to Paris to head this department in
1948. Additionally, she was also posted to Egypt and worked in other Middle Eastern, African
and European countries between 1948 and 1955. After returning to New York City in 1956,
Collings transferred to the United Nations headquarters to become the Chief of the Educational
Liaison Section, Office of Public Information (Jackson, 2001).
Collings was later to be described as ‘no better ambassador’ in the publication, Record of
Tributes to Doctor Dorothy Collings by former colleagues, and representatives from library
associations and other library-oriented international organizations that had worked or been aware
of Dr. Collings’ stellar career. Furthermore, Collings was an early visionary in the effort to
launch issues in Comparative Librarianship in the ‘mainstream’ of the USA’s LIS curriculum.
She taught classes of that nature at Columbia University’s School of Library Service and also at

7
8

http://www.nccuslis.org/digitallibrary/about_us.html
http://archives.nypl.org/scm/20769

47

the University of Denver. Prior to the commencement of classes, to raise the profile and attention
for the new library school, Dr. Collings travelled through the Caribbean region contacting
government officials and professional circles, recruiting students, appearing in public,
and speaking on the radio and on television. She proceeded to form an eleven-member
Advisory Committee on Librarianship of broad representation to serve as a link between
the University and the profession, particularly with regard to training needs, field work
facilities and the recruitment and placement of students. (Keresztesi, 1977, p. 199-200)

The teaching of classes for the inaugural program of the Department of Library Studies,
under the Faculty of General Studies of the University of the West Indies at the Mona Campus in
Jamaica, commenced in October of 1971 with an enrollment of 30 students from Antigua,
Barbados, Dominica, Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. With a focus on the concerns
specific to the histories and influences of the Caribbean two levels of study were offered. The
first was a three-year undergraduate degree which resulted in a Bachelors, and the second,
planned to start in 1973, a post-graduate diploma.
In all courses, special attention is paid to the conditions, needs and interests of the
countries and peoples of the Caribbean, and to the impact of these factors on library
programs and development in the region. At the same time every effort is made to assist
students to understand trends and developments in the international setting and a
comparative approach to the subjects offered will be undertaken as fully as is feasible.
(Collings, 1975, p. 131)
According to Keresztesi (1977) the first cohort of students admitted to the bachelor’s program
had demonstrated a competency in a foreign language and had prior experience in library work.
Fifteen of the total of 25 students9 held UNESCO scholarships the first year, and in the second
year 31 of the 71 enrollees received UNESCO funding. Monies also came from the governments
of Trinidad and Guyana, the Jamaica Library Service, and the British Development Division in
the Caribbean (Keresztesi, 1977, p. 199). The department was initially housed temporarily in the
Institute of Education but eventually moved to its own new two-story building that housed ‘the
offices and classrooms and a laboratory and model reference library.’ Faculty consisted of eight

9

This sum is a reference from Keresztesi, whereas Collings and other authors have quoted the initial class as
having thirty students.

48

professors at the inaugural term, three from Canada, four from Britain and one from the USA.
Reading material for the courses was described by Kereszteski as having a ‘British orientation’.
Of the 140 items, 60 came from Britain, 41 from the USA, two each from France and
Scandinavia, and one from India. The first year’s curriculum was a broad-based liberal arts
approach with only one year-long library science class offered. As the student moved into the
second and third year, the required classes focused more on a library orientation, taking into
consideration the student’s intended specialty. Elective courses also included a specialized
English course to help develop communication skills (Keresztesi, 1977).
Supervised field work over a six-week period in an approved library was a required
component and “is of special importance here in view both of the scattered island geography of
the Caribbean and the paucity of professionally trained librarians in the region” (Collings, 1973,
p. 15). Compulsory fieldwork remains an important part of all the degrees offered. Study trips
and field work were stressed. Students were encouraged to complete the supervised during the
vacation periods, and were required to submit periodic evaluations of the field experience, while
their supervisory authorities reported on their performance. If field-work was not suitably
completed, no degree was conferred.
Intertwined within the Bachelor programs providing instruction for professional
librarians, a special focus was also given to the education of school librarians. “The most viable
solution to the shortage of professionally skilled librarians was to recruit practicing teachers and
offer them intensive training during summer vacations” (Keresztesi, 1977, p. 204). The summer
training ran over two consecutive years for five weeks at a time. The first summer program
consisted of 20 participants (Keresztesi, 1977). Librarians who had received their training and
certifications as Associates or Fellows of the Library Association were encouraged to participate
and “the Department developed a flexible program enabling them to earn a bachelor’s degree in
library studies in two years through a policy of exemptions. The curriculum was designed to
make it possible for them to pursue the first year studies at any of the outlying campuses of the
University. Only for the second year was residency at the Mona Campus mandatory”
(Keresztesi, 1977, p. 203).
Present Status of the Program
The issue of the department’s directional path for the future has been raised given the
influences of information science and the digital revolution, which continue to change how LIS
49

educational content is conceived and delivered. Carroll, Kerr, Musa and Afzal in their
publication, Commonwealth of uncertainty: How British and American professional models of
library practice have shaped LIS Education in selected former British Colonies and Dominions
(2013) discuss LIS education at the Department of Library and Information Science as structured
on competing models of moving from a former British model to an American model. Moving
from the traditional apprenticeship model with examinations as a focus, the graduate degree is
fast becoming the norm as students look to the possibilities for employment in the USA and
Canada. “However, with increasing cultural and economic relationships and travel between the
US and Jamaica, North American standards and practice have led to major changes over the last
30 years” (Carroll, Kerr, Musa & Afzal, 2013, p. 125). Over time the curriculum has been
revised, first by the influences of professors from the USA who became involved with the
department through funding opportunities from the Organization of American States and
Fulbright, and secondly from the interest in international accreditation.
The department currently offers both undergraduate and postgraduate studies. There are
two undergraduate qualifications, which include a Bachelor of Arts in Librarianship and a
Bachelor of Arts in Information Studies, both requiring the completion of 90 credit hours. The
Bachelor programs are three years in duration. Minor undergraduate qualifications can be
acquired through the completion of 15 credit hours from two levels of class selections. From
1973 to 1989 the Department of Library Studies offered a twelve-month Postgraduate Diploma
program, which has since changed to a fifteen-month program that leads to a Masters of Library
Science (Feather & Stuges, 2003). Masters-level qualifications now consists of four degrees; a
Master of Arts in Library and Information Studies that commenced in 1998 and is intended for
graduates who already have the undergraduate degree in Library and Information Studies; a
Master in Library and Information Studies; a Master of Arts in Archive and Records
Management; and a Master of Philosophy in Library and Information Studies. The Masters of
Philosophy was instituted in 1996 and is obtained through research and presentation of a thesis.
There is also the opportunity to extend this degree into a PhD.
Intertwined within the programs providing instruction for professional librarians, a
special focus is also given to the education of school librarians. In 1998, there was the
introduction of a Bachelor of Education (School Librarianship), offered jointly with the
Department of Education (DLIS Departmental Handbook, 2013-2014). Furthermore, the
50

program has offered continuing education courses for library and information professionals. As
the interest in Archives has grown, so too has the need for trained professionals and that subject
area has been added to the curriculum at the Department of Library and Information Science. As
of 2016 a ‘Programme in Archives and Records Management’ is being offered at the
postgraduate level. For the 2016/2017 academic school year the program is active and the site’s
e-brochure indicates classes available both face to face and online (Department of Library and
Information Studies, n.d.).
Over its 46 years in existence, the Department of Library and Information Science has
had the following 10 Heads of Department: Dr. Dorothy Williams Collings (1971-1974), Frank
Hogg, (1974-1976) Dr. Daphne Douglas (1976-1980) & (1982-1993), Dr. Hazel Bennett (19801982), Ms. Stephaney Ferguson (1993-1997), Mr. Ownali Mohamedali (1997-2000), Prof. Fay
Durrant (2000-2005) & (2008-2011), Dr. Cherrell Shelley-Robinson (2006-2008), Dr. Paulette
Kerr (2011-2015), and Dr. Paulette Stewart (2015-) (DLIS Departmental Handbook, 2016-2017).
The department consists of eight faculty members, nine adjunct professors and a six-person
administrative staff (DLIS Departmental Handbook, 2016-2017). The number of graduates from
1971-2000 totals 655, for both undergraduates and graduates (Mohamedali, 2004). As the
department continues to focus on the Caribbean needs for librarianship, and actively promotes
this focus, a small thing like the inclusion of the flags of each nation featured on the
department’s website helps to promote regional cooperation. Regional cooperation is also
pronounced in the celebration and conference held to honor the department’s 40th anniversary in
2012 (Department of Library and Information Studies, n.d.). At this event, past Heads of the
Department, members of the Advisory Board, in addition to past graduates from the 70s, 80s and
90s were honored. In 2014 a regional workshop was held in Castries, St. Lucia entitled, New
Directions in Library Services for Information Professionals in the Caribbean (DLIS
Departmental Handbook, 2015-2016).
In the spirit of academic competitiveness, the Department of Library and Information
Science offers various awards to its undergraduate and graduate students. There are seven awards
for undergraduates that include the Alumni prize for Best Grade; COMLA Prize for Best Grade;
Amy Robinson Prize; Daphne Douglas Prize; Gloria Baker Award; Hazel Bennett Prize and
Faye Durrant Award. A Dorothy Collings Prize is awarded to the best grade for graduating
undergraduate and postgraduate students. The Stephaney Ferguson Award is awarded to a
51

student for the Best Grade in LIBS6901 – Trends and Issues in Library and Information Work
and a Sonia Black award for best Grade in ARCM6004 – Records Management in the Digital
Age (DLIS Departmental Handbook 2016-2017). A professional student organization for
budding librarians exists as the University of the West Indies Library and Information Student
Society (UWI-LISS). 10
Influence of ICTs
At the time of Dr. Dorothy Colling’s presentation in 1972 at the international library
conference co-sponsored by the Jamaica Library Association and the Ministry of Education,
Libraries and the Challenge of Change, she noted in her paper that, “in the years since WWII,
the vast changes which have transformed the world in the political, economic and social fields,
together with the technological advances which have occurred simultaneously, have resulted in
an unprecedented expansion in the provision of needed library and information services and in
changing patterns of library development” (Collings, 1975, p. 135). Her observations, pertinent
to those thirty years after WWII are a mirror for the technological developments in ICTs that
have taken place since the inception of the Department of Library Studies at the University of the
West Indies, which is now known as the Department of Library and Information Studies.
With all the issues that can affect the Caribbean region, particularly the English-speaking
Caribbean one has to maintain a sort of two-headedness with regards to providing the appropriate
library education for students in the region. The DLIS at the University of the West Indies
continues its work to educate future librarians fully aware of local and international changes as
evidenced in their statement from the department’s student handbook:
In order to achieve its mission the Department has developed a curriculum reflective of
what is internationally recognized as the essential/core areas of library and information
education and at the same time, it gives due recognition to the Caribbean. To ensure its
continued relevance to the needs of the profession, the Department regularly evaluates its
curriculum taking note of global trends and issues and seeks to constantly incorporate
these developments in the programmes. While every effort is made for students to
understand trends and developments within an international context, in all course
offerings, the Department pays special attention to the social and developmental needs,
10

This website is associated with UWI-LISS but has not be updated since 2015.
https://www.facebook.com/UwiLibraryAndInformationStudentSocietyliss/

52

and interests of the people of the Caribbean, thereby grounding the programme firmly
within a Caribbean context. (DLIS Departmental Handbook, 2016-2017, p. 3)
As technological developments with ICTs have influenced society in general, library services
and the practices of professional librarianship have also changed the delivery of education for
librarians both locally and internationally. With the ability to deliver instruction over geographic
and time differences in real time or, retrospectively as saved content, and with more material
available digitally, universities are now accepting the distance learning options open to students.
With regards to the Department of Library and Information Studies at the University of the West
Indies Carroll, Kerr, Musa & Afzal (2013) have observed, “Given the growth of information
technology, the Department introduced new courses to reflect the trends” (p. 127). The
department now offers three of their four postgraduate degrees both face to face and through
online instruction. Additionally, the department maintains a website at,
https://www.mona.uwi.edu/dlis/ and a Facebook presence at,
https://www.facebook.com/DLISUWIMona/

53

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Conclusion
As stated from the introduction of this thesis, a uniform coverage of LIS education in the
English-speaking Caribbean has some difficulties in being completely comprehensive given the
varying historical trajectories of each island nation. With the inception of colonialism and
capricious exchanges-political and economic- between a ‘mother-nation’ located elsewhere, the
influences of slavery as the main mode of labor and the economic drive for transplanted
merchants, made for a meandering line of development for most of what has become the main 18
nations associated with the English-speaking Caribbean. With the mix of peoples moving
through these nations carrying ideas and trends formed in the ‘motherland’ and its extended
relationships to similarly minded countries, libraries as a form of education outside of the
classroom setting has influenced the push for trained and competent library staff, and has been a
staple from the inception of subscription libraries through to public library services within the
English-speaking Caribbean. Early on, expatriates were the main ‘librarians’ all coming from
abroad and prior to national independence, regional training was executed through “on the job’’
in apprentice-like situations or through correspondence via the Library Association in Britain.
The limited few who could go abroad went to study at significant cost.
While educating future librarians about librarianship in the Caribbean, whether graduates
remain or travel out and in the region, attention to the variegated ways library service developed
must be a constant reminder, as on a more macro level, history has not been a straight line of
existence with the neat compilation of document, bureaucratic structures and the consultation
process between the hierarchical arms of municipal and governmental institutions and the public
has showed to have impacted the development of free public library services in the Englishspeaking Caribbean. Such was the case where it took fourteen years from the availability of
funding from the Carnegie Corporation to the Castries Town Board of St. Lucia to have the
library finally built and opened (Hinds, 2016). In more contemporary times, Ackbarali (1992)
discusses the protracted discussions and negotiations that went on throughout Trinidad and
Tobago’s NALIS project, which was eventually shelved. Funding has repeatedly been a concern,
particularly for smaller nations, both for the vagaries of their economic markets and the attention
54

of their governments. It was also an issue that plagued the early subscription libraries. It had
been earlier noted that in order to push forward public library services, funding would have to
come from external forces and that perception has proved true over time. It was also highlighted
in Hockey’s report regarding the inception of the Central Library Scheme, that in some cases,
once public libraries started under the funding streams of the scheme were transferred to the
respective governments they could sometimes see a lack of attention to maintenance. The ECRL
was an early example, as was the Trinidad and Tobago Library and some of the libraries on the
smaller island nations, particularly after disasters. Boultbee (1978) raised that same concern in
his discussion of the state of the Bahamian Public Library services and observed, “unfortunately,
no matter how long one goes on listing the attributes of co-operation and resource sharing and
the need for strong legislation and professionally qualified librarians one always comes up
against the same, recurring barrier: a lack of money. Money is necessary for the success of any
scheme, and especially when speaking of the national level, must ultimately come from the
government” (p. 154). Ackbarali (1992) stated the following in her discussion of NALIAS, when
it came time for discussions about funding the suggested building complex to house proposed
national library authority, “Even in the wealthiest nations, governments have a tendency when
funds are scarce to treat library and information services as dispensable items, however critical
they may be to the nation’s productivity” (p. 85). Ballance and Bain (2001) re-iterated
Boultbee’s observation and expanded on the ongoing state of the public library service in the
Bahamas. Grenada and other of the smaller island nations have been facing similar issues with
consistent funding sources the last decade and a half. Additionally, staffing issues continue to
influence the public library services of many of the English-speaking Caribbean.
Other more non-man-made influences like natural disasters, tropical storms, hurricanes
and volcanoes have damaged buildings and their contents as also noted earlier by Ernest Savage
during his travels through the Caribbean. In Monserrat the library’s building was damaged by the
1928 hurricane; the second attempt at forming a public library in Belize, then British Honduras,
had its book stock destroyed by the 1931 hurricane. Ballance and Bain (2001) also describes the
major storms of 1929 that left the population on the Out Islands of the Bahamas ‘battered’. There
was the postponement of the completion of library automation system for the Grenada Public
Library for three years after the country was affected by Hurricane Ivan in 2004 (National
Archives of Grenada, 2014). Additionally, the building housing the Grenada Public Library and
55

the country’s various archival collections has been closed indefinitely with calls from the library
and archives community for attention to the needed repairs to the building and the threat to the
national archival collections housed there. 11 Fire, although a phenomenon that could be
considered in both camps as man-made and as a natural disaster, has proved to be a constant for
some library buildings and even cities of the English-speaking Caribbean. The early rendition of
the Grant’s Town public library in the Bahamas, constructed in 1930, burned in 1942 during the
Burma Road Riots (Ballance & Bain, 2001). Hinds (2016) in her A Carnegie in Castries
mentions the 1948 fire that devastated a large part of the city; one of the buildings being the
library, where thousands of documents were destroyed. Fire also destroyed the main library
building for the St. Kitts and Nevis Library Services in 1982, and more recently, in 2017, the
historic public library building in the Turks and Caicos Islands was ruined.
A major theme that arose was the constant drive by those in the islands who diligently
campaigned for their library services, and in the call for a regional training program. Library
associations of the region, in addition to individual effort and initiative was what was able to
bring the DLIS to fruition through a sustained effort by first gaining the approval from the
University of the West Indies , to eventually finding the funding sources. As the department got
underway, its character was described by Dr. Dorothy Collings as follows,
The fledgling library school at the University of the West Indies has so recently come
into being that it has scarcely had time to take on a character of its own. It appears,
however, to be well within the mainstream of current trends…In terms of historical, it is
not surprising that library education in the West Indies has leap-frogged from in-service
courses and study abroad straight to a university-based professional school—the climate
may be tropical but the pace of a young and vigourous region is swift! (1975, p. 134)
The need for trained staff for libraries has been a constant and under the influences of the British
and American library school models, the establishment of the Department of Library and
Information Science’s main focus is providing education for the contextual needs of the Englishspeaking Caribbean. As the program has grown, following trends both inside and outside of the
region, the department has expanded to accommodate the developments in ICTs and the move,
11

The building was abandoned in 2011 and the following blog post goes into the lack of governmental attention to
the building’s maintenance. https://grenadanationalarchives.wordpress.com/2009/10/23/grenadas-endangeredarchives_p002/

56

internationally towards more online distance education. As the Department’s current mission
indicates, it is “to provide the highest standard of teaching and research to produce information
professionals, well equipped to face the challenges of the dynamic information environment, and
to provide leadership in managing the information needs of the Caribbean for the twenty-first
century and beyond” (Department of Library and Information Studies (DLIS), (2017).
From the initial recommendation of the Central Library Scheme and the inception of
training by Dr. Gordon Stewart to the contemporary work being done at the Department of
Library and Information Science in the University of the West Indies, and that of organizations
like COMLA and ACURIL, regional cooperation continues to be a focused thread for libraries in
the region, the training of staff and the general sharing of resources. As scholarship and research
are becoming more of a focus of libraries, further developments in librarianship in the Caribbean
has now seen the establishment of the publication, the Caribbean Library Journal. The online
journal was started in 2013 and is a publication of the University of the West Indies: “The CLJ is
published annually and contributors are invited to submit new scholarly works such as academic
essays, book reviews and research reports. The Editors are also interested in publications which
incorporate Web 2.0 tools, videos and other innovative pieces.” 12
Recommendations for Future Research
Many issues have come to light during the research process for this thesis but four have
stood out that are worthy of mentioning as possible factors for future study with regards to
librarianship in the English speaking Caribbean. In researching this topic women have been very
prominent as initiators of the need for public library services in the English-speaking Caribbean.
As a group, they have also served in prominent positions as leaders of libraries, library
associations and the one university library education program at the University of the West
Indies. Women were active in library associations and at all levels in the promotion of library
services. It would be noteworthy to conduct a comparative analysis of the ‘female place’ in
librarianship in the English-speaking Caribbean against that of women in the USA and/or
Britain. J.P. Danton in his 1968 report on the library services in Jamaica alluded to the need for
more men in the profession from his observations of what he saw. Danton further goes on to state
in his discussion of the prestige and recognition of a professional degree from a university,

12

https://journals.sta.uwi.edu/clj/index.asp?action=about

57

…would very likely draw at least a few additional men into the profession. At present
there are fewer than five in Jamaica. This has, as one disadvantage, been a salary
depressant, since the young woman, often able to live indefinitely at home, and never
needing to consider the eventual probability of having to support a family, is usually
willing to work for less than a man. Another disadvantage to a profession over 95 per
cent female is the high attrition rate and wastage caused by marriage and childbearing.
(Danton, 1968, p. 38)
A second area that could prove informative concerning library education in the English-speaking
Caribbean regards the graduates of the Department of Library and Information Studies. As stated
in this thesis, a 40th anniversary celebration was undertaken where a sample of graduates over
that period were honored. It would be of some note if a comprehensive research survey was to be
undertaken on the total number of graduates from the department to see if the contextual needs
and focus of the program-the Caribbean context- has proved efficacious for graduates of the
programs. It would also be helpful to know how graduates have fared in their careers with the
education they were given through the Department of Library and Information Studies at the
University of the West Indies. The questions are myriad, did they stay with the profession; were
their studies appropriate for their career path; did the course material prove effective for the
employment they went onto. A comprehensive research study could prove useful to the
department as a tool for future directional planning and also enhance international relationships
with agencies or institutions interested in the efficacy of such programs.
Despite the size and many challenges faced by the libraries of the island nations in the
Eastern Caribbean region, library services are of utmost importance for the continued provision
of information to the population. Throughout the research process for this thesis, the voices in
those areas are as prominent and ‘energetic’ as the efforts described as such by Ernest Savage
when referring to the library associations of Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago. A third area of
research that could prove useful would be a comprehensive analysis of the public library systems
in that region, post-independence to ascertain how the libraries in these countries have fared
since initial establishment of libraries with the assistance of the Carnegie Corporation, through to
current times. Furthermore, investigations of these libraries could encompass the impact of
technological changes with ICTs, the various natural phenomena that can be damaging and how
each country’s library system adapts; being multi-focused institutions-public/national library,
58

historical society, archive; the lack of human and technical resources; preservation issues of
historical material; the lack of government financial support and general apathy (National
Archives of Grenada, 1974). Additionally, as library functions are becoming more
interconnected with archival processes, an oral history would be a positive undertaking. 13 A
fourth area for research would be the development of an across-the-board look at the number of
Carnegie libraries that were built in the English-speaking Caribbean. Broadly, I would propose
an analysis of who, why and how these individual applications were initiated and seen through to
fruition.

13

This suggestion is based on a collection found at the Alma Jordan Library at the University of the West Indies, St.
Augustine. http://uwispace.sta.uwi.edu/dspace/handle/2139/6340 This digital representation is based on an oral
history endeavor: a physical collection of reel films, video tapes and audio cassettes of interviews conducted with
persons of historical importance associated with Trinidad & Tobago. The collection is housed in the West Indiana
and Special Collections Division.