THE USE OF SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS BY SCHOOL LIBRARIANS TO
EVALUATE AND IMPROVE COLLABORATIVE NETWORKS IN THEIR SECONDARY
SCHOOLS: A PILOT STUDY
By
Deborah Rinio, M.S.

Abstract
Social capital, in the form of relationships among teachers, results in sharing information
and resources, which leads to improved student academic achievement. As schools continue to
seek out ways to improve performance, social capital is often overlooked in favor of
development of human capital in the form of professional development and training. Schools that
have implemented collaborative groups have the potential to increase social capital, but often fail
to structure the groups intentionally or evaluate their outcomes.
School librarians in secondary schools often face challenges when it comes to
collaboration. The job of a school librarian is inherently collaborative. To effectively serve the
school’s population, school librarians must understand the needs of their community. To teach
information literacy skills, they must have access to students, typically via classroom teachers.
Not surprisingly, collaboration between teachers and librarians is a major focus of both
professional and research literature, yet librarians report it is one of their biggest challenges.
Librarians are urged to start small, work with the teachers who are willing, and hope that others
in the school will see the value of collaboration; in other words, build it and they will come.
This research sought to determine if school librarians could use social network analysis
as an evaluative and strategic planning tool. This study used a mixed-methods approach in a
three-phase process to collect social network survey data in two secondary schools, develop the
Social Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL) Process, and pilot test the process with
the school librarians in the pilot schools using participatory analysis. Analysis revealed that the
SNASL Process has the potential to enable school librarians to evaluate and improve upon the
collaborative network of their school by identifying individuals in specific role positions and
producing generative insight regarding the structure of the school network.

Chapter 1: Introduction
This research is concerned with collaboration practices between school librarians and
teachers in public schools. The following question guided this work: How can social network
analysis be used by school librarians to evaluate and improve the collaborative networks in their
school? In order to answer this question, a method titled the Social Network Analysis for School
Librarians (SNASL) Process was developed using social network analysis and then pilot tested at
two schools in a mixed methods approach utilizing participatory analysis by the school
librarians.
Statement of the Problem
The ultimate goal of any education setting is to improve student achievement. Research
indicates direct links between teacher collaboration and student achievement (Y. L. Goddard,
Goddard, & Tschannen-Moran, 2007; Ronfeldt, Farmer, McQueen, & Grissom, 2015); as well as
indirect benefits to student achievement through improved teacher self-efficacy (A teachers’
guide to TALIS 2013, 2014) and diffusion of ideas through dense teacher networks (Pil & Leana,
2009).
School librarians have been particularly focused on collaboration for decades. Since the
1960s, professional literature and guidelines for librarians have emphasized collaboration
(Bergen, 1963). Despite this focus in both the professional literature and research, librarians find
collaboration difficult to initiate. One promising methodology is social network analysis, which
enables the school librarian to explore collaboration from a school wide perspective. Social
network analysis as a means of understanding increasing collaboration features prominently in
general educational research but a review of the literature confirmed that it has been mostly

1

overlooked in research specific to school librarians. Utilizing social network analysis, the school
librarian can develop a systematic means of increasing collaboration throughout the school.
In order to determine an efficient and effective process for school librarians to implement
social network analysis, and to determine if the resulting process would lead to the potential for
strategic planning, research was conducted in two secondary schools in a mid-size suburban
school district with experienced librarians that were new to their specific schools.
Rationale
Since the first professional standards and guidelines for the school librarian in 1988, the
American Association of School Librarians (AASL) has included some form of instructional
partnership as one of the roles of the school librarian (American Association of School
Librarians, 2007; American Association of School Librarians & Association for Educational
Communications and Technology, 1988, 1998). Callison (1999) noted that in Information Power
the word “collaboration” appeared over sixty times. In the newest version of the national
standards, “collaboration” appears seventy times (National school library standards for learners,
school librarians, and school libraries, 2018). Not surprisingly, teacher and librarian
collaboration is a main theme in the professional literature as well as research, focusing on: the
role of the librarian as instructional partner (Ballard, 2009; Loertscher, 2014); views of
collaboration (Asper, 2002; Bush, 2003); encouraging teachers to collaborate (Brown, 2004;
Gess, 2009; Hylen, 2004; Morris, 2015); theories of collaboration (Montiel-Overall, 2005, 2008,
2010); impact of collaboration on students (Dadlani & Todd, 2016; Vermillion & Melton, 2013);
and how to collaborate effectively (Buzzeo, 2010; David, 2008; Harvey II, 2008; Husid, 2013;
Johnson, 2010; Lankau, 2015).

2

These authors often cite student learning and student achievement as the desired
outcomes of collaboration. Haycock (2007) stated that “collaboration is the single professional
behavior of teacher-librarians that most affects student achievement” (p. 32). Improving
collaboration in schools, and particularly teacher and librarian collaboration, is of benefit to
students both directly and indirectly (Haycock, 2003, 2007; Houston, 2008; Lance & Loertscher,
2001; Lonsdale, 2003). Several studies support the assertion that teacher and librarian
collaboration improve student academic achievement (Lance, Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell,
2000, 2003; Lance, Rodney, & Russell, 2007; Smith, 2006). Librarians provide expertise in
locating instructional resources, teaching information literacy skills, and engaging in the research
process.
Yet, librarians report that one of the major challenges they face is teacher collaboration.
They complain that “it does not happen often enough, and the collaboration that does take place
many times does not approach a level where the school library media specialist would be
considered an indispensable member of the instructional team” (Cooper & Bray, 2011, p. 48).
The answer to this problem is often tantamount to build it and they will come. Librarians are
urged to start small, work with the teachers who are willing to work with them, continue to
communicate, and hope that eventually the other teachers in the building will see the value of
collaboration (Gess, 2009). Although this is necessary and useful advice, it requires a large
investment in time and energy and has an uncertain result. Some teachers will respond to this
approach, while others will not. Additionally, a librarian that is new to a school may not be fully
aware of the existing collaborative structure of the school. He or she may waste time in
rebuilding relationships with the library that already existed or focus energy in a haphazard way.

3

Although school librarians must reach out to teachers to build collaborative opportunities, this by
itself, without a holistic and systematic approach, offers a murky and unknown result.
A review of the research suggestions that the tools and information provided through
social network analysis offers schools a means of systematically analyzing their existing
collaborative networks. Librarians can then use this information to strategize their collaborative
attempts and better understand the collaborative structure of their building. With a basic
understanding of social network theory and using social network analysis to investigate networks
within a school, a librarian that is new to their building - regardless of their years of experience can quickly get a picture of how much collaboration occurs in their building and establish an
intentional plan for increasing teacher and librarian collaboration that allows them to manage and
leverage their interactions with colleagues.
Librarians without these tools at hand may view collaboration in their school from an
egocentric viewpoint because they know who they collaborate with and who they do not, but
they are likely unaware of all the connections between the teachers in their building, especially in
a larger school. For example, they may not know that the music teacher that they work with
closely does not work with any other colleagues, or that the science teachers they meet with
monthly to share resources work closely together but never in a cross-curricular unit with other
teachers. Of course, this sort of information will be learned naturally over time as the librarian
works with more educators in his or her building; but it is unlikely to be complete and may take
several years of establishing relationships and gathering information. Social network analysis has
the potential to speed up this data-collection process and ensures a greater degree of
comprehensiveness (Cross & Parker, 2004). It also allows other educators in the building,
including school leaders, to benefit from the information.

4

Limitations of the Research
The goal of this research is to outline a process that school librarians can use to evaluate
and increase the quantity and quality of collaboration within their schools. It is important to note
that the process investigated and suggested here is an initial idea based on preliminary data in
two testing sites. Additional testing and research is needed to determine if the process will be
applicable to other schools beyond the initial study population.

5

6

Chapter 2: Literature Review
This research study was informed by theories on social capital, social network theory,
and collaboration. In this chapter, the literature regarding the value of teacher collaboration is
presented and situated within the concepts of human and social capital.
Human capital is the knowledge, skills, and abilities of individuals. Social capital is the
knowledge and resources that individuals have access to as a result of their social networks. In
schools, social capital is developed when teachers collaborate, when they interact with each other
to share information and resources, and benefit from each other’s expertise and experience. The
ultimate goal of any school is student achievement, and recent research suggests that teacher
collaboration in schools and the resulting social capital has just as much, if not a greater effect,
on student achievement than teachers’ human capital (Brownell, Yeager, Rennels, & Riley,
1997; Bryk & Schneider, 2003; Coburn, Penuel, & Geil, 2013; McNicholl, 2013; Moolenaar,
2012; Moore Johnson, Reinhorn, & Simon, 2016; Perry, Phillips, & Hutchinson, 2006; Poulos,
Culbertson, Piazza, & d’Entremont, n.d.; Stoll, Bolam, McMahon, Wallace, & Thomas, 2006).
In other words, as depicted in Figure 2.1, when teachers collaborate, social capital within the
school increases, and as a result students perform better than when teachers work in isolation.

7

Figure 2.1: Cycle of Student Improvement as Result of Teacher Collaboration in Schools.
The Value of Teacher Collaboration
Leana and Pil (2006) found that social capital in the form of the structure and content of
relationships among teachers significantly predicted student academic achievement. Goddard
(2003) found a positive relationship between high levels of social capital and student academic
achievement in mathematics and writing on the state standardized tests. Furthermore, Papa
(1990) provided evidence that workers further improve skills acquired through training when
they later communicate that knowledge to others. In all of these studies, researchers
demonstrated that social capital in the form of instrumental relationships resulted in positive
change.
The Teaching and Learning International Survey (A teachers’ guide to TALIS 2013,
2014) examined collaborative activities of teachers worldwide and found that teachers that
engage in collaboration at least five times per school year had higher rates of self-efficacy and
job satisfaction, which has a positive association to student achievement. Collaboration was
defined as taking part in collaborative professional learning, engaging in joint activities across

8

age and grade groups, observing and providing feedback on each others' practice, and teaching
jointly in the same class.
One of the first studies to demonstrate a direct link between teacher collaboration and
student achievement was Goddard, Goddard, and Tschannen-Moran’s (2007) study; in their
study of elementary schools in a large Midwestern district, they found teacher collaboration to be
a statistically significant predictor of student math and reading achievement. Ronfeldt, Farmer,
McQueen, and Grissom (2015) found that schools whose instructional teams engage in a higher
quality of collaboration also reflect higher achievement scores in math and reading. Such
communities of practice have been shown to improve student academic achievement. But
implementing them alone is not enough to ensure improvement. One must be able to assess those
communities of practice to determine if they are achieving their intended effect. Examining
communities of practice through the lens of social network theory allows organizations to
visualize the flow of communication among employees. By doing so, they can see where
bottlenecks are occurring, where members of the staff are disconnected from their colleagues,
and where certain individuals bridge the gaps between groups (Cross & Parker, 2004).
Even within an established team of teachers, quality of collaboration can vary. The
quality of the collaboration influences how likely teachers' practices will change and thus student
achievement will be impacted (Ronfeldt et al., 2015). Leana and Pil (2006) echoed this finding in
their study of 88 urban public schools. They found that social capital - the structure and content
of relationships among teachers - was a significant predictor of student math and reading
achievement.
Examining collaboration from a social network perspective means accepting several
assumptions. One assumption is that within relationships among individuals resources, such as

9

information and knowledge, are exchanged. In the classroom, this is evidence in the sharing of
instructional resources and approaches to overcome classroom challenges (Degenne & Forsé,
1999). Strong group ties between teachers result in greater student achievement (Pil & Leana,
2009), because strong relationships facilitate and enhance the flow of resources and ideas.
Vertical ties, such as those between administrator and teacher, do not affect the teacher team but
result in student gains for those individual teachers who have strong relationships with
administrators (Pil & Leana, 2009).
Pil and Leana (2009) also found that more-able and less-able teachers benefit from strong
group ties in different ways. Students of more-able teachers performed significantly better when
those teachers had strong horizontal ties. Less-able teachers benefited most from dense ties,
meaning that all the teachers representing that educational focus are members of the community
of practice; for example, all 4th grade teachers. In this way, the diffusion of ideas through the
group is consistent and less-able teachers are sure to become aware of the teaching practices of
their more-able peers. Additionally, density of connections increases trust, which makes
willingness to be vulnerable to others more likely.
Another benefit of effective teacher communities of practice is the spillover effect
described by Pil and Leana (2009). Although individual teacher educational attainment has no
direct impact on student achievement, Pil and Leana (2009) found that within teacher teams,
educational attainment had a positive association with student growth. Having a teacher with a
higher educational degree in an effective team creates spillover that impacts the teaching of the
other team members, regardless of their own formal education. In a similar study of five biology
teachers engaged in collaborative professional development, McNicholl (2013) found that the
presence of teachers of varying levels of knowledge and expertise was significant. These more

10

educated teachers often serve as informal mentors, providing instructional advice and new
resources to less experienced teachers.
Collaboration Between Teacher & Librarian. Just as quality of collaboration within
schools varies, so to does collaboration specifically between librarian and teachers. Constantly
changing priorities, increasing demands on teachers’ time, lack of training, and insufficient time
to collaborate can hinder even the most willing participant. Studies show a considerable
difference in the social network structure across schools (Daly, Moolenaar, Bolivar, & Burke,
2010; Moolenaar, 2010; Spillane & Healey, 2010). For example, Moolenaar’s (2010) research
into 53 Dutch elementary schools showed variation in teacher interaction across schools from
10% of teachers with relationships in some schools to 77% in others.
The difficulties involved in collaborating in schools can be exacerbated when crossdisciplinary teams such as teachers and librarians begin working together, or when teachers
move from sharing resources to co-teaching (Zaretsky, 2007). Issues such as dividing
responsibilities, respecting each other’s expertise, and scheduling become more prominent.
When librarians and teachers work together, it is not uncommon for librarians to allow the
teacher to focus on content knowledge while the librarian handles process skills. Unfortunately,
many teachers view process skills as less important; they are rarely tested and appear as a small
portion of overall standards and curriculum objectives. Thus, when time grows short, they will
minimize the time available for process and remove much, if not all, of the librarian's
contribution to the class (Achterman & Loertscher, 2008). Librarians, on the other hand, view
process skills as a core skill and necessary for developing life-long learning and believe inquiry
can and often should be the vehicle for content rather than an addition to that content (American
Association of School Librarians, 2007).

11

In fact, librarians report that one of the major challenges they face is teacher
collaboration; “it does not happen often enough, and the collaboration that does take place many
times does not approach a level where the school library media specialist would be considered an
indispensible member of the instructional team” (Cooper & Bray, 2011, p. 48). The answer to
this problem is often tantamount to build it and they will come. Librarians are urged to start
small, work with the teachers who are willing to work with them, continue to communicate, and
hope that eventually the other teachers in the building will see the value of collaboration (Gess,
2009). Although this is necessary and useful advice, it requires a large investment in time and
energy; by itself, without a holistic and systematic approach, it offers a murky and unknown
result.
Montiel-Overall (2005) proposed four stages or models of collaboration specifically with
the librarian teacher collaborative relationship in mind: coordination, cooperation/partnerships,
integrated instruction, and integrated curriculum. For Montiel-Overall, coordination might
involve sharing of resources, time, space, or students. The model denotes the idea of efficiency
to remove duplication of efforts, but in general requires minimal communication between
partners. Cooperation describes relationships with members who come together to share funds,
space, collections, shared time, and students (Fitzgibbons, 2000 as cited in Montiel-Overall,
2005). Cooperation involves setting goals; it reflects a philosophy of teamwork, however it is
also associated with terms like help, aid, and assist, which denote one-sided relationships. In the
librarian teacher relationship, the librarian is often a support to the teacher in a cooperative
model of collaboration. However, this model can also be similar to a multidisciplinary unit where
each teacher is responsible for the content that is specific to his or her area of expertise.

12

Integrated instruction, on the other hand, requires “shared thinking, shared planning, and
shared creation of integrated instruction” (Montiel-Overall, 2005, para. 1). Collaborators work
together toward a shared goal, each an equal partner with defined roles and shared responsibility.
An integrated curriculum model requires that the librarian work with each teacher each year to
plan, implement, and evaluation instruction integrated with library curricula.
Unfortunately, without effective social networks teachers often do not view the librarian
as a suitable co-teacher. In a study of college faculty, Christiansen, Stombler, and Thaxton
(2004) found that faculty often view librarians as a last resort for gaining access to research
materials, rather than an expert on the research process; and do not view librarians as experts in
their own fields of expertise and therefore not credible sources for consultation.
Librarians experience this disconnection directly in the form of interactions with faculty
that reflect a perception that librarians are in a service position to faculty, and also indirectly
through students who bring assignments that reflect out of date library practices. This
disconnection interferes with the librarian's' ability to effectively serve students. Although
faculty also are aware of the disconnection, they do not view it as problematic (Christiansen et
al., 2004). The disconnect between faculty demands for student information literacy skills, the
perception of the importance of those skills, and belief that librarians are or are not experts in
these skills is troubling and must be overcome for students to benefit fully from librarian
expertise and effectively master information literacy skills.
Montiel-Overall (2010) found similar results in her study of teachers and librarians in
elementary schools. Teachers did not understand the role of the librarian, their areas of expertise,
or how to effectively engage in collaborative teaching. Without effective trust, communication,
awareness of each other’s expertise, and time to engage in inquiry around instructional problems,

13

true collaboration cannot be effective. Social network theory offers a mixed methods means of
analyzing the current state of collaboration in a school. With social network analysis data and
reflection, librarians can work strategically to improve collaboration and thereby improve
teaching practice and student academic achievement.
The Importance of Trust
Trust is essential to effective collaboration. In Chicago, an examination of reform efforts
demonstrated that the level of trust among teachers was the distinguishing characteristic between
schools that thrived under reform and those that did not (Bryk & Schneider, 2003), indicating
that trust can be critical to effective change in schools. Trust between teachers, and between
teachers and administrators, is so critical to effective collaboration that Putnam (1993, 1995)
refers to trust as "social capital" and describes it as an asset that can be accumulated and spent.
Communities that rely on and use trust accumulate more social capital and those that do not use
trust diminish social capital.
In developing and maintaining social capital, two types of relationships are generally
defined: instrumental and expressive. Instrumental relationships are work-related and ultimately
aimed at achieving school goals, such as instructional reform. When teachers collaborate, they
are engaged in instrumental relationships. Expressive relationships are not directly work-related
and place the individual's interests above that of the organization; for example, friendship or
personal guidance. Expressive ties are generally agreed to be more durable than instrumental ties
(Moolenaar, Sleegers, & Daly, 2012), but both are necessary for school improvement.
Necessary to establishing and maintaining both expressive and instrumental ties is trust.
Trust is typically defined as a judgment that another party will not act opportunistically, is honest
in their negotiations, and makes a good faith effort to fulfill commitments (Tschannen-Moran &

14

Hoy, 2007). Improving instructional practice requires the acknowledgement of problems and
areas of improvement. In trusting environments, teachers are more likely to disclose more
accurate, relevant, and complete information regarding problems. However, when distrust is
present, especially when one individual holds more power within the organization,
communication becomes an effort to protect one's personal interest rather than presenting
accurate information and sharing ideas. In her study of 45 schools in an urban school district,
Tschannen-Moran (2001) found that trust was a statistically significant predictor of
collaboration. The higher the levels of trust were, the higher the levels of collaboration. Both
trust and communication are vital to successful collaborations. Each party needs to trust that the
other will do their job effectively and communicate consistently in order to avoid duplicating
efforts and ensuring they are meeting student needs (Wood, 2012).
Unsurprisingly, collaboration and trust are also cyclical in nature. Trust breeds more
effective collaboration and collaboration results in greater trust between colleagues. These
relationships affect teacher’s social capital (access to knowledge and resources) and directly and
indirectly affect student performance. In other words, the stronger the networks within a school,
the greater the collective responsibility, collective efficacy, trust between administrators and
teachers, and teacher influence on decision making, all of which positively impact student
achievement (Moolenaar, 2012). Prior research suggests the trust generated in professional
communities results in a culture that supports risk taking (Bryk & Schneider, 2003; Louis,
Marks, & Kruse, 1996; Newmann, King, & Youngs, 2000). Being able to collaborate effectively
requires trusting relationships and the need to feel safe (DeLuca, Bolden, & Chan, 2017).
Although it is not required for colleagues to become friends, understanding each other on a more
than instrumental basis by having non-work connections helps to make people seem

15

approachable and safe and helps build respect among colleagues (Abrams, Cross, Lesser, &
Levin, 2003; Brown, 2004).
Rich and frequent communication also fosters trust. Increased communication provides
more information resulting in a better assessment of another person's abilities, intentions, and
likely behavior. Additionally, it helps in developing shared vision, goals, and language. Face-toface interactions are stronger than other forms of communication, but what’s most important is
that one communicates frequently. This increases the information available for others to assess
one’s abilities, intentions, and behaviors (Cross & Parker, 2004). It is important, however, not to
merely seek a connection, but to ensure that connection is a quality one (Abrams et al., 2003).
This means that interactions should include both a personal and professional component, both
expressive and instrumental qualities. Although every organization has a different culture and
norms of behavior, it is often important for individuals to catch up on a personal level before
engaging in work-related dialogue. Not every encounter needs to follow this format, but it is
important that the relationship as a whole include both parts for the most efficient development
of trust.
Further, teachers who have closer and more expressive relationships and interact
frequently are more likely to reveal vulnerabilities and problems they experience in the
classroom (Pil & Leana, 2009), thus opening themselves up to risk, but also to potential reward
through evaluating and seeking solutions to problems and thus improving their practice. Zaretsky
(2007) describes how practitioners engaging in collaboration for the first time initially
experienced conflict as programming decisions were made unilaterally rather than with
consultation from stakeholders and team members. As time went on, participants confronted

16

these issues and engaged in healthy confrontation to improve their working relationship and
partnerships.
It is human nature that it takes time to develop trust. In any given situation, individuals
must decide whether to trust another person. That decision is based on prior interaction and the
current level of trust that exists. In other words, a person is much more likely to trust someone
they know well than someone they do not. And yet, we are all aware of situations where
someone was swindled or conned; where does trust come into play here? Coleman's formula for
the trust relationship can help with understanding the reason, and how this might apply to the
school setting. When a decision is made whether to trust someone, the difference between the
absolute potential loss and the difference in gain between one friend and another is examined
(Coleman, 1990). For example, if Teacher A is known for being disorganized, Teacher B may
choose to go to Teacher C instead, even though no prior relationship exists between Teacher B
and C. The potential loss in consulting Teacher C is low, and the potential gain compared to
Teacher A is high.
In respect to the teacher and librarian relationship this emphasizes the importance of the
school librarian getting to know the staff so that trust can be developed. Further, it demonstrates
that people are willing to work with someone they do not know well (and thus cannot trust fully)
if the potential gain is higher than working with someone they do trust. This means if the
librarian has demonstrated him or herself as an expert, it is more likely that staff will work with
him or her since the potential gain of working with an expert who is not a friend is higher than
working with a friend who is not an expert. Of course, many of these decisions are made
subconsciously and how we weigh perceived trust and perceived gain or loss from an interaction

17

is relative and personal. However, by understanding how these decisions are made, librarians can
help shift things in their favor.
Similarly, as information becomes increasingly accessible through websites, databases,
and internal networks, the quality of the resources plays a role. The principle of least effort is
often applied, where information seekers go to the most easily accessible source regardless of its
quality. However, when a decision is being made about which person to seek information from,
quality does play a role (Cross & Parker, 2004). Thus, it is critical for the librarian to be
trustworthy as an effective and reliable source of information.
Another aspect of trust is the fidelity demonstrated between words and actions. If
someone says they will do something and then does not, or does something else, it is likely one
will question their dedication to the others’ interests. This is more complicated than it appears on
the surface, however, especially in the busy environment of a school. This is not just about words
matching deeds, but expectations matching deeds. That is why when a school librarian
collaborates with a teacher, it is important to lay out the expectations. Who will accomplish what
task and in what timeline? Once those expectations are set down in a clear way, it is important
that they be enacted in order to build and keep that trust. A teacher that asks the librarian to
prepare an online resource guide for a class project and finds when the class arrives that the
guide was never finished is less likely to work with that librarian in the future, as he or she is
now deemed untrustworthy. Of course, all of these concepts are relative. The first few
collaborative interactions with a colleague are much more important than after several years of
working together. This is not to say that one should prioritize new colleagues above colleagues
with more established relationships, but that once trust has been built it is more likely to

18

withstand some pressure. A colleague that has a negative first impression has a much harder time
gaining traction.
However, it is just as important to understand the skills and expertise of the others in the
school environment. One of the most overlooked dimensions of trust within school districts is the
ability to accurately determine who knows what. The lack of awareness of each other’s skills and
expertise is one of the major hindrances to individuals working together. Even if all other aspects
of the organization foster and support collaboration, people will not connect on new projects or
to solve existing problems if they do not have an understanding of the other person's knowledge
base (Cross & Parker, 2004). Administrators can overcome this by grouping together individuals
who do not normally collaborate when engaged in specific projects; this gives them the structure
and time to get to know each other's skills and personalities.
Once they have this information, teachers can use it when opportunities or problems
arise. Teachers need to know who has relevant expertise in order to know who to reach out to for
their particular problem. Administrators cannot just present one-fits-all solutions; rather each
situation needs to be examined independently and solved as fits its particular circumstances.
Having this information can help determine who to seek for each task and therefore has a
positive impact on collaboration (Cross & Parker, 2004).
Furthermore, it is important that individuals not only identify what they know to others
within their organization, but also set boundaries on the limits of their knowledge. Although this
can be a challenge, it is important not to let the pressure to be an expert in all areas drive one to
answer questions with more confidence than they should. The possibility of incorrectly
answering a question can create a wedge in the trust that exists. This can be especially difficult
for librarians due to the expansive nature of their job, which involves not only information

19

literacy instruction and library operations, but also technical support and instructional
technology. It is important that people clarify what they know, and what they are willing to find
out. For example, if a teacher came to the librarian with a DVD stuck in a computer disc drive,
the librarian might say something like: "I know a few tricks but I'm not sure exactly where the
problem lies. I'll look into it for you and let you know." Rather than saying, "Sure. I'd be happy
to fix that for you." The first is very clear about the librarian’s intentions and does not offer false
expectations.
The Role of Homophily in Trust. Because of the historically isolated nature of teaching,
creating a culture of sharing can be difficult due to the inherent risk involved in sharing (Gajda &
Koliba, 2008). In her study of collaboration between teachers of gifted students and school
counselors, Wood (2012) found that each party believed they needed to understand what the
other did in order to collaborate. Similar to the case of school librarians, teachers respect school
counselors and think their work is important, but view them as possessing a completely separate
set of skills; the lack of perceived similarity results in greater risk, and so collaboration is rarely
initiated or sustained. This principle, that individuals tend to form relationships based on how
similar they are, is called homophily. Research shows that the more similar individuals are, the
more quickly resources will travel between those individuals; and the more dissimilar individuals
are, the less likely they are to share information (Coburn et al., 2013; Cross & Parker, 2004;
Moolenaar, 2012).
Teachers tend to seek out others like themselves (e.g., same grade-level, same subjectarea, similar levels of experience) to mitigate this risk, but schools and districts can influence
whom teachers perceive as similar via organizational structures (Coburn et al., 2013). In their
examination of a failed mathematics reform effort in a public school district, Coburn et al. (2013)
found that district policy influenced tie formation (i.e., formal relationships) between teachers. In
the first year of the initiative, when teachers discussed mathematics in their traditional grade-

20

level groups, their tie formation was based on proximity and homophily. In year 2, when the
district changed the structure of the meetings, proximity and then expertise became the most
important quality for new tie formation. Teachers sought out other teachers because they
identified new experts in their social networks based on groups formulated by the district. Had
the teachers not been asked to interact with new groupings, is it likely that homophily would
have continued to be the predominant method for social connections and teachers would have
had less access to social capital.
Studies of collaborative inquiry that involved diverse groups of educators indicate the
value of bringing diverse viewpoints and experience to the table (Borgatti & Cross, 2003;
Cantalini-Williams et al., 2015). In a study involving teachers, administrators, school board
members, and university partners working together to solve instructional challenges, CantaliniWilliams et al. (2015) noted that teacher participants were able to learn from each other and felt
more supported in their mission by having both other teachers and administrators participating in
collaborative instructional-focused dialogue. The structural diversity of the team was cited as one
of the main advantages of the study, bringing diverse viewpoints and experiences to the table and
enabling participants to discuss future possibilities and the potential impact of their work on
others in the school and district.
Physical proximity is an important dimension to why individuals work with each other.
Physical proximity increases the likelihood that people will have chance meetings that enable
them to learn about each other, develop bonds, and thus enable intentional encounters in the
future (Borgatti & Cross, 2003). Although proximity alone is not a determinant, it increases the
likelihood that people will have chance meetings that enable them to learn about each other,
develop bonds, and thus enable intentional encounters in the future (Borgatti & Cross, 2003). In

21

a school setting is it particularly important to pay attention to this. No matter how a school is
organized (grade level, subject area, etc.) there will always be teachers that are physically farther
away from each other than others.
Whether via proximity or other variables such as workload and flexibility of scheduling,
accessibility is a critical factor of how people make choices regarding who to consult for
information and resources (Borgatti & Cross, 2003). Administrators can mitigate the effect of
proximity by structuring professional learning communities and other school events so that
teachers from diverse backgrounds and physical locations have an opportunity to work together
and get to know one another.
Communities of Practice or Professional Learning Communities (PLCs)
Frequent interaction can also help build trust. Thus, schools and districts can create
environments that breed that interaction through professional development or meetings that
encourage teachers to engage frequently and in sustained ways, as well as by arranging physical
space such that teachers interact with colleagues more or less frequently based on proximity.
Focusing teacher communities of practice on a particular topic or idea, such as an instructional
reform, may also impact whom they seek out in discussing instruction (Coburn et al., 2013).
Communities of practice are groups of people that share a concern or passion around a
topic and who deepen their knowledge of the topic through ongoing discussion and inquiry. It is
important for successful school wide collaboration that all teachers be part of a community of
practice and those communities of practice have strong ties between them. Having a shared
purpose and engaging in a cycle of inquiry ensures that teachers store, retrieve, examine,
transform, apply, and share knowledge and experiences about practice for a shared purpose. It is
through this process that a group of teachers in a school becomes a professional learning

22

community. Having that shared purpose functions as a glue that holds each team together in their
cycle of inquiry, and focuses dialogue, action, and evaluation (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder,
2002).
Teachers in schools with strong professional communities are more likely to make
changes to their instruction practice (Louis & Marks, 1998; Louis et al., 1996; Newmann et al.,
2000) and experience increases in student learning (Lee & Smith, 1996; Louis & Marks, 1998;
Yasumoto, Uekawa, & Bidwell, 2001). The access to support and resources that students possess
as a result of social network connections can facilitate their success in school. Furthermore, the
literature reveals that professional development in schools is most effective when teachers
conduct professional inquiries into their own practice via teacher teams or professional learning
communities (McNicholl, 2013; Moore Johnson et al., 2016; Perry et al., 2006; Stoll et al.,
2006). School administrators can form these communities of practice purposefully to accomplish
a specific goal, or allow them to develop organically, as teachers tend to gravitate toward others
that share similar interests or have similar backgrounds.
Allowing teachers the time to collaborate with each other also allows them to situate new
information into the schema of their existing beliefs and forge shared values amongst their
colleagues, resulting in supportive risk taking and transformative practice (Tschannen‐Moran,
2001). In a case study in Canada, Zaretsky (2007) found that even though teachers noted that
their collaboration resulted in more questions and tensions as participants shared different values
and beliefs, they found that it was necessary to gain a better understanding of issues in education
and their own practice. In her two-phase study of middle schools, Pounder (1999) found that
schools where teachers worked in grade-level teams were more likely to be aware of student
circumstances that might affect learning, such as family concerns and educational histories, and

23

have a greater professional commitment than non-teamed teachers. Engaging in dialogue around
instructional practices also allowed teachers to learn new strategies, reaffirm their practice, and
think more deeply about their practice than they would have otherwise.
Unfortunately, schools and districts rarely provide teachers enough opportunities to
engage in substantive dialogue with other teachers regarding instructional practice (Tschannen‐
Moran, 2001). Insufficient time is often cited as a barrier to implementing collaboration.
However, in a study of six high-poverty schools in Massachusetts, Moore Johnson et al. (2016)
found that collaboration reduced the stress of teachers, even when they complained about the
pace of their work. These six schools had all achieved the state's highest performance rating,
based on student growth and the narrowing of achieving gaps in student subgroups. The schools
followed various models including traditional, turnaround, and charter schools. In all six schools,
Moore Johnson et al. (2016) found that collaboration was emphasized and teachers found it to be
beneficial, despite the workload. Although collaboration took a substantial amount of time,
teachers believed it improved their teaching.
Nevertheless, most public schools in the United States have focused on the human capital
of teachers - their competencies and experience - rather than social capital - the resources and
information accessible to them through their social networks (Pil & Leana, 2009). This emphasis
stems from the emphasis by government, business, and school leadership that there is a need for
highly qualified teachers. However, far less agreement exists on what qualifications teachers
should possess and how those qualifications can be attained (Darling-Hammond, 2004). To
respond to the perceived inequities, policy makers have called for increased professional
development, mandatory testing of teacher subject knowledge, and improved training for

24

aspiring teachers (Schneider & Keesler, 2007), putting human capital at the center of school
reform efforts.
Within this environment, building and maintaining the relationships necessary for
effective collaboration is not an easy task. Poulos et al. (n.d.) recommends that school leaders
establish structures for school-wide participation in collaboration; model constructive feedback;
prioritize a cultural fit when hiring; and create opportunities for teachers to work together. With
competing priorities, full schedules, and varying needs, it can be difficult for school leaders to
invest their time in improving staff professional relationships. Many districts have implemented
communities of practice or professional learning communities (PLCs), discussed in more detail
later in the chapter, as a means of supporting teacher collaboration, but setting aside time alone
for teachers to talk will not ensure that these PLCs are effective at improving teacher practice or
increasing student achievement (McNicholl, 2013).
To study the impact of social capital (the access to information and resources) on schools,
and determine whether PLCs are effective, numerous education scholars have adopted a social
network perspective to study teacher collaboration (Daly & Finnigan, 2010; Moolenaar et al.,
2012; Penuel, Riel, Krause, & Frank, 2009). This method enables the researcher to see the
patterns of social relationships among teachers and to determine the degree to which
collaboration takes place. Although now common in the field of education, this approach has
been overlooked in the specific realm of school librarianship; only one study has used social
network analysis as a methodological approach (Schultz-Jones, 2009).
And yet teacher and librarian collaboration is a main theme in school librarianship
literature and research, focusing on: views of collaboration (e.g., Asper, 2002; Bush, 2003);
encouraging teachers to collaborate (e.g., Brown, 2004; Hylen, 2004); theories of collaboration

25

(Montiel-Overall, 2005, 2008); and how to collaborate effectively (Buzzeo, 2010; Harvey II,
2008; Husid, 2013; Johnson, 2010). Research on how to improve collaboration primarily focuses
on observing successful collaboration and extrapolating best practice from these observations
(e.g., Brown, 2004; Haycock, 2007). These sets of advice often treat the librarian as an isolated
actor. They overlook the other existing relationships in the school and the culture of
collaboration that may or may not exist in that school. Social network theory offers a lens
through which to examine collaboration in schools by examining the relationships between
teachers in schools. This information can then be used to improve collaboration and by extension
student learning.
Social network analysis enables the librarian to improve collaboration by not only
examining one’s personal network, but the network of the school as a whole and the relationships
between individuals. In the only study that utilizes social network analysis in specifically
examining the role of the school librarian, Schultz-Jones (2009) found that establishing and
maintaining a social network within the school environment is critical to the school librarian,
regardless of length of service. Visualizing the social connections within the school allowed the
librarians in her study to think strategically about building relationships, as opposed to focusing
on a specific subject area - a common trend in school librarianship.
By embedding teachers’ individual behaviors into the pattern of their interpersonal
relationships, social network analysis captures collaboration in a way that other methods cannot
and facilitates the researcher’s generative insight in a way that can result in transformative
change. It allows the analyst - in this case the school librarian - to notice characteristics of the
entire school network (e.g., density) as well as characteristics of subgroups and individuals
within the network (e.g., math department is highly collaborative but isolated). This new source

26

of information enables the librarian to become strategic about his or her own collaborative
practices and improve collaboration school-wide.
Chapter Summary
The intent of this study is to answer the research question: How can social network
analysis be used by school librarians to evaluate and improve the collaborative networks in their
schools? Social network theory relies on an understanding of social capital. In this chapter, an
introduction to social capital and its role in teacher collaboration was presented. Prior studies that
build on this foundation, explicitly or implicitly, were presented that demonstrate the value of
teacher collaboration, the importance of trust, and the role of communities of practice both for
schools in general and particularly in regards the teacher and librarian relationships. The existing
research demonstrates the necessity for strong social networks and sufficient social capital for
strategic improvement of collaboration and by extension teaching practice and student academic
achievement.
To fully address this question however, a more extensive and purposeful dive into the
theoretical foundation of social capital and social network theory is required. In the following
chapter, the theoretical framework for the research is presented: more completely defining social
capital, explicating social network theory, and defining and explaining individual network
positions. This information will provide a necessary foundation for the reader to better
understand the methods and findings.

27

28

Chapter 3: Theoretical Foundation
In this chapter, social and human capitals are contrasted to highlight the opportunities and
limits of ongoing teacher and librarian collaborative practice at a particular place. Existing
models of school improvement often focus on human capital - the knowledge, skills,
experiences, and abilities - possessed by individuals. Schools and districts provide professional
development to teachers in an effort to increase their human capital. Some research suggests,
however, that social capital - the information and resources accessible through one’s
relationships - has just as much, if not a greater, effect on student achievement than teacher
human capital (Bryk & Schneider, 2003; Daly et al., 2010; Leana & Pil, 2006; Pil & Leana,
2009).
Drawing from both human and social theories of capital, social network analysis is a
means to help generate strategies for deeper collaboration inside a school. A social network
analysis affords a contrast between collaboration as current practice and collaboration as
potential practice. For example, through a social network analysis, the potential for collaboration
is highlighted so that the individual librarian can not only assess his or her own current
collaborative potential and that of the school as a whole, but also develop ways to increase such
social capital within that school, thereby potentially increasing collaborative capacity throughout
the system. Analysis of how capital is dispersed enables both insight into current practice and
future strategic action.
Social capital as a concept is not inherently good or bad; it is a tool (Putnam, 2001).
Social network analysis can reveal existing power structures and the flow of power within and
between organizations. For this reason, the exchange of information and resources can be used to
improve the availability of social capital through a school, just as it can be used to maintain and

29

reinforce existing power structures that limit social capital. This is not to say that collaborative
relationships do not possess power structures, but rather that the flow of power within networks
is not the focus of this research. For the purpose of this research, social network analysis is used
to examine the collaborative structures within individual schools. Additionally, it is assumed that
educators in a school have positive intentions and use social capital to improve student learning,
growth, and working conditions.
Within this chapter, content is organized from broad to narrow in scope: beginning with a
definition of social capital, moving to the study of social capital through social network theory,
and finally to an examination of the specific roles individuals play within social networks.
A Note on Language Used in this Dissertation
The language of social network analysis stems from the communication discipline. Terms
like boundary spanner, information broker, peripheral person, and central connector are not value
judgments. Used out of context, these terms can reduce the individual to their role in information
flow rather than the more complex reality who they are and their role in the organization. I chose
to use the terms of social network analysis, including words that reduce an individual to a
specific set of characteristics because these terms reflect the flow of information and resources
throughout the network, and the ultimate goal of social network analysis is to map those patterns.
The school librarian (or administrator or teacher) who uses this methodology to identify
role positions in the network will have a more complete awareness of each individual’s
contributions to the network than is present in the anonymous version presented in this research,
because they have context and experience with the various members of the network. Using social
network analysis enables the school librarian to distance themselves from their preconceived

30

notions about each individual’s role in information flow, while still viewing them as a whole and
complete individual with multiple contributions to bring to the network.
One’s position in the network may increase or decrease their ability to disseminate or
obtain information, but this positioning does not make that individual’s role in the network any
more or less valuable. For example, a peripheral person, who exists on the edges of the network,
may be positioned there due to his or her role as an expert in the community. Operating on the
fringes allows this person to work undisturbed. Their connection to the remainder of the network
may exist through a boundary spanner that facilitates the flow of information between the
peripheral person and the remaining network. It is only through additional exploration beyond
social network analysis visualizations that one can determine whether an individual’s position in
a network is of benefit, detriment, or neutral to the greater whole.
The school, like any organization, is an information network. The identification of
individuals in these positions within the network allows the viewer to see specific junctures
where information and resources travel in recurring patterns. By identifying the individuals that
hold these positions, the school librarian can better see those patterns of information flow and
have the potential for leveraging that information flow to improve social capital throughout the
network.
These patterns of information and the communication that enables the flow between
individuals and groups is a source of power because “communication, and particularly socialized
communication, the one that exists in the public realm, provides the support for the social
production of meaning” (Castells, 2009, p. 238). This type of power suggests that influence is
not relegated to the authority figure in a particular network due to his or her position, but is a

31

feature of the network that any individual can possess based on access to and redistribution of
information and resources within that network.
Defining Social Capital
Social capital's principal theorists (Coleman, 1990; Putnam, 1995) define social capital as
"features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and networks, which act as resources for
individuals and facilitate collective action" (Lochner, Kawachi, & Kennedy, 1999, p. 260). For
example, in a network of friends where everyone is connected to everyone else, all members tend
to exchange information and resources, trust each other, and share similar attitudes (Coleman,
1988). In contrast, individuals with no ties to each other have difficulty exchanging resources
and ideas because there are no established ties from which those ideas and resources can flow.
One way to distinguish between social capital and human capital is that human capital is a
quality possessed by an individual; whereas, social capital is a quality created between people
(Burt, 1997). In the world of education, as with many other fields, social capital can be more
concretely defined as access to valuable resources (e.g., lesson materials, information) through
one's social relationships with others.

32

Figure 3.1: Visualization of human and social capital.
Figure 3.1 visualizes the distinction between human and social capital. Human capital is
internal to the individual and consists of the knowledge, experience, abilities, and skills that one
possesses. Social capital is the access we hold to each other’s human capital, as well as the forces
our social relationships exert on us, and the opportunities they provide (Burt, 1980). Within a
school each teacher possess human capital in their educational background, training, knowledge,
skills, and abilities. When those teachers collaborate, they benefit from each other’s human
capital via social capital. For example, librarians are research experts and often have access to
research tools such as inquiry process models. A librarian that does not collaborate with teachers
still possesses knowledge and resources about research, but the teacher does not benefit from that
knowledge. When the teacher collaborates with the librarian on a research project, he or she
gains access to the knowledge and resources of the librarian.

33

The foundational theorists (Burt, 1995; Coleman, 1990; R. D. Putnam, 1993) define
social capital as a function of social structure producing advantage. Putnam (1993) specifically
defines social capital as "features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and networks, that
can improve the efficiency of society by facilitating coordinated action" (p. 167).
As other researchers and theorists have taken up a social capital framework and
approached the idea from different perspectives using various forms of evidence, they all operate
under the assumption that "better connected people enjoy higher returns" (Burt, 2000, p. 347). In
the educational community, this concept can be seen in the work of Pil and Leana (2009), who
found that teachers that work with more highly educated teachers will experience benefits in
their own teaching practice and student academic achievement, regardless of their own level of
education, or human capital. In other words, the human capital of the teacher has a higher benefit
to the school when accessed via social capital than it does when the teacher works exclusively in
isolation.
However, public schools often place a stronger emphasis on human capital than social
capital (Pil & Leana, 2009). The concept of human capital (Becker, 1964) has played a central
role in models of individual and organizational performance since their introduction. Human
capital is defined as “an individual’s cumulative abilities, knowledge, and skills developed
through formal and informal education and experience” (Leana & Pil, 2006, p. 1103). Human
capital leads to superior performance, productivity, and career advancement for individuals.
Coleman (1988) theorized that for human capital to benefit the collective, it must be
shared with others through social interactions. He provides the example of a family, whereby a
parent may have extensive human capital yet does not spend time with their children (Coleman,
1988). If the human capital of the parent (his or her knowledge, experience, skills, and abilities)

34

is not employed at home - in other words, if the parent is absent or does not engage with the
child - then that human capital is mostly irrelevant to outcomes for the children. The social
capital, in the form of relationships between the parents and children, is what determines the
value of that human capital. Without the relationships between individuals, human capital is
available only to the individual that possesses it. However, when individuals come together, they
can access each other’s human capital. This accumulation of capital, along with the social forces
exerted by those relationships, is social capital.
Human capital, when isolated from social capital, makes it possible for the individual
who invests in it to reap its benefits. The individual who seeks additional schooling or training
reaps its benefits in the form of more satisfying work, a higher-paying job, or a greater
understanding of the world. Although an individual may benefit from social capital, the
individual's actions have an impact on all those in the system. Coleman (1988) provides the
example of a school parent group. For example, imagine a group with a large population of
parents who do not have full-time jobs outside of the home. If one heavily involved parent
decides to take a full-time job and remove him or herself from the parent group as a result, that
specific parent may not feel a loss, but the withdrawal of the loss of the individual constitutes a
loss to all the other parents whose associations and contacts were dependent on them.
This same experience can occur if a heavily involved teacher retires. It can take several
months, or even years, to regain the bulk of the knowledge lost when a well-connected individual
leaves an organization (Coleman, 1988). When a librarian retires or moves schools, he or she
does not take the books and databases with them, but the knowledge of how to access those
resources, the most efficient way to find information. Another librarian may learn this type of
information quickly, but it takes longer to develop the social relationships that enable that

35

information to be widely shared. It is the networks of relationships within the school that enable
the information to flow between individuals.
The school librarian, or any school leader, who understands these distinctions between
human and social capital and the impact of each on the system as a whole is equipped to put this
knowledge to use in educational initiatives, such as professional development, since public
schools often focus their professional development on providing information and developing
skills in the individual to increase the effectiveness of the teacher in his or her classroom. If the
administrator recognizes the value of social capital, he or she will ensure that staff and faculty
build relationships with each other as well. Then, when one teacher receives training he or she
will be more apt to share it with the other teachers. They too will then benefit from the training
and their students by extension. As teachers begin to implement the new ideas, resources, or
strategies in their classrooms, the social networks that enable them to discuss their challenges,
successes, and questions will positively impact the entire school. If instead, those teachers are
isolated and do not communicate, their human capital may still increase, but the social capital of
the school will not. In fact, Daly, Moolenaar, Der-Martirosian, & Liou (2014) compared teacher
social capital and human capital through interim student assessments and found that teacher
social capital had a greater influence on student success on interim benchmark exams than
human capital did, suggesting that teachers’ social networks are more important for student
achievement than their individual experiences or educational attainment.
Public school districts often invest money and time in training employees and seek to hire
those with the strongest credentials. For example, many school districts incentivize more
education by paying a higher wage for more educated teachers. This human capital is valuable to
an organization, but only to the extent that there exists social capital - the information and

36

resources accessible through one’s social contacts (Coleman, 1988). If a single employee gets
training on a new technology, but does nothing to share that knowledge with his or her coworkers, the effect of that training is minimized.
In the context of the school library, social capital enables the teacher to gain information
and resources from the librarian. Those resources may include the physical items of the library,
but are also the librarian’s expertise in information literacy skills and pedagogical practices. One
of the roles of the school librarian is to build a collection of resources and curate that collection.
With modern technology, many teachers do not need to interact with the librarian to access
library materials; they can find them through the library or school district’s website. However,
the teacher that includes the librarian in their social network benefits from the human capital of
the librarian, as well as the physical and electronic resources that the librarian manages. Seeking
the librarian’s expertise adds to the teacher’s social capital; adding to the resources and
information that the teacher has access to and thereby creating an advantage for that teacher. The
best teacher may not necessarily be the one with the most education or experience, but the one
with the greatest social capital. In fact, Pil & Leana (2009) that human capital of teachers
benefits other teachers more than it benefits the individual who possess the capital, helping to
demonstrate that it is not the human capital of the individual that is most important but the social
connections within the organization that define success.
Referring back to Figure 3.1, the teacher that effectively builds a social network within
his or her school that includes the librarian, increases his or her knowledge, abilities, and skills,
and also now has the capacity to transmit that knowledge through the network. Social capital
research in education has demonstrated that teachers who have greater access to social capital typically measured as the quantity and quality of their social relationships - are in a better

37

position to implement new initiatives and demonstrate innovation (Coburn & Russell, 2008;
Frank, Zhao, & Borman, 2004); achieve higher student achievement (Moolenaar, Sleegers, &
Daly, 2011; Pil & Leana, 2009; Spillane & Kim, 2012) and experience greater quality of the
resources that flow through their networks (Carolan, 2014). In contrast, teachers who possess a
large amount of human and physical capital in the form of experience, education, and personal
materials, but very little social connections are unable to access the information and resources
that are possessed by their colleagues. Their potential for gaining access to information and
resources is reduced due to their small social network. The teachers with large social networks,
by having a higher quantity and quality of relationships, have a larger knowledge network to
draw from when necessary, and can thus improve their teaching practice through access to
information and instructional resources from their colleagues.
Social Network Theory
Social capital theory foregrounds how relationships are necessary to access the
information and resources possessed by others; in contrast, social network theory reveals the
patterns in the social structure that enable social capital to exist (Burt, 2000). In education, social
network research has been used to examine leadership practices, professional learning
communities, teacher collaboration, reform implementation, and teacher induction and retention
(Moolenaar, 2012). Social network theory is a mechanism for understanding the social capital
relationships between embedded individuals in a particular system. Thus, it can be used to better
understand how librarians and teachers collaborate. It is important, however, in order to get a full
perspective, to examine both the whole system level and also the component parts within that
system.

38

One of the advantages of social network theory is the dual nature of the study of the
individual and the group. Therefore, it is uniquely situated for the study of the librarian in the
greater context of the social relationships within the school. Social network theory offers a
holistic perspective in which macro level actions produce micro level interactions and vice versa
(Coleman, 1990). One of the most well known examples of the micro level influencing the
macro level is the "tragedy of the commons" in which the grazing of each farmer's sheep reduces
the availability of pasture for the sheep of other farmers. Another example that teachers can
relate to is union-management bargaining. Although there are only two actors arriving at a
decision, the outcome impacts all parties in the system. In other words, the transition of
information from the macro level to individual actors can affect the actions they take and thus
affect system behavior. Another reason for examining a system from a macro-level perspective is
the fact that actors are not fully in control of their activities, but find some of those activities
partially or wholly controlled by others. The rules and norms of behavior of an organization are
one such example of this sort of control.
There are three assumptions that underlie social network theory (Degenne & Forsé,
1999): individuals are embedded in social structures meaning that they are interdependent,
resources that flow through a network must do so through interactions between individuals; and
social networks both provide opportunities for and constrain the actions of individuals and
organizations.
The first assumption that individuals are embedded in social structures refers to the fact
that actors are interdependent (Burt, 1980). This social embeddedness in the school environment
is visible in the way that teachers work in various groups, including grade-level teams, subject
departments, one-to-one interactions, and larger structures such as a schools and districts.

39

Acknowledging this interdependence means that changes at one level will impact other levels.
For example, increasing the human capital of teachers by increasing their knowledge will have
impacts on the various teams they interact with, thus improving grade-level knowledge.
The second assumption is that resources flow through a network and are transferred by
social interaction between individuals. This may consist of transfer of information from one
individual to another, or a larger diffusion of ideas throughout an entire school community.
Rogers (1983) defined diffusion as “the process by which an innovation is communicated
through certain channels over time among members of a social system” (p. 5). Rogers’ (1983)
process consists of an individual’s awareness of an innovation, decision to adopt or reject the
innovation, implementation of the decision, and confirmation of the decision. In schools,
teachers routinely exchange instructional materials, ask for pedagogical strategies to overcome
common problems, and gather information from each other on various educational ideas and
opportunities. As they encounter new ideas, they engage in Rogers’ process. Deciding to coteach with the librarian is an example of this process. A teacher must first be aware of the
opportunity, then decide to engage with it or not, implement the decision to co-teach or not, and
then confirm that decision through assessment of student outcomes. Social network analysis can
be used to examine the diffusion or exchange of ideas at an organizational level (Frank et al.,
2004).
Third, the social network perspective acknowledges that social networks both provide
opportunities for and constrain the actions of individuals and organizations (Burt, 1980). In
schools, teachers may benefit from instructional resources and the expertise of co-workers, but
they can only benefit from those resources if they have access to them through their relationships
that are available within their social network. Thus, lack of access to necessary resources may

40

hinder a school’s capacity for improvement. Social networks with strong ties tend to exhibit
norms of behavior. These norms may develop naturally or be crafted intentionally, as a result of
groups working together. In a cohesive group, norms can result in sanctions or rewards for
members of the group. For example, in a school library that loans technology such as computer
carts, it might be a norm that the teacher loaning the equipment returns it in good condition on
time. If the teacher chose not to do this, and the next teacher receiving the equipment receives it
late, the librarian might choose to deny the first teacher the opportunity to use the equipment in
the future. This type of sanction is most effective when it derives from the group as opposed to
the individual. If the teacher using the cart, the teacher who received it late, and the librarian all
have strong ties, the sanction has more weight than if it is purely the librarian imposing a
sanction on the first teacher.
Whole Network Measurements
Most social network studies of the educational environment examine system-wide macrolevel features of the schools, such as the density or centrality of the whole network as described
below. These system-level measurements are useful in examining the change in schools over
time and comparing multiple schools. On the other hand, ego-level measurements - those that
measure the characteristics of a specific individual in the network - enable the researcher to
understand how individuals interact with each other within a network (Coleman, 1990).
Understanding the characteristics of a particular individual can enable the researcher to ascertain
their role in transmitting or receiving information and resources to others in the network.
As a participant in the community, school librarians also gain the ability to understand
their own role in the system and how they interact with individuals and subgroups in the social
network of their schools. By first noticing the characteristics of individuals within the network,

41

the participant researcher can use that information to create a strategic plan to leverage or modify
those characteristics. Nevertheless, examining macro-level characteristics and qualities of social
networks can provide a foundation for understanding how social capital flows within the network
as a whole and within and between network subgroups, which can be useful to the participant
researcher.
Density. The interconnectedness of actors in a network is referred to as the density of the
network; in other words, the ratio of existing ties between team members relative to the
maximum number of possible ties (Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002). A network where every
actor is connected to every other actor would have a network density of 1.0. Figure 3.2 displays
three networks of size six with densities of 1.00, 0.40, and 0.20. This could represent the math
department and science department in a school each had six members. If the math department
had 12 pairs of collaborative ties (density of 0.40) and the science department had six pairs of
ties (density of 0.20), the math department would be considered more dense and therefore, for
our interests, more collaborative.

Figure 3.2: Three networks of size six with densities of 1.00, 0.40, and 0.20.
Unsurprisingly, an individual is more likely to seek someone out when they know how to
gain timely access to the other person and understand his or her level of expertise (Borgatti &
Cross, 2003); getting to know one another increases the likelihood of information and resource

42

sharing. Thus, understanding the density of social networks in schools can be a starting point in
determining the potential for how much information and resources are exchanged, whether
members are engaging in problem solving and dialogue around instructional practices, and the
impact of group norms and sanctions on group members.
Furthermore, teams in which there is a high-density of instrumental ties will have more
information sharing and collaboration, and thus more task completion than teams with lowdensity (Burt, 1997). Low-density teams will be unable or unwilling to exchange information
with each other and may have to rely on individuals that act as brokers to communicate with
disconnected members of the team. Although brokers can be important figures in a social
network, tying together disparate departments or levels of a network, they are not a substitute for
an effective team. For example, a principal might serve as a broker between teachers and school
district administrative staff. It would not be efficient for the teachers within the school to all have
instrumental ties with district staff. Similarly, each department in a school (grade level or
academic unit) is likely to have instrumental ties within the department (e.g., all the social
studies teachers work closely together), but they may also have instrumental ties with other
teachers in the building. In fact, having cross-curricular ties is important to the formation of new
ideas and pedagogical practices (Butti, 2016). Although it is important to have high-density
teams for effective collaboration it is also important to recognize that too many strong ties within
a network may result in losses of efficiency, as members spend too much time maintaining ties
(Burt, 1997).
Closure. Closure is the idea that a group is bounded. In a network with closure, everyone
is connected such that each person is connected to each other person (Burt, 2000; Coleman,
1988). This type of closed group is also referred to as a clique and typically features actors with

43

strong ties. A closed network results in sanctions and opportunity, making it less risky for those
within the network to trust one another and increasing the power of sanctions when one violates
group norms or trust. These norms come about as a means of limiting negative effects or
encouraging positive ones. Sometimes norms occur organically, or sometimes they are
intentionally created and fostered through purposeful action. However, norms are only effective
in a closed system. Take Figure 3.3 for example. In figure 3.3(a), actor A can carry out actions
that have negative or positive implications on B or C. However, since B and C do not have ties to
each other, they cannot combine forces to sanction or reward A, and thus have no power over A
unless B or C alone is sufficiently powerful. However, in figure 3.3(b), B and C can combine
forces to provide a collective sanction or reward. By having a closed system, the members of the
social network can exert more force on the other members.

Figure 3.3: Diagram of closure; Recreation of figure from Coleman, J.S. (1988), p. 106
Strong versus Weak Ties. Both strong and weak ties serve important purposes in a
social network. We tend to have strongest ties with those we are most familiar and most similar
to. As a result, our strong ties - although still very useful - are less likely to present us with new

44

ideas than our weak ties do. Weak ties are more likely to be bridges to socially distant regions of
a network, resulting in new information. Research has demonstrated the value of weak ties in
finding a job (Granovetter, 1973), individual advancement (Burt, 1995, 1997, 2000), and
diffusion of ideas (Granovetter, 1983; Rogers, 1983). “Weak ties may lead to search benefits in a
social network but they may also cause problems in transferring complex forms of knowledge”
(Hansen, 1999, p. 83).
Strong ties, on the other hand, have been shown to be necessary for transferring complex
knowledge across departmental boundaries within an organization (Hansen, 1999) and engaging
in rich exchanges of knowledge (Pil & Leana, 2009). Borgatti & Cross (2003) suggest that
information seeking is dependent on how well a person knows and values the expertise of
another, the accessibility of the other, and the potential costs in seeking information from the
other person. However, strong ties also are more likely to result in constraints as group norms
influence processes and decisions (Coleman, 1990; Granovetter, 1973; Hansen, 1999).
Structural Balance and Homophily
Structural balance is the idea that individuals are more likely to create new direct ties
with friends of friends, and discontinue relationships with friends of enemies and enemies of
friends (Cross & Parker, 2004). Due to this effect, subgroups or cliques will emerge within
schools.
The other reason teachers tend to cluster is the principle of homophily, which states that
individuals tend to form relationships based on how similar they are; such as age, gender, or
educational level. The more similar individuals are, the more quickly resources will travel
between those individuals; and the more dissimilar individuals are, the less likely they are to
share information (Moolenaar, 2012). Teachers are often isolated and autonomous within the

45

school environment. Seeking out others to discuss teaching and learning involves the risks of
violating norms or revealing teaching problems. There is greater perceived safety in
communicating with those who are similar. Research suggests that principle of homophily
shapes teacher networks into relatively homogenous subgroups based on similarities (Frank,
1995; Penuel et al., 2009). People have a tendency to trust those with whom they share
similarities, and to regard those who are members of the out-group with suspicion and with
stereotypes. These types of biases can create and sustain feelings of distrust. Thus, trust is more
difficult to create and sustain in situations of diversity, whether it be diversity of gender,
ethnicity, age, or teaching specialization (Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 2007).
Structural Holes. The disconnections between each team, subgroup, or clique, in an
organization are referred to in social network research as structural holes. Brokerage is the
transmission of information across subgroups. The concept of structural holes is built upon the
idea that social capital is a function of brokerage opportunities and builds on the work of
sociologists that emerged in the 1970s regarding the strength of weak ties (Granovetter, 1973);
betweenness centrality (Freeman, 1978); the benefits of exclusive exchange partners (Cook &
Emerson, 1978); and structural autonomy created by complex networks (Burt, 1980).
The structural hole between groups indicates a place where each group is focused on their
own work and not on working together. This doesn't mean they are unaware of each other, but
information does not flow directly between the two groups. Within each group, there are
typically strong ties, but across groups ties are more likely to be weak. Burt (2000) uses the
metaphor of an insulator for an electric circuit, the electrical current still travels from point A to
point B but in a less directed pattern and perhaps a little slower. It is tempting to view structural

46

holes as a negative thing, a place where groups are not working together. However, they can also
be viewed as an opportunity to broker the flow of resources between the two groups.
Individual Network Positions
One of the hallmarks of social network theory is it’s holistic perspective in which macro
level actions produce micro level interactions and vice versa (Coleman, 1990). One of the most
well known examples of the micro level influencing the macro level is the "tragedy of the
commons" in which the grazing of each farmer's sheep reduces the availability of pasture for the
sheep of other farmers. Another example that many teachers can relate to is union-management
bargaining. Although there are only two actors arriving at a decision, the outcome impacts all
parties in the system. In other words, the transition of information from the macro level to
individual actors can affect the actions they take and thus affect system behavior.
Overall network structure is important for understanding organizational phenomena, but
so too are individual network positions. These positions are related to the different types of
relationships an actor possesses and the amount of those relationships. At the individual or actor
level, the position of an actor within a network can determine whether they have a structurally
advantageous position and thus have greater access to knowledge and resources, or more control
over knowledge and resources (Burt, 1995).
Teachers with high levels of social capital have a greater opportunity to use and expand
that social capital to improve student learning. Therefore, understanding teachers' network
positions may be useful in understanding how resources (knowledge and information) support or
constrain their efforts at improving student achievement (Baker-Doyle, 2011; Coburn & Russell,
2008; Moolenaar et al., 2011; Penuel et al., 2009).

47

There are four network positions commonly referred to in the business community (Cross
& Parker, 2004): information broker, central connector, boundary spanner, and peripheral
people. Each role plays a unique position within an organization. Identification of individuals
within these role positions can be used to strategically improve social capital in the organization.
Boundary Spanner. A boundary spanner serves as a broker, connecting subgroups
within an organization. Librarians fulfill this role naturally, operating on the boundary between
teacher and library. Van Deusen (1996) observed in a case study that the librarian provided
leadership as an “insider/outsider” suggesting a similar role. In this situation, the librarian added
value through her knowledge of quality resources for instruction. However, since she was not a
supervisor, she was a safe source for assistance and information. Since librarians are in a central
and non-threatening position within a school, they are in a unique position to bridge the
structural holes that might exist between departments and grade levels. Bridging structural holes
is important to effective collaboration. A network with distributed expertise and many weak ties
has little redundancy. Information within cliques is often redundant, since people closely
connected to one another tend to have access to the same resources and research has shown that
people rely on previously established communication channels (Hansen, 1999). When structural
holes are brokered, the additional flow of information ensures that both groups have access to the
information flows within the groups. The more structural holes spanned, the richer the
information within the network.
Thus, it is important that brokers exist to bridge structural holes and enable new
knowledge to flow into existing cliques. The broker, often referred to as a boundary spanner,
spans the hole and serves in this role (Cross & Parker, 2004). Enabling cliques with purposeful
information, boundary spanners can improve workflow, since each clique can focus on its own

48

work without the distractions of other needs but can also have consistent information regarding
the other groups. In the academic library, the liaison librarian often serves this role. The liaison
librarian is part of an academic department as well as the library itself. By engaging in both
departments, they can broker information between the two groups ensuring that each group's
needs are met. Although this is not as common within schools in the school setting, it does occur
within departments in a single school or between a school and the district office. A teacher who
is well connected to the district office might hear about new curriculum resources or reform
initiatives in advance of other teachers and can thus spread the information to his or her
department quickly. Librarians can make a point to become this individual by forming the
necessary connections, and thus become more central to the information flow in the school
building.
Central Connector. A central connector is highly sought after and therefore has greater
access to information and social support from the network. In-degree and out-degree are two
important ways that this is described. Others seek actors with a high in-degree out for resources
and knowledge, whereas actors with a high out-degree seek resources from others (Burt, 1995;
Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Those with a high in-degree, by nature of their position, have a
disproportionate influence over others in the network as they have more relationships with which
to access resources (Daly et al., 2010; Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). These individuals tend to be
centrally located in the network and as such, have a greater ability to leverage resources
compared to more peripheral individuals (Tsai, 2001). However, large numbers of direct ties can
also drain an individual’s resources because they require time and effort to maintain (Balkundi &
Harrison, 2006). Furthermore, the social norms present within the group may constrain an
individual’s behavior defined by those ties (Burt, 1995). Therefore, a central connector may be

49

perceived as an expert in the system, but they may also be a bottleneck that is holding up the
flow of resources and information.
Educational researchers often refer to the total or average number of relationships as a
measure of closeness centrality. Another way this is expressed is as the total number of
relationships in relation to the total number in the network (Burt, 2000; Cross & Parker, 2004; de
Jong, Moolenaar, Osagie, & Phielix, 2016). In other words, how close is one person relative to
others in the network. A teacher with a high closeness centrality will have few steps between the
other actors in the network. Being centrally located means that the information a person
distributes will reach the rest of the network more quickly (Freeman, 1978).
Information Broker. Information brokers sit on the shortest path between the remainder
of the network. These individuals disproportionately affect information flow and can be
leveraged to promote connectivity within the network (Cross & Parker, 2004). Since an
information broker is likely to have a large number of ties in the network and also serve as a
bridge between disconnected actors, potential information brokers can be identified using the
broker and normalized broker measurements. Broker is the number of pairs that are not directly
connected, but bridged by the given actor. Normalized broker (nBroker) is the broker divided by
the total number of pairs, or the percentage of pairs for which the actor serves as broker. An
individual with a high broker value has more influence in the network, as they are a pathway for
information to flow amongst members of the network and thus can determine where and when
information flows.
Because of their position in the network, information brokers, like boundary spanners,
also bridge structural holes. However, unlike boundary spanners that link specific subgroups,
where ties are likely to be strong, information brokers link a variety of actors within the network,

50

many of whom may have weak or non-existent ties. This allows them to receive and disseminate
a large amount of information to and from different actors within the network. This combination
of information from weakly connected actors contributes to innovation within the network by
enabling information to flow in ways that it would not without the information broker (Burt,
1995).
Peripheral People. Peripheral people operate on the perimeter of the social network.
They have few ties to the other actors in the network, measured by ego network size (Borgatti et
al., 2002; Cross & Parker, 2004). These individuals may have underutilized skills, expertise, and
unique perspectives that are not being leveraged by the school.
Individuals may be on the periphery because they wish to be there or because they are not
sure how to work their way inside (Cross & Parker, 2004). Identifying these individuals can
allow librarians to form mentoring relationships, introduce them to others, or get them involved
in bigger projects. Identifying these individuals and pulling them into other projects helps the
librarian become a boundary spanner or information broker, a bridge between individuals in the
network, increasing his or her impact and perception of value.
Using social network analysis to identify periphery people is the first step. However,
additional qualitative data is needed to determine why the individual is on the periphery (Cross
& Parker, 2004). Some individuals are on the periphery by choice. Pushing them to be involved
may reduce their morale or reduce their own work effectiveness. It is important to get to know
people to understand these distinctions. For example, if a specialist is too busy helping others,
they may not have the time to stay ahead in their field.

51

Regardless, enabling peripheral people to build more network ties increases the social
capital of the entire organization, as their knowledge and resources become more easily
accessible by other teachers.
Chapter Summary
Utilizing social networks in the form of teacher collaboration has the potential for
improved academic achievement of students and transformative change in schools when
effectively implemented (e.g., Brownell et al., 1997; Bryk & Schneider, 2003; Coburn et al.,
2013; McNicholl, 2013; Moolenaar, 2012; Moore Johnson et al., 2016, 2016; Perry et al., 2006;
Poulos et al., n.d.; Stoll et al., 2006). As a teacher that interacts with students and has the
potential to interact with all other teachers, the librarian has a unique opportunity to impact the
collaboration that occurs within a school.
Social network theory offers a lens through which to examine collaboration in schools.
The school librarian can then use the information generated to improve collaboration at the
individual and systemic level. To determine the effectiveness of this theoretical framework in the
secondary school setting, this study employs techniques based on this theoretical foundation to
identify a process for school librarians to evaluate and examine collaboration in their schools.
This includes identifying and classifying individuals into specific network roles and visualizing
their relationships within the network. With this information, the school librarian can think
strategically about building relationships, leveraging existing opportunities, and building social
capital throughout the school environment.

52

Chapter 4: Methods
The purpose of this research is to outline a process that school librarians can use to
systematically evaluate and improve collaboration between teachers and librarians in their school
by answering the question: How can social network analysis be used by school librarians to
evaluate and improve the collaborative networks in their school? In order to achieve this, two
schools were engaged in a mixed methods pilot study to test the usefulness of social network
analysis to this purpose in a three phase process: Development of the Alaska Teacher Social
Network Survey, Development of the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL)
Process, and pilot testing. This chapter reports on the methods and results of each phase of the
research, and the rationale behind those methodological decisions.
Introduction to the Research Design
The University of Alaska Institutional Review Board approved the research project on
April 11, 2017 titled “Social Network Analysis of Teacher & Librarian Collaboration AK
Secondary Schools” [983929-2] (See Appendix A). As portrayed in Figure 4.1, this multi-phase
mixed methods study made use of an explanatory sequential design using a quantitative survey
followed by a qualitative participatory analysis before final interpretations (Creswell & Plano
Clark, 2011). An explanation of each phase is provided in subsequent sections within this
chapter.

53

Figure 4.1: Research Design

Participants
The study was conducted in a mid-size suburban school district. After district permission
was granted, all librarians and their principals in the district (9 in total) were invited to
participate. Three schools agreed to participate. One of the three was used to field test the survey
instrument. Thus, two sets of social networking data were collected and analyzed. In this
particular district, all certified librarians are at the secondary level, so only middle schools and
high schools were subject to the study.
The school used to field test the instrument is a high school with a student population of
960 (“School enrollment by grade as of October 1, 2016,” 2017). There are 57 teaching staff,
four counselors, and three administrators for a total of 64 certified and administrative positions.
Amongst the pilot schools, School One is a middle school with a student population of 656
(“School enrollment by grade as of October 1, 2016,” 2017). There are 38 teaching staff, three

54

counselors, and two administrative staff for a total of 43 certified and administrative positions.
School Two is a high school with a student population of 977 (“School enrollment by grade as of
October 1, 2016,” 2017) and a teaching and administrative staff of 63. Both of the librarians in
the study are certified librarians with more than 10 years of library experience, but less than two
years of experience in their current school environment.
Since the purpose of the study is to outline a process that librarians and other school
leaders can employ to assess and improve collaboration in their buildings, each school site was
viewed as a pilot with the intention of refining the process to increase reliability, ease of use, and
ability to analyze the data. For the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians to be
implemented more widely and applied to other settings additional testing and analysis is
necessary.
Demographics. Demographics were collected for those who participated in the Alaska
Teacher Social Network Survey (ATSNS). Pilot School One chose to survey their certified and
instructional support staff. They have 43 teaching, instructional support, and administrative staff.
93.02% (n=40) individuals chose to participate in the survey. Pilot School Two chose to survey
their certified staff only. They have 62 teaching and administrative staff. 67.74% (n=42) of their
staff chose to participate in the ATSNS survey.
Of the 40 participants in Pilot School One, a middle school with students in grades six
through eight, 70% (n=28) taught 6th grade, 77.5% (n=31) taught 7th grade, and 62.5% (n=25)
taught 8th grade. Of the 42 participants in Pilot School Two, a high school with students in
grades nine through twelve, 80% (n=32) taught 9th grade, 85% (n=36) taught 10th grade, 85%
(n=36) taught 11th grade, and 80.95% (n=34) taught twelfth grade.

55

Figure 4.2 and 4.3 depict the subject areas taught by teachers in Pilot School One and
Two respectively.

Figure 4.2: Teacher Count by Subject in Pilot School One.
Special Education includes both Intensive Resource classrooms and aides that follow individual
students. Two teachers noted that they teach both science and math. One teacher taught both
Health and PE.

56

Figure 4.3: Teacher Count by Subject in Pilot School Two.
Special Education encompasses intensive resource as well as aides and subject-specific special
education classes. CTE includes drafting, engineering, woodworking, etc. One teacher indicated
they taught math and CTE classes. One teacher indicated they teach both social studies and CTE
classes. Two teachers indicated they teach both science and mathematics.
As depicted in Figure 4.2, staff indicated their years of experience at Pilot School One as
30% (n=12) with 0-2 years of experience, 17.5% (n=7) with 3-5 years of experience, 19.05%
(n=8) with 7-9 years of experience, and 27.5% (n=11) with 10 or more years of experience. In
Pilot School Two, staff indicated their years of experience as 21.4% (n=9) with 0-2 years of
experience, 11.9% (n=5) with 3-5 years of experience, 0.48% (n=2) with 7-9 years of experience,
and 59.52% (n=25) with 10 or more years of experience.

57

Figure 4.4: Frequency of Teachers based on Years of Experience in Current School of the
Alaska Teacher Social Network Survey participants.
Although the intent of this research is not to compare the two schools, it can be noted that
years of experience in a school are relevant to the social capital accessible within that school. As
teachers continue to learn and practice within a school, the potential for social network ties
increases (Coburn et al., 2013; Tschannen‐Moran, 2001). Thus, schools with a higher percentage
of teachers with less years of experience may have less access to social capital than those with a
higher percentage of teachers with more years of experience in a particular school location.
Phase One: Alaska Teacher Social Network Survey
Phase One of the study involved the development of the Alaska Teacher Social Network
Survey and field-testing of the survey instrument. In this study, a group network approach was
used to explore the collaborative networks of two schools in a suburban setting. A group network

58

approach looks at the entire network bounded by a discrete unit, in this case the school itself.
This level of analysis allows for examination of the whole structure as well as individual actors
within the structure.
Another common method that was not selected for this study is an egocentric approach,
whereby the network of one or more individuals is examined in isolation (Figure 4.5). This
method would allow for understanding of the librarian’s network but not the broader
collaborative networks of the school as a whole. However, understanding the entire system is
necessary if a librarian wishes to understand, and possibly alter the dynamic, of that system. If
the librarian were to only examine his or her existing relationships, this would not reveal the
cliques that exist in the school, which staff were central to the network, and who was serving as
boundary spanners, among other things. Without this information, the librarian would be unable
to improve collaboration beyond his or her existing social network. Thus, a group network
approach was chosen for this study.

Figure 4.5: Ego versus Group analysis.
1a represents the egocentric network of actor A. 1b represents the group network of the
organization of which actor A is a member.

59

The purpose of the research is to create a system that enables librarians to examine the
patterns of relationships within a single school. Although it is possible to examine relationships
across schools, or encompassing entire districts, school librarians are more likely to be concerned
primarily with the collaboration that occurs within their own school and thus more directly
impacts their students. Additionally, they are more likely to have access to the teachers and staff
in their own building than at the district level. Librarians in both pilot schools later confirmed
this assertion. During participatory analysis, one librarian indicated:
We interact with our building so I would want to know our building. I can’t
imagine knowing who’s interacting in the network of a curriculum coordinator
would help me but it might. But I think it would be interesting to know how our
classified people fit into that, especially your library assistants, your classroom
aides, anyone who’s on staff in a mentoring position, and even the safeties.
Thus, for the purposes of this study, the social network analysis process was designed to
examine the collaboration that occurs within a single school.
Freeman, Romney, & Freeman (1987) found that individuals are much more likely to be
accurate regarding the nature of relationships within their own subgroups, than they are
regarding subgroups to which they do not belong or globally regarding the whole network, and
that accuracy in social network perception also develops over time. Therefore, the survey was
focused on more stable relationships, as opposed to those that might be bounded by a specific
period of time. Bernard et al. (1979, 1982) found that respondents report inaccurate data more
than half the time, regardless of the structure or time period questioned (with the exception of the
most immediate past). As a result, they report, "cognitive data about communication can not be
used as a proxy for the equivalent behavioral data" (Bernard et al., 1979, p. 208). However, they

60

did find that people tended to remember those they communicated with frequently and included
them in their report regardless of whether or not they had communicated with that person during
the time period in question. Therefore, to improve accuracy, the survey questions were not
bounded by time but asked about relationships and interactions in a general sense.
Furthermore, the possible actors were preloaded into the survey so that participants were
not forced to recall names, but instead chose them from a list. This reduces measurement errors
and helps remind participants about relationships that otherwise might have been forgotten
(Carolan, 2014).
Additionally, ratings of frequency were used in the survey. Ratings are generally the
preferred method for capturing a relationship’s intensity and are preferable over rankings (sorting
relationships into an ordered list) and binary data (presence or absence of a tie) (Carolan, 2014).
Therefore, a four-point frequency scale was included to add valued data. However, to enable a
novice to easily use social network data in their occupational setting, this information was
stripped in the analysis stage.
Finally, in order to effectively map information flow and build reliability, it was
important to check both parties’ perceptions of the relationship (Cross & Parker, 2004). To do
this, two questions were asked in addition to demographic questions: 1) Within your
school, whom do you go to for information or to discuss your work?, and 2) Within your
school, who comes to you for information or to discuss your work?
Once school sites were chosen and permission granted, the Alaska Teacher Social
Network Survey (AK TSNS) was drafted and field-tested. The survey was field tested at a large
high school with 45 respondents (see Appendix B). The initial survey asked for teachers to list
the frequency with which they interacted with each other teacher in the building and then to

61

select the most frequent reason for that collaboration. Reasons available in the survey included
technology, instruction, resources, student specific, and other. These reasons were cited to
attempt to include the breadth of reasons individuals might reach out to each other to increase
student achievement in a K-12 environment, and to understand how the librarian fits into this
system. Many teachers felt this system was too limiting and too comprehensive, and took too
long to complete.
Feedback was given suggesting a change in design so that factors can be combined. In
other words, teachers could indicate frequency with which they discussed each item (technology,
instruction, students, etc.) separately rather than selecting the most frequent purpose.
Additionally, teachers noted that they often engage in gossip or casual conversation.
Communication networks that are broad or unspecific will naturally pick up jokes, gossip, and
personal conversations (Cross & Parker, 2004). To increase precision, this was added as a
category of communication so that it would be clear what activities involved seeking out others'
expertise and what communications were more sociable. As a result of this field-testing, the
survey was modified to separate the categories and add the category of “Casual Conversation”
(see Appendix C for the final survey).
Reliability and Validity of Social Networking Analysis. Some of the weaknesses of
survey-based social network analysis stem from the self-reporting nature of the survey
respondents. People can often forget or misreport interactions; they can inflate their responses to
make themselves look more central; and of course there is missing data from individuals who do
not complete the survey at all, or only partially complete the survey (Cross & Parker, 2004;
Freeman et al., 1987). This affects validity - whether a respondent's reported behavior reflects his

62

or her actual behavior - and reliability - whether the question(s) measure what they claim to
measure.
These methodologies pose a limitation of the social network analysis component of this
mixed methods study, since there is no measurable way within this method to demonstrate
reliability and validity. However, general guidelines for the development of social network
surveys as described in the “Alaska Teacher Social Network Survey” section of this chapter were
used to help induce more valid responses. These include designing the survey to include a global
list of actors, not bounded by time, with a four-point rating scale, and questions that allow for the
determination of reciprocation of ties.
Previous studies lend evidence to the claim that reciprocated relations may be more valid
(Carolan, 2014). To overcome participant recall shortcomings and develop reliability and
validity, the survey was designed to ask both parties about an interaction. In this way, responses
were cross-referenced. This helped fill in the gaps where a survey was incomplete or missing and
also identified those individuals who inflated their responses. This method allowed for a more
comprehensive understanding of the network and helped to mitigate missing data. If a teacher
did not complete the survey, the researcher assumed reciprocity and manually coded the
adjacency matrix to reflect this likelihood (Cross & Parker, 2004; Moolenaar, 2012).
Within the limitations that this poses, it is worth noting that cognitive data, regardless of
reliability and validity, has something meaningful to tell. First of all, it demonstrates perceived
communication. This alone can be valuable depending on the context and purpose of the
investigation. In the case of the school librarian, the individual who acknowledges that they
come to the librarian for information indicates that they value the information or resources that
the librarian provides. On the other hand, the individual who does not indicate they routinely

63

visit the librarian, and yet the librarian knows they speak with that person quite often, may
indicate that the person does not recognize the conversations they have with the librarian as
accessing information and resources. Knowing this can help the librarian develop a plan of
action to improve communication and collaboration between teachers, regardless of the accuracy
of the responses.
Reciprocation was also used to help mitigate missing data. Different types of studies
require different response rates to accurately calculate network measures. Measures of centrality
are most sensitive to missing data (Borgatti, Carley, & Krackhardt, 2006; Costenbader &
Valente, 2003), but most other characteristics remain fairly stable with a response rate of 7585%. In this study, multiple attempts were made to get as close to 100% participation as possible
with final numbers at 95.2% (n=40) for the middle school and 67.7% (n=42) for the high school.
The low response rate for the high school is a limitation. However, dichotomizing the data by
stripping frequency values, and enforcing symmetry by assuming reciprocated ties helps reduce
analysis error (Carolan, 2014).
Phase Two: Development of the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians
The heart of this study is the development of the Social Network Analysis for School
Librarians (SNASL) Process. Social network analysis is a complex methodology utilized by
researchers in education, communication, and other social science fields. The power of social
network analysis is the combination of statistical analysis and network visualizations. Librarians,
like many teachers, are busy individuals. Analyzing the network of their school must be
simplified so as to be manageable and useful. Of course, there are myriad ways to examine social
network data and numerous means of quantitatively evaluating a social network. The goal here

64

was to simplify the process to enable use by non-trained personnel in a relatively short span of
time. Thus, only a small subset of quantitative measurements was used.
The first step in developing the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL)
Process was to determine the most appropriate software program for network mapping and
statistical analysis. After exploring several alternatives, UCINET 6 for Windows (Borgatti et al.,
2002) was chosen due to its relative ease of installation, accessible help materials, free trial
availability, and frequency of use in communication research.
After choosing UCINET, the next step was to determine which statistical measures and
visual mapping strategies would be most useful to and easily understood by the school librarian.
Social network diagrams can be difficult to understand, especially in a large organization; and
often people will read into them what they want to see rather than what the information is
actually suggesting (Cross & Parker, 2004). That is why the processes outlined here uses both
diagrams and quantitative analysis. By examining quantitative analysis first, one can identify
keys individuals to examine further in the network diagram. This can also help provide a layered
approach that minimizes jumping to conclusions based on the diagram and permits a novice
analyst to interpret the data.
Statistical Measures. In order to make the SNASL Process useful to the average school
librarian, who has minimal time to spend and is unfamiliar with social network analysis, it was
decided that measurements that are not immediately useful and easy to understand would not be
included. After a review of the most common analysis in educational research, it was determined
that measures at the ego-level would be most useful and easily understood by the school librarian
and enable them to both understand the flow of information within the network and strategize

65

how to increase and improve collaboration. This type of analysis (ego-level) is possible even
when the data collection is conducted within the group network and not the egocentric approach.
Network-level structural measures are calculated from the entire network and provide an
excellent snapshot of the network’s structure (Coleman, 1990). However, without a proper
measure of comparison, these measurements are not immediately useful. For example, density is
a common measurement used in social network analysis. Network density refers to the number
of ties in the network reported as a fraction of the total possible number of ties. If all actors in the
network had ties with every other member of the network, the density would be 1.0. Knowing
that the density is 0.5 - and thus that about half the network has ties - is interesting, but it does
not allow the librarian to know which actors have a large number of ties and which are not well
connected within the school network. This type of ego-level information is necessary for the
library to make the most use of the data.

Table 4.1: Social Network Analysis Employed in this Research
Statistical
Analysis
Broker
Normalized
Broker
Size of Ego
Network
Constraint
Geodesic
Distance
Point
Connectivity

Definition
The number of pairs that are not directly connected, but bridged by the given
actor.
The broker divided by the total number of pairs.
The size of the network for a given actor.
The proportion of connections that actor has that are connected to one
another.
The number of steps between each set of actors in the network.
The number of nodes that would have to be removed in order for one actor
to no longer be able to reach another.

In the initial development of the SNASL Process, the following statistical measures were
used as defined in Table 4.1: broker, normalized broker, size of ego network, constraint,
66

geodesic distance, and point connectivity (Borgatti et al., 2002). These measures were used to
identify and categorize the network position of individual members, including central
connectors, those in the periphery, information brokers, and boundary spanners. This structure
was used to make the SNASL Process accessible to the school librarian with little experience
with social network analysis, and to enable the librarian to use the data for systematic
improvement of the collaborative network. A worksheet was drafted to enable school librarians
to walk through the analysis process and identify the actors in each network position. This was
utilized during the participatory analysis steps in Phase Three.
Information Brokers. Information brokers facilitate the flow of information amongst
others in the network (Cross & Parker, 2004). Potential information brokers can be indicated
using the broker and normalized broker measurements. Broker is the number of pairs that are not
directly connected, but bridged by the given actor. Normalized broker (nBroker) is the broker
divided by the total number of pairs in the network, or the percentage of pairs for which the actor
serves as broker. An individual with a high broker value has more influence in the network, as
they are a pathway for information to flow amongst members of the network and thus can
determine where and when information flows.
Central Connectors. Central connectors are those individuals who have the fewest
number of steps between most other actors. Being centrally located means that the information a
person distributes will reach the rest of the network more quickly (Freeman, 1978). They can
link multiple members of the network to increase the flow of resources and information. Central
connectors tend to have a high closeness centrality, measured here by geodesic distance.
Geodesic distance displays how close is one person relative to others in the network. A teacher
with a high closeness centrality will have few steps between themselves and the other actors in

67

the network. Central connectors are therefore most likely to be those individuals with the lowest
geodesic distance values.
Boundary Spanners. In any given network there are likely to be subgroups. In a school,
subgroups may take the form of academic departments, grade levels, or other commonalities.
The spaces between those groups are called structural holes. Boundary spanners are those that
connect multiple subgroups within a network and bridge the structural holes (Burt, 1997, 2000,
p. 200; Cross & Parker, 2004).

Figure 4.6: Boundary Spanner.
Node D is serving as a boundary spanner, connecting the two subgroups of A, B, C and E, F, G.

Within these subgroups actors have varying degrees of power based on the constraint
imposed on them by the network (Burt, 2000). A group that is tightly knit has a higher potential
to impose norms and sanctions then one that has looser connections. The statistical measure that
reflects this is called constraint. Boundary spanners have low constraint, because they are
connected to multiple groups as opposed to embedded within a closed group. Therefore,

68

constraint can be used to suggest individuals who might be boundary spanners. Network maps
can be used to confirm whether an actor is indeed a boundary spanner.
Peripheral People. Those on the periphery exist on the edges of the network and have
few connections (Cross & Parker, 2004). They may be on the periphery intentionally, needing
space to operate effectively, or they may need help getting connected. Size of network is one of
the most basic measures to determine those that are on the periphery. Those with the lowest
network size are likely to be peripheral in the network. As with the other measures and network
positions, network maps can be used to confirm the statistical analysis.
Point connectivity can also be used to determine which actors exist on the periphery of
the network. Point connectivity calculates the number of nodes that would have to be removed in
order for one actor to no longer be able to reach another (Borgatti et al., 2002). This shows the
strength or tenuousness between a particular actor’s connections to the network. If the number is
higher the individual has many ways to get information to the other actor. If the number is low,
there are few ways channels of information flow for that actor. Those on the periphery will have
very low numbers in the point connectivity matrix.
Network Mapping. After determining which statistical measures to use, a decision
needed to be made about how best to approach the visual mapping. NetDraw within UCINET
(Borgatti et al., 2002) was used to draw the network maps. Within NetDraw, there are a variety
of tools. To simplify the process and yet enable depth of analysis, it was decided that using
attribute maps would be the most accessible to the librarian with minimal social network analysis
training and exposure.
Attribute maps allow the researcher to apply filters to the map to gain differing
perspectives on network connections (Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). Nodes can be altered by

69

shape, size, or color. For example, for years taught at this school, 0-2 might be brown, 3-5 red, 68 orange, and 9+ yellow. This color gradient allows for an easier visual representation of the
network in relation to years taught in the school. Additionally, attributes can be used to cluster
nodes within a map by a specific attribute, such as subject area. Applying these filters allows the
researcher to visualize the impact of the attribute on network connections.
Research suggests that individuals tend to form relationships based on how similar they
are; such as age, gender, or educational level (Cross & Parker, 2004; McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
& Cook, 2001; Moolenaar, 2012). This is referred to as homophily. To enable librarians to
visualize how homophily impacts network connections, subject area taught, location in the
building, and years of practice were included in the pilot research. These factors were chosen due
to the ease of access of the information to the school librarian. Subject area taught and location in
the building may already be known or can be easily obtained. The total number of years taught as
well as years taught within the particular school can be ascertained in demographic questions on
the ATSNS. Other possible attributes that contribute to homophily include gender, race, hobbies,
and general background. However, these factors were not included in this research due to privacy
concerns.
To make the SNASL Process accessible to the school librarian, a worksheet was devised
to walk through the process while teaching basic social network concepts. As a means of
structuring the process and aiding librarians in linking social network concepts to daily practice,
focus was placed on individual positions in the network and classifying individuals into four
categories: central connectors, peripheral people, information brokers, and boundary spanners.
The worksheet (Appendix D) also included instructions for how to use UCINET to generate
statistical measures, manipulate network maps, and apply attribute maps to network

70

visualizations. The worksheet did not include instructions for how to collect network data,
transfer data to an adjacency matrix for upload to UCINET, or install UCINET 6 for Windows.
The researcher performed these steps for the librarians and has provided it here in Appendix E;
although it is necessary for the school librarian that wishes to engage independently in the
SNASL Process, it is procedural information and not something that was tested as part of the
participatory analysis.
Phase Three: Pilot Testing
Pilot-testing of the School Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL) Process
involved data collection and analysis in two pilot schools as detailed previously in the
Participants section of this chapter.
Data Collection. For both Pilot School One and Pilot School Two, the Alaska Teacher
Social Network Survey (ATSNS) was disseminated via SurveyMonkey by the researcher at a
staff meeting, with follow up online for those staff members that were not present at the meeting
due to illness or other commitments. Multiple attempts were made to get as close to 100%
participation as possible with final numbers at 95.2% (n=40) for Pilot School One and 67.7%
(n=42) for Pilot School Two.
Once participating teachers visited the SurveyMonkey link, they were informed of their
rights via an informed consent page in the survey. Teachers who provided informed consent
were granted access to the survey; those who did not were prevented from continuing the survey.
No teachers choose this option. The survey was available until the close of the school year.
Follow up emails were sent to teachers who did not complete the survey approximately one week
and then one month after the presentation at the staff meeting.

71

All data were coded to maintain confidentiality but enable the researcher and librarian
participants to identify subject area of the given teacher. Thus, each response was coded with
their subject area and then a letter. For example, Math A, Social Studies B, etc. The master list of
identification codes and teacher names was kept in a secure location.
Data Analysis. After data were collected, they were transferred to an adjacency matrix
using Excel (Figure 4.7) and were visually analyzed using the NetDraw capability of UCINET
(Borgatti et al., 2002).

Figure 4.7: Screenshot of Adjacency Matrix in Excel for Pilot School One.
See Supplemental File: Pilot School One Adjacency Matrix and Supplemental File: Pilot School
Two Adjacency Matrix for full data set.

72

This allowed the researcher to see relationships between actors in the network; the
direction of those relationships; identify subgroups in the network; and identify individual actors
that appear central, on the periphery, or bridging gaps between other actors in the network. For
ease of analysis, all purposes listed on the survey were grouped together with the exception of
casual conversation. This enabled the researcher and librarian participants to examine
instrumental relationships only. Although expressive relationships are important to building trust
in social networks, the intent of the research is to improve instrumental relationships between
librarians and teachers through a process that is accessible to librarians and thus expressive ties
were removed from analysis.
Participatory Analysis. After data collection and analysis, anonymized results were
presented to the school librarian during a 60 to 90-minute conversation. During this time, the
researcher examined the data alongside the school librarian from the pilot school using the
SNASL Process Worksheet (Appendix D) in a semi-structured interview format. Both the
researcher and librarian examined the data on the researcher’s computer, which was preloaded
with the UCINET software and school data sets. The role of the researcher during the semistructured interview was as a technical guide, aiding the school librarian in understanding
concepts and utilizing UCINET and NetDraw. Additionally, the researcher asked follow up
questions as necessary to better understand the school librarian’s interpretation of the data. The
researcher’s role was intentionally minimal to enable the school librarian to engage in the
process without interference.
To avoid interruptions during the interviews and create a natural setting for an
examination relating to one’s work life, as well as for convenience of the participants, interviews

73

were conducted after school in the library of each librarian. Field notes were used to record
immediate impressions during and following interviews.
Unfortunately, the researcher encountered technical difficulties with the attribute maps
and was unable to explore these with the school librarian in Pilot School One during the first
participatory analysis section. However, results from this section led to revision of the SNASL
Process Worksheet and a follow up interview with the new worksheet was conducted with the
Pilot School One Librarian.
Refinement of the SNASL Process. The goal of the participatory analysis process was
to 1) determine librarian’s understanding of network concepts and why they are relevant, 2) elicit
librarian interpretation of the network map of their school, and 3) assess whether librarians were
able to use the process to develop strategy for improving collaboration within their school.
Technical difficulties with the attribute maps during participatory analysis lead to further
investigation on how to upload the maps to avoid these issues in the future and a revision in the
procedural notes for the SNASL Process (Appendix E) regarding recommendations for how to
create and upload attribute maps. The researcher initially used an attribute matrix developed
using the UCINET spreadsheet editor. Although theoretically suitable, a more common approach
is to use the text editor in Windows to create a tab delimited file. A new file was created and
tested multiple times; no further technical issues were encountered.
A more substantial revision was of the SNASL Process Worksheet itself. In the first
version of the SNASL Process Worksheet (Appendix D), the school librarian was led through
two stages. The first was an analysis of the statistical data for each role position. The second was
examination of the social network diagrams. During participatory analysis with Pilot School One
it became clear that although the librarian understood each role position and its value, she was

74

having difficulty remembering the distinction between the different role positions during the
social network diagram stage. Having just been introduced to the concepts, she was being asked
to remember too much too quickly. Additionally, although she was able to identify individuals in
each role position, she did not link the examination of the data with strategic plans for improving
collaboration in her school.
As a result of the participatory analysis with Pilot School One the SNASL Process
Worksheet was revised (Appendix F). In the first iteration (Appendix D), used with Pilot School
One, the network position roles were identified and defined at the top of the worksheet and then
not referred to again. The intention in this original design was to allow the librarian to use these
roles as needed, but not force the librarian to use them. When used in Pilot School One, the
librarian was able to identify individuals within these roles when prompted, but they did not
voluntarily refer back to the role positions. Furthermore, the researcher noticed in the initial
analysis of Pilot School One that the librarian was identifying individuals and providing some
background, but for the most part was not indicating how the information could be used to
improve collaboration in the school without additional prompting.
For example, when asked which actors have the most impact on the network, referring to
boundary spanners, the librarian in Pilot School One said, “You can visualize constraint as power
in their network. People with high constraint are most powerful in their network so I want to
reach out to them when trying to get a new initiative started.” This indicated that the librarian
understood the role position and the value of the statistical analysis and its role for professional
practice, but did not go so far as to strategize how that information would be used to improve
collaboration.

75

To overcome these obstacles, in the revised iteration of the worksheet used with Pilot
School Two (Appendix F), the researcher made these connections between role position and
specific aspects of the social network analysis more overt. Instead of role positions being a
separate section in the worksheet, it was thread throughout and made more explicit by creating
subsections within the worksheet for each of the four role positions. Additionally, the question
“How could you use this information to help improve collaboration?” was added to each
subsection to help the librarian make the connection between the data and strategic improvement
of collaboration in their school.
The response from the librarian in Pilot School Two to the corresponding statistical
analysis in her school, demonstrates the improvement:
This analysis shows how large a person’s network is and how they fall in their
network. [A] teacher talked about how different the library was from when she
first came here, environmentally, tall shelves, but also technology differences.
Books are being weeded because so much of the information is available online
and has the most current information. As I do more and more of that, getting rid
of nonfiction books, then you need to know who are the people that are going to
have some influence. Win them over.
Her response provides a specific and actionable way that the data could be used to
improve collaboration in the school. After referring to a common problem in librarianship faculty response to the weeding of books - she demonstrates both an understanding of the role of
the boundary spanner as an individual with influence over multiple subgroups and how this
knowledge can improve her practice by indicating, “you need to know who are the people that
are going to have some influence. Win them over;” suggesting that by understanding who the

76

boundary spanners are in the building you can help shift attitude throughout the building. In this
instance, including the roles overtly in the worksheet and asking the librarian to connect the
results to improving collaboration helped her connect the responses to her practice.
To further examine whether the revised worksheet would result in more generative
insight and strategic responses from the librarian in Pilot School One, a second interview was
conducted. In both interviews, the librarian was able to identify individuals in specific role
positions, but in the second one she moved beyond identification to strategy for improving
teacher collaboration. For example, when looking at the information brokers in the first
interview, she remarked, “Looking at Broker and nBroker primarily, meshes with existing
knowledge that sped works throughout the building and library.” In the second interview, she
expanded to say, “Those are the people I want to have stronger connections with because they
are influential. Is that right? So, then I want to identify, so who is Sped D? Because I need to be
in Sped D’s business so I can say hey, do you know what’s going on? Have you checked in over
there?”
As a result of the participatory analysis with Pilot School One, the SNASL Process
Worksheet was revised and restructured in three substantial ways: 1) The worksheet was
reorganized by role position so that the librarian was examining the statistical analysis and then
the social networking diagram for one role position before moving on to examine the next one.
2) Additional descriptions of each role position were added to clarify their value and purpose. 3)
Additional questions were added to elicit school librarian’s thinking regarding the strategic value
of the social network data.
Once role positions were thread throughout the process, it became clear that identifying
key players through defined roles enables the librarian engaged in the SNASL Process to

77

transition from identifying characteristics of their school’s social network to strategic
implementation of a plan to improve social capital throughout the school. Identifying individual
actors in specific network positions enabled the librarians to move from noticing to strategizing.
Limitations. There are several limitations to any qualitative research. First, it must be
noted that any report of research is a representation of the author (Creswell & Plano Clark,
2011). The researcher views data through a lens of his or her personal experience, which biases
responses and interpretations of the data. To limit the effect of these biases, the planning and
design of the research was conducted to increase data quality in the design of survey instruments,
repeated testing of the SNASL Process, and transparency of reporting.
Additionally, this study only examined the potential of social network analysis as a tool
for school librarians in secondary schools. Since the district involved in the research only has
certified librarians at the secondary level, no data from elementary schools was included.
Elementary schools often have different collaborative structures; they more likely to focus on
grade level teams rather than subject area, and librarians are more likely to work with students on
a fixed schedule. Therefore, additional research is needed to determine the impact of social
network analysis, and specifically, the SNASL Process, in elementary schools.
In this study, all interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and checked for
accuracy to increase credibility of data. During participatory analysis, each school librarian
walked through the SNASL Process with guidance from the researcher in a 60- to 90-minute
semi-structured interview using the structure of the SNASL Process Worksheet. Field notes were
used to record immediate impressions during and following interviews. Additionally, interviews
were initially read as a whole and then examined in sections for fuller examination. Interview
transcriptions and field notes were gathered for initial coding. Using these initial categories,

78

transcripts were read again and analyzed to validate codes and identify supportive data for each
identified theme.
To avoid interruptions during the interviews and create a natural setting for an
examination relating to one’s work life, as well as for convenience of the participants, interviews
were conducted after school in the library of each librarian. The researcher’s limited resources
and the limited time of the participants, resulted in limitations to the scope of qualitative inquiry.
Although a small grant of $1000 was received for this dissertation from the Frances Henne /
VOYA Research Grant, this was not sufficient funding to enable further pilot testing of the
SNASL Process.
The researcher facilitated the participatory analysis such that her role was minimal,
however, she did offer explanations and technical assistance to the school librarians. Thus,
without a facilitator’s presence a school librarian may experience differing results when
engaging in the SNASL Process. Further pilot testing and social network analysis research can
incorporate additional school settings and levels of librarian experience to further validate these
findings.
Final Analysis
As stated at the beginning of this chapter, the purpose of this research is to outline a
process that school librarians can use to systematically evaluate and improve collaboration
between teachers and librarians in their school. Since the outcome of this dissertation is the
development of the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL) Process, the final
analysis of the data was designed to determine the effectiveness of the SNASL Process in
enabling the school librarian to evaluate and improve the collaboration network of their school.
During final analysis, interview transcriptions were read as a whole and then examined in

79

sections for fuller examination. Interview transcriptions and field notes were gathered for initial
coding. Using these initial categories, transcripts were read again and analyzed to validate codes
and identify supportive data for each identified theme. Three themes were identified during this
analysis: identifying role positions, producing generative insight, and enabling the potential for
strategic improvement of collaboration.
The results of the final analysis are presented in Chapter 5: Findings.

80

Chapter 5. Findings
The purpose of this chapter is to present the findings of the study to answer the question:
How can social network analysis be used by school librarians to evaluate the collaborative
networks in their school? To investigate this question, a process was developed for school
librarians to evaluate and improve the collaboration network of their school, named the Social
Network Analysis for School Librarians (SNASL) Process. This chapter reports on the themes
that emerged during the final analysis: the role of network positions and the potential for
strategic improvement of collaboration through generative insight.
Although a necessary part of the research design, the actual results of the social network
analysis within each school are not the research findings. Therefore, the complete results of the
social network analysis conducted within each pilot school are included in Appendix G.
Role of Network Positions
Definition of Terms. Recall from chapter III how a social network can be viewed as a set
of actors and a set of links among these actors. When examining a social network analysis
diagram, an actor is visualized as a node, which can represent an individual or an organization.
In this case, each node represents a teacher or staff member at one of the pilot schools. The terms
node and actor will be used interchangeably throughout this chapter.
The relationships between the actors are represented as links, or ties, between each node.
Arrows represent the directionality of the ties. Ties that feature arrows going in both directions
are reciprocal. In Figure 5.1, two nodes are presented with a reciprocal tie.

81

Figure 5.1: Illustration of network with two nodes and a reciprocal tie.
Information Brokers. Information brokers have a high out-degree (a large number of
outgoing ties) and thus are hubs for information within the network. They also sit on a path
between various pairs of individuals that would not otherwise be connected if the broker were
not part of the network (see Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2: Diagram of Information Broker.
In this network, A is the information broker, ensuring that there is a path for information to flow
between all members of the network.

82

In UCINET, the statistical measures broker and nbroker are used to identify information
brokers. An individual with a high broker value has more influence in the network, as they are a
pathway for information to flow amongst members of the network and thus have a greater
influence on where and when information flows.
School librarian participants identified information brokers as “people I want to have
stronger connections with because they are influential.” In Pilot School One, after identifying
Sped D as an information broker, the librarian noted “I need to be in Sped D’s business so I can
say hey, do you know what’s going on?” confirming her understanding of the role of the
information broker and its ability to increase social capital. By connecting with Sped D, she also
gains access to his or her human capital, their knowledge, skills, and abilities.
In Pilot School Two, the librarian remarked that:
Knowing who has the most influence, especially since I am still new - 2 years
isn’t long - it would help me to pinpoint the people I should be contacting and
seeing if I can get them to collaborate with me, because they are going to have
influence over the people with whom they are interacting. And there’s that
possibility that they’ll say something about oh what a great lesson we had and
another might pipe in and say oh, I’d like to try that. What’s the possibility you
and I can sit down together when you get a chance?
Her statement acknowledges that information brokers are connected to a diverse group of
people in the network and that by working with them she is increasing her presence throughout
the whole building. Since information brokers are well connected, there is a higher possibility
that other teachers will see or hear about successful collaborations that occur with the
information brokers. The librarian was able to take this information and apply it to a

83

collaborative strategy - focusing attention on collaborating with information brokers to take
advantage of her role position.
Central Connectors. Central connectors tend to have a high closeness centrality,
measured here by geodesic distance. Distance is a measure of how “far” apart actors are within
the network (Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). In other words, how many steps does it take to get
from one actor to another? When this value is small there is a relatively cohesive network; when
it is high, it is difficult for information and resources to flow through the network. Geodesic
distance, in particular, demonstrates the number of steps between each set of actors in the
network. A teacher with a high closeness centrality will have few steps (a low geodesic distance)
between the other actors in the network. For example, in Table 5.1, B is one step away from C,
meaning that they are directly connected. In contrast, B is three steps away from D, meaning that
for information to flow between B and D in that network, it must go through two other people
before reaching D. This can be visualized in Figure 5.3.

Table 5.1: Example Geodesic Distance Matrix
A

B

C

D

A

0

2

1

1

B

2

0

1

3

C

1

1

0

2

D

1

3

2

0

84

Figure 5.3: Example Network Diagram for Data in Table 5.1.
The librarian in Pilot School Two noted that she “Could also use this analysis to identify
the people who are perceived experts / authority / bottlenecks because they could help route
people to the library when appropriate. Identify who those individuals are could give insight into
what they were doing to make them seen as attractive to other faculty and I could emulate or
expand upon that.” Again, she was able to identify the usefulness of the data to “identify the
people who are perceived experts / authority / bottlenecks” and use this information to strategize
her approaches to collaboration to “emulate or expand” on what the central connectors were
doing to “make them seem as attractive to other faculty.” Although this approach was different
than the one taken by the librarian in Pilot School One, who identified individuals she could
reach out to in order to benefit from their network connections, it is no better or worse. In both
situations, the social network analysis enabled the librarian to move from a “build it and they
will come” approach to a targeted and strategic approach.

85

This strategy also allowed the librarian from Pilot School Two to capitalize on the human
capital of the central connector. To “emulate or expand” on what a central connector does is to
engage with and learn from that individual, accessing their human capital and utilizing it to
increase one’s own.
The power of visualizing the network via a social network map was confirmed when
using the graph theoretical layout to view central connectors in Pilot School One mapped by
geodesic distance (Figure 5.4). The librarian made a statement that “the ones in the center, they
are clustered that way because they have more stronger, more connections” and then noted that
the map was “visually more reflective of what we were just talking about,” referring to the
geodesic distance matrix that was examined previously.

Figure 5.4: Social Network Diagram of Central Connectors in Pilot School One.
Nodes are organized by graph theoretical layout. Central connectors are coded in red.

86

By visualizing the centrality of individual network members in this way, the librarian was
able to see the relative capacity of each member of the network to quickly and effectively
communicate information:
Sped D, which also has one of the lowest [geodesic averages]. It’s interesting. Do
you see… am I seeing right? English D. English D also was ranked as an
information broker. But it’s interesting because the librarian and English D have
more influence than the admin does… That’s cool. Not that it’s influence, but it’s
more power in the structure. I think its just information not power… Like in the
ability to share information and connect and collaborate there is a lot.
Visualizing the social network data in various configurations enabled her to see the actors
with the most ability to share information throughout the network. As with the information
brokers, she was initially surprised that the administration was not more central. The
visualization shifted her preconceptions about the nature of power. She acknowledged that,
although the principal was the authority in the building, he or she may not have the influence
necessary to quickly disseminate information or connect people throughout the building.
Boundary Spanners. Boundary spanners connect subgroups within a network and bridge
structural holes. Visualizing boundary spanners with a network map allows the analyst to see the
connections between different subgroups in the network. Figure 5.5 depicts a network map that
shows how Sped D has connections with various academic subunits within the school. For visual
clarity, Sped D has been color-coded red and each subject area subgroup has been coded a
different shape. Sped D, similar to central connectors and information brokers can help spread
information across the network. However, unlike central connectors and information brokers,

87

boundary spanners have more control within the network, because they are not constrained by
the norms of a particular subgroup. This means they are likely to have more influence than other
members of the network.

Figure 5.5: Ego Network of Sped D in Pilot School One.
The diagram is organized by subject area. Each subject area is coded a different shape. Sped D
is red.

Upon examining the map in NetDraw depicted in Figure 5.5, the librarian in Pilot School
One noted that Sped D and Library were potential boundary spanners and that although the
Admin had connections with various departments they were not as robust as the connections
present within the ego network of Sped D or Library. This triggered her to reflect on the role of
the admin and why this might be the case:

88

and I wonder if that’s because in our building so many of us connect with each
that we don’t have to go through the admin to get to somebody. In other schools,
you may have to run other networks, you may have to go through that power
broker in order to get to others, but here people aren’t afraid to just walk across
the hall or go downstairs or go… reach out… because they are aware of who has
information that they need. It’s like, who knows how to use the printer, how to do
this, I need to connect with the Z4 team, all these things. It’s like the admin, are
go-tos, but maybe not for all the day to day business. Where our boundary
spanners are the day-to-day business of getting stuff done. We don’t have to jump
through hi to get to somebody else. We just go get it. I know who’s gonna
know…
She went on to differentiate the role of the information broker and the boundary spanner:
I think you need like the information brokers. They get the information out. But
these boundary spanners. These are the others you can get to those you are not
collaborating with. It seems like those are the ones you want to target if you want
to build more connections and stronger connections. Those are the people you
want to connect with. Cause your information brokers are going to be able to
share information and all that, but the boundary spanners are the ones that are
going to have a better jump to other people, they’ll get them, bring them in, you
know. It’s like get those outliers and bring them in.
These observations confirmed her understanding of the role boundary spanners play in
the social network of the school and demonstrated her ability to use the information to improve
collaboration by forming relevant strategy.

89

The librarian in Pilot School Two offered similar observations to the librarian in Pilot
School One. In addition to identifying the boundary spanners, she noted a specific way in which
she could use the information: “Teacher talked about how different the library was from when
she first came here, environmentally (tall shelves) but also technology differences. Books are
being weeded because so much of the information is available online and has the most current
information. As I do more and more of that, getting rid of nonfiction books, then you need to
know who are the people that are going to have some influence. Win them over.” Here, she is
referring to the regular practice of removing old, outdated material from the library. Often
teachers do not understand the role this plays in maintaining a strong library collection and
question the librarian. By identifying the boundary spanners who have influence within their
network and “win them over,” the librarian hopes to also win over the individuals in the network
within those boundary spanners. Making connections with these boundary spanners and
“win[ning] them over” allows her to transfer some of her human capital – knowledge of the role
of the librarian in curating the library collection – to the boundary spanner, thereby increasing
access to the social capital between both individuals through the new formation of a tie between
them.
Periphery People. Since those on the periphery exist on the edges of the network and
have few connections, they are likely to have the lowest ego network sizes and the lowest point
connectivity values. Those with the lowest network size are likely to be peripheral in the
network. Point connectivity, which calculates the number of nodes that would have to be
removed in order for one actor to no longer be able to reach another, is also used to determine
whether actors exist on the periphery of the network. If the number is higher the individual has
many ways to get information to the other actor. If the number is low, there are few ways

90

channels of information flow for that actor. Therefore, those on the periphery will have very low
numbers in the point connectivity matrix. As with the other measures and network positions,
network maps can be used to confirm the statistical analysis.
The Density Measures report in UCINET calculates ego network size as one of its
statistical measure; the number of individuals in an individual’s social network. The Point
Connectivity report in UCINET calculates point connectivity between each pair of actors in the
entire social network. During participatory analysis, the school librarians used UCINET
generated point connectivity report and density measures reports, which includes a measure of
ego network size for each network member. They used this data to identify periphery individuals
in the network, and then used UCINET’s NetDraw to generate social network diagrams to better
understand the role of these individuals in the network.
In both schools, librarians were able to identify those on the periphery. The visualization
(Figure 5.7) in particular allowed them to see individuals that were on the edges of the network
and had fewer connections.
I want to see some of these… less of these outliers… see the one before where we
saw that social studies… ugh… I feel like that’s … I can see it in this one… when
I look at all these arrows I like seeing like almost a black circle [referring to the
arrows being so tightly connected that they form a black band around the node]
around some of these people; you know, cause it means they are connecting
everywhere, but then I see this and there’s not a lot coming in and I don’t see a lot
coming out. You know, like, look at this right here. That’s not cool. No. I was
looking at Science F. That’s what I was referring to when I said look right here,
that’s not cool.

91

Figure 5.6: Social Network Map of Pilot School One.
Diagram is in graph theoretical layout by geodesic distance. Science F, a periphery person, is in
red for visual clarity.
Both librarians noticed a connection between position on the network and subject taught.
The librarian in Pilot School One connected this to the size of the department:
a lot of times when you are a department of one or two, you don’t have a lot of
connections, because you don’t have a team partner, you know, one door over
who is teaching the same content or using the same materials. And that’s what I
see a lot of here. Those are the departments of one or two.
Whereas, the librarian in Pilot School Two related the phenomena to the subject matter
itself:

92

I think there’s some people by virtue of their job are going to be automatically
plugged into a network. And there are going to be others, their work is so esoteric
perhaps, they are self-contained. For example, it’s hard for me to make a
connection where I can collaborate with the band teacher or the steel drums class.
There is potential but there is more of a stretch to make myself essential to the
success then there is for example the global studies department.
In both cases, the librarians recognized the value of identifying individuals on the edges
of the network and the ability to use social network data to pull them in. In the case of Pilot
School One, the librarian pointed to Soc D and shifted the network diagram to an egocentric
view (Figure 5.8). She noted that seeing the data she would identify Soc A as the person to talk
to in order to reach Soc D, saying “That would bridge that so you would have someone you
could go to and say hey, how can I help, I’d like to help, and that would bridge that step. It’s like,
sometimes when you go straight to someone they aren’t happy about it, but you can go around
that and maybe get somewhere.”

93

Figure 5.7: Ego network map of Soc D in Pilot School One.
Soc D a periphery person, is coded in red. The diagram shows connections to and from Soc D at
a geodesic value of 1.
Both librarians also recognized that some people are on the periphery by choice and may
not wish to be further involved in the network, or may need space to do their jobs effectively.
“Well, if you look at the science, this music, with the ones and the twos, that these people don’t
feel ostracized, or don’t feel I’m not getting everything I need, but it’s more of a content specific
I’m good, life’s good, I’m playing my music and I’m happy...” Their observations indicated that
the librarians recognized that some individuals, who possess a great deal of human capital, might
still have limited access to social capital. Identification of individuals in these role positions
allowed them to make a choice about how to proceed and where to focus their energies.

94

After using ego size and point connectivity values, ego-focused network diagrams
provided information on how the individual is connected to the broader network. As the librarian
for Pilot School One indicated, this enables the librarian to leverage existing connections to
create a more robust collaborative network at the ego level for the peripheral individual.
Look at each department to see where reciprocal connections exist and don’t
exist to know who to reach out to within a specific department. Add the librarian
in to the analysis to see where the connections exist. By looking at the reciprocal
relationships, there’s the potential for inserting some kind of activity where two
individuals are collaborating and I’m facilitating. That’s really exciting.
For example, Figure 5.9 displays the ego network of Music B, the most peripheral
individual in Pilot School One. From this visualization, the librarian was able to see that Music B
has one reciprocal connection, with Music A. Adding the librarian to the visualization (Figure
5.10) so that the network diagram is showing all relationships that exist within one step of both
the librarian and Music B, it’s possible to see that the Librarian has an established connection to
Music A. By leveraging her relationship with Music A, the Librarian has the potential to work
collaboratively with both Music A and Music B, thus broadening Music B’s ego network and
drawing him or her more fully into not only access to social capital, but also increasing the
overall school’s collaborative structure.

95

Figure 5.8: Ego Network of Music B, Pilot School One.

Figure 5.9: Ego Networks of Music B and Librarian, Pilot School One.

96

During the participatory analysis portion of each pilot, the librarians also indicated the
importance of helping peripheral people become better connected to the greater school network
and expressed frustration in not knowing how to make those connections:
The one that said you can go now, there's no connection, there's no curricular
connect, there's no personal connection. It's hard to come back time and again. I
still do, but it's hard. There's no collaboration with that. I don't know what else I
can do with this teacher to show that I'm worthy and that's really how I feel but I
also see that that's how this teacher is with a lot of staff. I know it's not personal
but it feels personal.
[The district library coordinator] has said you need to be a librarian on the go, on
the move. Get out of the library, get out of the office. I try that, that’s what I’m
aiming for, but I just haven’t been successful at doing that.
These frustrations are common in school libraries and served as part of the impetus for
this research, to provide school librarians with a tool to allow them to strategize their
collaborative efforts. Although the SNASL Process does not provide guidance for how to form
and maintain relationships, the ability to identify individuals that are disconnected from the rest
of the social network is itself a powerful tool. Social network analysis via the SNASL Process
allowed the librarians to identify individuals on the periphery so that strategies for integrating
them into the broader collaborative network of the school could be identified.
It is important to note that people on the periphery may be on the fringes of the network
intentionally, or they may be there because they do not know how to connect to the rest of the
network. Participating librarians understood this concept indicating things such as “would have
to talk to them to find out why they are there” and “I think there’s some people by virtue of their

97

job are going to be automatically plugged in to a network. And there are going to be others, their
work is so esoteric perhaps, they are self-contained.”
The Potential for Strategic Improvement of Collaboration through Generative Insight
One of the school librarians described the differences between her current approach and
using social network analysis to improve collaboration when she said “...you’re just scatter
plotting everywhere… build it and they will come; but this will be targeted. It’s targeted and
intentional when you have the data. You’re like, okay, look at this. It’s very clear that this is
where I need to go, this is where I need to go.”
Mapping the collaborative relationships of actors in the network and viewing and
manipulating the social network maps enabled the school librarians in each pilot school to notice
things of which they were not previously aware. Since each librarian was new to their school site
(less than two years), they were still learning about the social relationships between the staff and
their individual needs and preferences. The ability to see those relationships mapped into a
diagram, and then connect that information to ideas about the flow of resources and influence,
provided a tool that allowed the librarians to strategize to improve collaboration.
Knowing who has the most influence, especially since I am still new - 2 years
isn’t long - it would help me to pinpoint the people I should be contacting and
seeing if I can get them to collaborate with me, because they are going to have
influence over the people with whom they are interacting. And there’s that
possibility that they’ll say something about ‘oh what a great lesson we had’ and
another might pipe in and say ‘oh, I’d like to try that’. What’s the possibility you
and I can sit down together when you get a chance?

98

The librarian recognized that this data would allow her to “pinpoint” the people she
should reach out to and see if she can “get them to collaborate.” By working together with those
that have the most influence in the network she gains access to their human capital and increases
the potential for others to learn about her collaborative projects and want to replicate that
experience with their own classes.
Similarly, she recognized that she “could also use this analysis to identify the people who
are perceived experts / authority / bottlenecks because they could help route people to the library
when appropriate.” By targeting her efforts at those with the most capacity to reach others in the
network, she could increase her chances of convincing others to collaborate with her and use the
library.
These types of insights ranged from broad concepts about the nature of collaboration and
how the SNASL Process could be used to improve collaboration overall to observations about
specific individuals. In Pilot School Two, the librarian made an observation about one subgroup
when she noted “counselors had low numbers but they are involved with every student, but you
would think they are, would be involved with every teacher, but they are isolated.” The
visualization of the network enabled the librarian to see that the counselors were connected to
each other but isolated from the rest of the network; they had few connections to other teachers.

99

Figure 5.10: Social Network Map of Pilot School One with Counselors in Red.
Map is organized by graph theoretical layout by geodesic distance. For visual clarity, nodes are
shaped by subject area and counselors are in red.
By identifying those in the periphery like the School Counselors, the librarians gained the
ability to make a strategic choice. They can speak to the individual or individuals on the
periphery to determine why they are there and if it is a matter of choice. They can then choose to
aide the periphery people in becoming more collaborative and thus increase the social capital of
the entire organization, or they may choose to spend their efforts elsewhere. Prior to the
identification, however, the librarians were unable to make that choice because they did not have
the information to do so. The SNASL Process enabled them to be in a position where strategic
choices are possible.

100

In the examination of a social network diagram mapped by subject area (Figure 5.11), the
school librarian in Pilot School One noted:
It’s interesting that I don’t see social studies. Social studies are way out on the
edges. That’s interesting. So, when I look at social studies, I see that they are
connecting with other social studies teachers and like one with math. You know?
Interesting... And it would seem that Soc B is the one that connects to more
because they have reciprocal here, not here, but they do here and here, so they
would be the one, and Soc A. A and B. Those are the two you would target.
Reach out to get here [Math A] and here [Sped D] and here [Library].

Figure 5.11: Social Network Map of Pilot School One with Social Studies in Red.
This network visualization is mapped by graph theoretical layout by geodesic values. Social
Studies nodes are colored red.

101

Not only was she able to identify the fact that the social studies department was not well
connected to the rest of the network, she was able to identify which teacher would be the best
entry point to collaborating with the social studies department based on the number and types of
connections each member possessed.
Confirming and Modifying Preconceptions. The examination of the social network
diagrams resulted in confirmation or modification of librarians’ preconceptions of their own
practice. For example, one of the librarians mentioned, “I always feel too we have this disparity
between upstairs downstairs. I feel like I connect more with people upstairs because they’re
upstairs where the library is and I have fewer connections with people downstairs because
they’re all the way downstairs, they are at the other end of the building.” Based on this comment,
the researcher and librarian generated an ego-level social network diagram for the librarian using
a layout that mapped actors by location in the building (Figure 5.13). The librarian, who feared
that she spent too much time with teachers that were physically closer to her in the building,
noted, “it’s not so bad. It’s like okay… there’s still some connections.” By viewing the network
map in this configuration she was able to see the proportion of connections she had with teachers
upstairs (where the library is located) and downstairs. Her perception was that upstairs
connections would be much more robust, but in reality the difference was less than she believed.
Furthermore, by knowing who she is not connected to, and who indicates they are not connected
to her, she can begin to build relationships with those individuals and change faculty perceptions
of collaboration. The visualization of the social network changed her preconceptions.

102

Figure 5.12: Ego Social Network Map of Librarian in Pilot School One.
Nodes are categorized by location in the building: the lower left are staff that work primarily
downstairs, the upper right are staff that work primarily upstairs. The librarian node is red.
The other librarian also noted characteristics reflective of her own practice and remarked:
I see low numbers for myself and I know part of that is that I’m new, I’m still
learning the school, the personnel, the procedures, but I know it also reflects my
personality as well. [The district library coordinator] has said you need to be a
librarian on the go, on the move. Get out of the library, get out of the office. I try
that, that’s what I’m aiming for, but I just haven’t been successful at doing that.
Her statement reflects recognition of the fact that the statistical data (Figure 5.14) and
social networking maps (Figure 5.15) confirmed what she expected to see, that the connections
she has formed are not as robust as she’d like to see. Although 30 members of the school (Figure
5.15) go to her for information and resources pertaining to their work, there are 32 others that do

103

not have direct ties with her. As a result, she does not have access to their human capital and they
do not have access to her human capital.

Figure 5.13: Screenshot of Point Connectivity Matrix for Pilot School Two.

104

Figure 5.14: Ego Network Map of Librarian in Pilot School Two.
Nodes are organized by subject area and librarian is coded in red. The diagram depicts all of the
librarian’s incoming ties.
Having data that demonstrates the collaborative connections present in the building and
visualizing that data with social networking maps enabled both librarians to move beyond
“scatter plotting everywhere” and a “build it and they will come approach” to a more “targeted
and intentional approach.” By seeing the connections that existed and those that did not, they
were able to strategize potential approaches to improve collaboration in a way they had not
previously accomplished.
Unlike a report conducted by an external researcher, where the internal employee is
looking only at predefined network diagrams, the librarians using the SNASL Process have full
control of the social network analysis software. The librarians using SNASL are able to shift the

105

organization of the visualization, target specific individuals for examination using statistical
analysis, or ask specific questions based on preconceptions or curiosity, and then use the social
network visualizations to answer them.
While engaging in the process, the librarians recognized their own agency in
manipulating the social network diagrams within UCINET. During the participatory analysis
sections of the research, they often choose a specific individual or subject area whose ego or
subgroup network they wished to explore. The ability to make these sorts of choices and see the
various connections within and between departments was “exciting” to the participants who
acknowledge the potential of this type of insight.
Look at each department to see where reciprocal connections exist and don’t exist
to know who to reach out to within a specific department. Add the librarian in to
the analysis to see where the connections exist. By looking at the reciprocal
relationships, there’s the potential for inserting some kind of activity where two
individuals are collaborating and I’m facilitating. That’s really exciting.
The themes that emerged during this research: the role of network positions and the
potential for strategic improvement of collaboration through generative insight can be “exciting”
not only to the school librarian who wishes to evaluate and improve collaboration in his or her
school, but to school leaders who recognize the value of collaboration and its ability to lead to
improved school achievement. In the final chapter, a summary of the study, a summary of
findings, and implications for practice are presented. This information is provided not only for
the school library research or practitioner, but also for all educational leaders who wish to
strengthen collaborative practices in their schools.

106

Chapter 6: Discussion
Study Summary
Chapter I: Introduction defined the problem that was being studied and the need for the
problem to be address, and explained the question that guided the research: How can social
network analysis be used by school librarians to evaluate and improve the collaborative
networks in their school? Chapter 2: Literature Review provided an examination of the literature
on social capital and teacher collaboration in public schools. The value of teacher collaboration
to student achievement, the role of trust in the collaborative relationship, and the role of
professional learning communities in schools were discussed. In Chapter 3: Theoretical
Foundation, social capital and social network theory were defined and discussed, as well as
situated in the content of this study. On overview of common social network concepts in
educational research were discussed. Additionally, social network role positions were defined
and examined as a means of exploring social networks at the micro level. Since the outcome of
this dissertation is the development of the Social Network Analysis for School Librarians
(SNASL) Process, Chapter 4: Methods reported on the methods for each phase of the research
design, and the rationale behind those methodological decisions. In Chapter 5: Findings, the
findings of the pilot studies were presented and discussed. Chapter 6: Implications for Practice,
opens with a summary of the dissertation, reviews the findings, and offers recommendations for
both future research and implications for teacher collaboration in public schools.
Summary of Findings
The impetus for this research began with the effort to improve collaboration between the
school librarian and teachers in PK-12 schools using social network analysis to evaluate and
improve collaboration. The research design sought to answer the question: How can social

107

network analysis be used by school librarians to evaluate and improve the collaborative
networks in their school? Through the research process, the School Network Analysis for School
Librarians (SNASL) Process was developed to help provide school librarians with agency to
evaluate collaboration in their schools and then use their findings to develop strategic plans to
improve the collaborative network of their school. School network analysis has been used to
study teacher collaboration and social capital in general educational settings, and in one instance
was used to study school librarians (Schultz-Jones, 2009), but has yet to be studied as a
mechanism for school librarians to engage in their own local participatory research.
This study tested the SNASL Process as a mechanism to evaluate collaboration in schools
and create the potential for strategic improvement of existing collaborative structures in two midsized suburban pilot schools. School librarians engaged in participatory analysis using UCINET
(Borgatti et al., 2002), examining the social network data compiled by the researcher and guided
by the SNASL Process Worksheet.
The pilot studies revealed that the SNASL Process was effective in teaching basic social
networking concepts, and creating the potential for generative insight and strategic planning to
improve collaboration. In examining the data both statistically and through the use of social
network visualizations, school librarians noticed patterns of relationships they were otherwise
unaware of and confirm or modify existing preconceptions. Furthermore, school librarians in
each pilot study demonstrated understanding of each network position (information brokers,
central connectors, boundary spanners, and peripheral people) and were able to identify the
individuals operating in each role within their school network. They were then able to identify
strategic actions necessary to improve collaboration with individuals and subgroups.

108

Overall, the SNASL process enabled them to approach collaboration strategically. Instead
of “just scatter plotting everywhere… build it and they will come,” they could “be targeted.” As
one librarian expressed, “It’s targeted and intentional when you have the data. You’re like, okay,
look at this. It’s very clear that this is where I need to go, this is where I need to go.”
In particular, they recognized the value of the SNASL Process to a librarian that is new in
their building to use data to identify those with the most influence as a starting point for
collaboration. “Knowing who has the most influence, especially since I am still new - 2 years
isn’t long - it would help me to pinpoint the people I should be contacting and seeing if I can get
them to collaborate with me, because they are going to have influence over the people with
whom they are interacting.”
The ability to use data to see connections among and between departments within a
school and understand how to use the data to make choices and foster new connections was
“exciting” to the school librarians participating in the study. Understanding how to obtain and
use this data provided them agency they did not previously possess to manage their collaborative
networks and increase social capital in their schools.
Recommendations for Future Research
Applications of theory to new settings require a great deal of testing and refinement.
Although this study was built upon theory in the education and communication fields, it is the
first to apply these concepts to school libraries in this way. Therefore, other researchers can
continue to examine the usefulness of social network analysis to teacher and librarian
collaboration in K-12 schools; as well as test and refine the SNASL Process and increase its
applicability to other educational settings.

109

In particular, this study did not test the SNASL Process in elementary schools due to the
geographical lack of availability of certified librarians at the elementary level. Elementary
schools often have different collaborative structures, based on grade level and often more insular
(The MetLife survey of the American teacher: Collaborating for student success, 2010). Thus,
research in elementary schools is warranted.
Further study of the specific combination of instruments used in this study is also needed.
Testing with other survey instruments and other social network analysis software is needed to
validate findings. Testing is also needed to determine successful of the SNASL process without
the presence of a facilitator to collect and input data into the social network software, assisting
with technical issues, and answer clarifying questions.
Additionally, although the study demonstrated the usefulness of social network analysis
in producing generative insight and the potential for strategic improvement of collaboration,
future research may wish to examine the steps needed for librarians to move from identification
of strategy to implementation of that strategy.
Implications for Practice
A MetLife (The MetLife survey of the American teacher: Collaborating for student
success, 2010) survey showed that on average, teachers spent 2.7 hours per week in
collaboration. At the elementary school level, teachers are more likely to collaborate in grade
level groups; at the secondary level, they are more likely to meet in subject specific teams.
Teachers that spend more time in structured collaboration with other teachers are more likely to:
(a) collaborate school-wide and across grade and subject areas; be more satisfied with teaching
as a career; (b) be more likely to strongly agree that teachers trust each other; be more likely to
strongly agree that other teachers contribute to their success; (c) believe students have a sense of

110

responsibility for their own learning; (d) believe most teachers in their school hold high
standards for their students; and (e) be more likely to believe that collaboration has a major
impact on student achievement (The MetLife survey of the American teacher: Collaborating for
student success, 2010).
These beliefs and ideas on the impact of collaboration are not insubstantial. Teacher
collaboration has the potential for transformative change in schools, but it must be more than a
group of teachers given time to talk. Moore Johnson, Reinhorn, and Simon (2016) found that
when teams had purpose, that not one teacher found the teamwork a waste of
time. Accountability is also important for that time to be productive; critical to the success of
collaboration are school leaders who establish early on that collaboration time is time to work
toward team goals, not just "meeting" time (Poulos et al., n.d.). Focusing dialogue on
instructional practice is also critical for collaboration to have an impact on student achievement.
The literature reveals that professional development in schools is most effective when teachers
conduct professional inquiries into their own practice via teacher teams or professional learning
communities (McNicholl, 2013; Moore Johnson et al., 2016; Perry et al., 2006; Stoll et al.,
2006).
However, just telling teachers to work together is not enough to create effective
collaborative relationships. Teachers, especially those new to a school, may find it difficult to
integrate into the existing relationships structure. Social network analysis can be particularly
useful in this situation. Cross & Parker (2004) found that in the business world people learn the
most about their colleagues within the first year. After that, they increasingly turn to the people
they have come to trust, even if there are other people who might have more expertise. It is very
likely this concept is true in all types of organizations. It is not uncommon to hear a school

111

librarian exclaim that it is difficult to integrate into the existing school culture, especially if the
previous librarian was more isolated and collaborated less. Not only does one have to convince
teachers to trust them, and get to know them, but they have to perceive the librarian as an expert
worthy of consult and integrate him or her into their existing network of contacts (Christiansen et
al., 2004). Entropy makes this very difficult. Librarians new to their school can benefit from
understanding the structure of the school and therefore be more purposeful and efficient at
directing their energies.
Drawing a social network map allows the school librarian to visualize the network of
their school and see the interactions between colleagues. Once key players and structural holes
have been identified, the librarian can think strategically about building relationships and
increasing collaboration. This allows the librarian to think purposefully about where they fit into
the social network of the building and how to make changes to that role if desired. By
acknowledging the data, and devising a plan of action, the librarian can become an information
broker and connect people and departments together, thereby placing themself in a position of
influence and a bridge to greater collaborative networks. By examining one’s position in the
social network of the school, the librarian can uncover and then act to resolve many kinds of
personal and system-wide weaknesses (Cross & Parker, 2004).
But this process does not need to be limited to the librarian alone. School administrators
can benefit from utilizing social network analysis to examine the relationships between teachers
in their schools (Abrams et al., 2003). By identifying information brokers, boundary spanners,
central connectors, and peripheral people they too can leverage the influence these individuals
have in the network. They can also identify subgroups that are disconnected from the rest of the
network, peripheral individuals that should be more involved, or those that have too many

112

connections and may be suffering overload. This information, coupled with intimate knowledge
of their staff, can be used to create a more effective and collaborative team.
Scheduling. In order for anyone to engage in this process, however, support in needed
from the school administration (principal, superintendent, etc.). This support must not only
include permission to engage in the internal research, but general and overarching support in
developing a more collaborative culture within the school. One of the main ways that schools can
support effective collaboration is scheduling. Scheduling can be a help or a hindrance when
attempting to build up collaborative networks. A schedule that does not allow for organic
discussions or the ability to reach out to the most relevant resource for the task at hand, is one
that will result in poor and uninformed decision making (Cross & Parker, 2004). Schools that do
not build in sufficient PLC or collaboration time will see isolation continue in buildings, and
teachers continue to work alone, limiting the resources and knowledge at their disposal and
hindering student growth.
Furthermore, administrators who are often in back to back meetings will never have the
time to adequately hear from their teachers. Many schools have implemented leadership teams
and principals seek guidance and feedback from these teams. However, if input is relegated to
this subset of individuals, administrators will miss the potential insight that other qualified
educators can provide. Librarians who wish to be heard will often seek out leadership roles, but
these additional job responsibilities - if they become too great - can also result in the librarian
having less time to perform his or her regular job duties, or may require extensive volunteer time
outside of the school day.
Trust. School administrators would also be wise to develop and sustain trust amongst
teachers and between teachers and principals. In Chicago, an examination of reform efforts

113

demonstrated that the level of trust among teachers was the distinguishing characteristic between
schools that thrived under reform and those that did not (Bryk & Schneider, 2003), indicating
that trust can be essential to effective change in schools. Trust between teachers, and between
teachers and administrators, is critical to effective collaboration. Putnam (1993, 1995; 2001)
refers to trust as "social capital" and describes it as an asset that can be accumulated and spent.
Communities that rely on and use trust accumulate more social capital than those that do not use
trust diminish social capital.
Collaboration for shared decision-making can result in greater trust within the school
community. That trust can result in teachers being more willing to share ideas and resources,
creating a spiral of improvement, which results in greater self-efficacy for teachers and greater
student achievement. Unfortunately, shared decision making, as it has typically been enacted in
schools, affords teachers little real influence; instead, it is designed to increase teacher
satisfaction and acceptability of decisions by creating a mirage that teachers voices have weight
in the decision making process. This has been described as contrived collaboration (TschannenMoran & Hoy, 2007).
In a nationwide survey (Bacharach, Bauer, & Shedd, 1988), teachers indicated that
although they wanted to be involved in school and district decision making, their past
experiences indicated that their participation was contrived and they had no real influence,
reducing the likelihood of their future participation. Even though, as Conley, Schmiddle, and
Shedd (1988)point out, "their pedagogical knowledge, skills, and information about students are
arguably a school system's most valuable resource" (p. 266).
On the other hand, when teachers feel confident that their interests are being looked after;
and when principals extend trust to teachers through true shared decision making, teachers are

114

much more likely to agree with and abide by decisions made by administrators (TschannenMoran & Hoy, 2007). These effects of trust in schools are not just theoretical. Indeed, studies
have demonstrated that even after controlling for socioeconomic status, trust in schools is
significantly related to student improvement in reading and mathematics (Tschannen-Moran &
Hoy, 2007), but implementing collaboration and building trust requires not only buy-in from
teachers, but guidance and support from principals.
For administrators attempting to implement effective collaborative teams or reforms, it is
important to keep in mind that trust does not develop, nor is it based on, the same characteristics
between supervisors and subordinates as it does between peers. Studies demonstrate that
principals base their trust of teachers on the teachers' competence and commitment. Teachers, on
the other hand, view principals as trustworthy when they are kind, friendly, and demonstrate
integrity (Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 2007).
Recognizing Human versus Social Capital. Additionally, understanding the difference
between human and social capital can be beneficial to school administrators who are
implementing new initiatives or curriculum. One way to distinguish between social capital and
human capital is that human capital is a quality possessed by an individual; whereas, social
capital is a quality created between people (Burt, 1997). In the world of education, as with many
other fields, social capital can be more concretely defined as access to valuable resources (e.g.,
lesson materials, information) through one's social relationships with others; whereas human
capital is typically expressed through one’s academic degrees, training, and skills. Within a
school each teacher possess human capital in their educational background, training, knowledge,
skills, and abilities. When those teachers collaborate, they benefit from each other’s human
capital via social capital.

115

As explained in Chapter III, in the educational community, this concept can be seen in
the work of Pil and Leana (2009), who found that teachers that work with more highly educated
teachers will experience benefits in their own teaching practice and student academic
achievement, regardless of their own level of education, or human capital. In other words, the
human capital of the teacher has a higher benefit to the school when accessed via social capital
than it does when the teacher works exclusively in isolation. However, schools often focus on
developing human capital by sending teachers to trainings or providing professional
development time.
Although these opportunities are important, they do not benefit the collective unless
structures are in place to ensure that the information received by one individual can be accessed
by others in the network. In other words, teachers need time to talk, share, and observe each
other. School administrators can impact the frequency of this type of sharing by purposefully
structuring communities of practice so that teachers who might not otherwise interact have the
opportunity to do so.
In their examination of a failed mathematics reform effort in a public school district,
Coburn et al. (2013) found that district policy influenced collaboration between teachers. In the
first year of the initiative, when teachers discussed mathematics in their traditional grade-level
groups, their collaborative ties were based on proximity and homophily (similarity with others
based on gender, race, experience, etc.). In year 2, when the district changed the structure of the
meetings, proximity and then expertise became the most important quality for new
collaborations. Teachers sought out other teachers because they identified new experts in their
social networks based on groups formulated by the district. Had the teachers not been asked to
interact with new groupings, is it likely that homophily would have continued to be the

116

predominant method for social connections and teachers would have had less access to social
capital.
Evaluating Communities of Practice. Finally, evaluating school-wide systems for
communities of practice can increase school-wide supports for teachers increasing their selfefficacy and instructional resources, increase coherence across the school, improve collaborative
practice, and directly and indirectly increase student achievement. Gajda and Koliba (2008)
created a framework for evaluating and improving teacher collaboration within schools which
includes raising collaboration literacy by training teachers and administrators on the purpose of
communities of practice, identifying and inventorying communities of practice, reconfiguring
teacher teams if necessary, assessing the quality of collaboration, making corrections if
necessary, and recognizing accomplishments.
Raising collaboration literacy involves educating school leaders and shifting their
mindset from one of hierarchical structures to one where teachers are engaged in communities of
practice that form the building blocks for the larger professional learning community focused on
shared purpose and inquiry. By identifying and inventorying communities of practice, school
leaders can assess whether or not communities of practice are occurring in their schools and the
strength of horizontal and vertical ties in those communities. Size of the community of practice
(too big or too small) can also be assessed. Revisions can be made if necessary, based on the
needs and philosophies of the particular school. Assessing collaboration quality is also critical, in
that teacher teams must have verifiable goals, be focused in their communications, and be robust
in their discussions. School leaders should model effective collaboration, provide structures
when needed, and require agendas or minutes to ensure coherence if necessary. Enabling
effective communities of practice also involves recognizing accomplishments when teams are

117

able to improve their practice. Recognizing accomplishments can simply be verbal
acknowledgement at a staff meeting, to encouraging teams to share their process and results at
conferences.
Administrators who implement these ideas will increase the likelihood of teachers
working together and learning together. By working together in structured and efficient ways,
teachers build social capital throughout the school, increasing their knowledge base and resource
pool to directly and indirectly benefit their students. The School Network Anslysis for School
Librarians (SNASL) Process developed through this mixed methods research study demonstrates
how this can be done starting with the librarian as researcher and collaborator. Expanding the
analysis and reflection process based on data to a school’s entire staff may enable all members of
school to understand how to develop social capital for improved teacher practice and student
academic achievement, who to go to for assistance to improve workflow and efficiency, and how
to most effectively structure teams to improve instructional practice.