UNDERSTANDING LARGE-SCALE ONLINE COLLECTIVE ACTION:
EXAMINING THE CONDITIONS FOR AND OUTCOMES OF
ENTERPRISE SOCIAL MEDIA-BASED ONLINE IDEATION
IN A REGULATORY ORGANIZATION
By
NIK AHMAD ROZAIDI BIN NIK ABDUL RASHID

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Understanding Large-Scale Online Collective Action:
Examining the Conditions for and Outcomes of Enterprise Social Media-Based
Online Ideation in a Regulatory Organization
by NIK AHMAD ROZAIDI BIN NIK ABDUL RASHID

Dissertation Director:
Jennifer Gibbs

Crowdsourcing is one of the innovative ways organizations are employing to gather
quality ideas from a large group of people. It is used when organizations need to involve
a larger group of participants who are collectively invested in the outcome, such as for
initiatives with organization-wide implications, that which small group brainstorming
cannot sufficiently accomplish. The unpredictability of the process from start to finish
however raises questions on the conditions suitable for the large-scale online ideation
process that belies the collective action, because it does not seem to parallel that of small
group brainstorming. This dissertation documents a mixed-methods case study of a
regulatory organization that used enterprise social media for large-scale ideation, with a
focus on identifying the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation, and the
factors that may influence the quality of the ideation process. The study found that the
process is conditional on having an emergent facilitator, a longer deadline, not having
participants pre-selected, and technology that has unique affordances for ideation. The

ii

study also found that functional diversity, number of comments, and presence of
facilitator are significant predictors for the quality of the ideation process. The study has
theoretical and practical implications on ideation, enterprise social media use, collective
action, and for organizational communication.

Keywords: collective action, connective action, enterprise social media, social media,
affordance, ideation, brainstorming, innovation, organizational communication,
knowledge sharing, public good, collective good, communal good, employee engagement.


CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
This chapter establishes the rationale for the study of large-scale online
collective action in the context of large-scale online ideation. The study was motivated by
the rise of crowdsourcing in several facets of organizations. One recent phenomenon of
interest is organizations leveraging on communication technology to crowdsource ideas
from a large group of people for the purposes of innovation. Underlying this phenomenon
of large-scale online ideation is collective action theory, but applied in online settings,
and scaled up. Dissecting how the phenomenon occurs, several problems come to light,
namely the general unpredictability of the process from start to finish. Existing theories
of online collective action, brainstorming, and computer-mediated communication
(CMC) can explain some aspects but not fully, because this phenomenon is quite
different in a few respects. This study intends to address those gaps. The chapter
concludes with a preview of the rest of the dissertation.
1.1. Background and rationale
“Innovate to stay relevant” is perhaps an axiomatic expression held by the
management of many organizations especially those in a dynamic and competitive
environment. These organizations regularly explore ways to improve themselves, by
seeking ideas from various stakeholders, and developing solutions to solve identified
problems (Bjelland & Wood, 2008). Even governmental or regulatory organizations need
to improve themselves so that their policies and regulations remain relevant and do not
hinder innovation in the industry they are overseeing. At one end, open innovation
(Chesbrough, 2003) seeks feedback and ideas from external parties such as customers,
industry partners, or the general public (Leimeister, Huber, Bretschneider, & Krcmar,

2
2009). At the other end, closed or internal innovation utilizes employees as the source of
knowledge for issues and the ideas to address them. At the core of these approaches is
ideation, or the communicative process of sharing conceived ideas and sharing
knowledge when discussing the ideas (Kelley & Littman, 2001; Wolfe, 1994).
Ideation is akin to brainstorming but without the formality of that process
(Osborn, 1963). A defining feature of ideation, or brainstorming for that matter, has been
the size of the group of participants, which is generally small in number, in order to be
manageable and productive (Osborn, 1963; Valacich, Dennis, & Nunamaker, 1992).
Crowdsourcing ideas from the larger organizational population, i.e. large-scale ideation,
however is needed in situations when participation by a small, select group of people is
insufficient, because the effort may have organization-wide or broader implications. A
larger number of participants will also generate more ideas (Renzulli, Owen, & Callahan,
1974), and the discussion that follows has the potential to produce better quality ideas
that are more thought through from multiple dimensions (Perry-Smith, 2006; Zhou et al.,
2009). Large-scale ideation is also important to get more people to be collectively
invested in, or bought into the outcome, as they become involved in the process (Seibold
& Shea, 2001), which is useful when subsequently implementing the ideas. Example
cases include finding ways to improve process efficiency or cost efficiency across the
whole organization (e.g. Di Gangi & Wasko, 2009, Tierney & Drury, 2013), or
identifying new areas of business for the organization to explore (e.g. Bjelland & Wood,
2008).
Large-scale ideation however is problematic in several ways. The physical space
and time constraints for example place an upper limit on the number of concurrent

3
participants. Even if there was a large enough venue to accommodate all employees
simultaneously, ensuring their participation is close to impossible. There are bound to be
free riders (Olson, 1965) who are not incentivized to participate because there is no
adverse impact from not contributing, or that the effort to contribute exceeds any benefit
that may be gained. This impacts the ideation process from start to finish. The use of
communication technology addresses these issues to some extent -- for example, by
eliminating the need to be collocated to participate, or even to interact synchronously in
real-time -- which potentially enables a larger group of people to participate at the time of
their choosing (Drury, 2008; Helander et al., 2007; Muller et al., 2013). Participation
however remains a challenge, and the extent to which the ideation process itself can
occur online varies, as some parts are done manually offline (e.g. Bjelland & Wood,
2008). This in turn raises questions on the limits of the technology's ability to support
online ideation. In order to understand the problems of large-scale online ideation, several
constitutive areas come under investigation, namely the ideation process, which involves
the communicative acts of knowledge sharing and argumentation, the participants, and
the technology. A common thread running through these areas is collective action, and
specifically, collective action in online environments.
Collective action theory concerns the decision-making by individuals in a group
to participate to produce or obtain a public good, which can be consumed or enjoyed
without reducing its availability to others, who cannot be excluded from doing the same
(Olson, 1965). Collective action is the manifestation of the group taking the necessary
action together, because no single individual can afford to take a unilateral action or be
effective or successful at addressing the group problem. Typical examples of public

4
goods include public parks and national defense, but wage increases for unionized
workers are also a "public" good for the group, with collective wage bargaining or
industrial action as the manifestation of collective action. An intranet or centralized
database is also a public good because it holds communal information that is accessible to
all members and does not diminish when consumed (Fulk et al., 1996). Similarly in that
respect, the set of ideas shared to solve a group problem is also a public good, because it
fulfills the non-exhaustivity and non-excludability criteria, with ideation as the collective
action, because the group problem solving cannot be done unilaterally.
The decision to participate in collective action has been understood to be
economic, based on the evaluation of cost against benefit, with participation likely
occurring if the economic benefit from participating outweighs its cost (Olson, 1965).
Typically though, the cost of participating, monetary-wise or effort-wise, in producing a
public good is higher than the benefit gained, leading many to free ride the effort,
enjoying the good without contributing anything towards its production. Ideation
participants, when they are physically collocated as in a brainstorming group, also
experience similar considerations when thinking about the problem and communicating
their ideas to others, and in evaluating if the effort benefits them as much or more, which
could result in the minimization of participatory efforts. Nonetheless, collective action is
still triggered in many situations, with Olson (1965) arguing about its logic that there are
other drivers in place, such as an individual being invested in the outcome, or a small
select group organizing others to override the participation problem.
In light of technological advancements in communication, and how it has been
found to reduce the effort or cost of participation in many situations, it has been argued

5
that collective action in the online environment may not necessarily suffer from free
riding, and group members will hence participate more easily and without the need to be
formally organized (Bimber, Flanagin, & Stohl, 2005). The decision-making to
participate online was also reconceptualized as the transition from private to public
domain instead of by economic consideration. The diminishing role of the formal
organization and the increased sharing of personalized content (e.g. opinions and stories)
in coordinating online collective action, have been characterized instead as “connective”
action (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012). These revised approaches to understanding
collective action especially when performed online have been examined in several
specific cases such as on flash mobs utilizing social media to coordinate action, and for
organizing social movements (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012; Bimber et al., 2005; Fulk et
al., 1996). The theory however needs to be validated in different contexts, such as when
using different communication technologies such as enterprise social media (ESM), or in
a closed environment such as within a work organization, or for a specific purpose such
as for ideation.
ESM in particular are beginning to be widely adopted by organizations. A
survey by the International Data Corporation (IDC) of 700 senior executives of U.S.
companies found that two-thirds of the surveyed companies had deployed enterprise
social software (IDC, 2012). Another survey of 791 Western European small and
medium-sized businesses found that almost a third of them had deployed some form of
social media tools for business purposes, with adoption expected to reach 48% by mid2014 (IDC, 2013). Such organizations are exploring ways to capitalize on the social
interactivity of the technology, as part of a participatory management philosophy

6
(Seibold & Shea, 2001), in order to discover more productive and profitable uses of the
technology for the organization that leverage the collective intellectual capacity of the
employees, such as for enterprise-wide ideation. Research on ESM thus far has focused
on its knowledge sharing “affordances” (e.g. Gibbs, Rozaidi, & Eisenberg, 2013;
Majchrzak, Faraj, Kane, & Azad, 2013; Treem & Leonardi, 2012) -- which is defined in
the next chapter as characteristics that suggest possibilities for action (Gibson, 1986). At
the same time, studies on how the technology can be or is being used for large-scale
online ideation are limited (e.g. Bjelland & Wood, 2008; Di Gangi & Wasko, 2009;
Tierney & Drury, 2013).
It is therefore the imperative of this study to explore how the large-scale online
ideation process works on the ESM, as a tool to leverage the collective intelligence of
employees to gather ideas for identified problems, the conditions under which that
process occurs in organizations, and what ESM affordances contribute to the process.
Consequently, it is also necessary to identify the factors that may influence the quality of
the ideation process, in order to provide a more complete picture in understanding largescale ideation from start to finish.
Besides contributing to the practical knowledge of how ESM can be leveraged
and perhaps customized for innovative purposes, the study intends to contribute to the
discussion in the organizational communication and technology use space, about the use
and appropriateness of social media in the workplace, about how ESM may be used for
innovative purposes, and for engaging employees in participatory processes. It will also
contribute to a better understanding of how large-scale collective action works in online
contexts, in parallel to the theory of connective action (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012) thus

7
enhancing the theory of collective action. As ESM becomes more widely adopted by
organizations and their employees, the need for this study becomes greater.
Preview of the Dissertation
The rest of this dissertation is structured as follows: Chapter 2 presents a review
of relevant literature, and introduces concepts important for the study, such as collective
action, ideation, and enterprise social media. It also presents the theoretical framework,
discusses the concept of large-scale online ideation, presents gaps in research on largescale online ideation using ESM, as well as the rationale for the research questions and
hypotheses. Chapter 3 introduces the research site (a regulatory organization) which has
an ESM used by its employees. The chapter also discusses the methods used, namely
mixed-methods case study that is primarily based on the analysis of the server log data
from ESM usage over 13 months and from 20 in-depth interviews. The key variables and
analytical procedures are also introduced in the chapter. Chapter 4 contains quantitative
results of the log data analysis, followed by Chapter 5 that contains qualitative findings
from the interviews. Lastly, Chapter 6 covers the theoretical and practical implications of
the results and findings, limitations and future directions, as well as the concluding
section for the dissertation.

8
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter reviews the literature on collective action, brainstorming, and CMC
in order to assemble the requisite knowledge to investigate the large-scale online ideation
phenomenon. It discusses collective action theory in the context of the online
environment to provide the base understanding for research. It examines the formal rules
of brainstorming to help explain how ideation is carried out by participants. The chapter
then argues about the need for organizations to scale up their ideation process, for various
reasons, but importantly because it was enabled by CMC. The challenges that nonetheless
remain bring us to the first research question about the enabling conditions for large-scale
online ideation. Then the chapter turns to examining enterprise social media (ESM) as a
recent CMC, and exploring its suitability for ideation. To that end, the second research
question asks about the ESM affordances for ideation in order to characterize how users
appropriate this new technology for a specific purpose. Finally, the chapter closes by
exploring ideation quality in order to identify the factors that may influence the outcome,
for which several hypotheses are developed for testing. Together these form the
theoretical framework for examining large-scale online ideation.
2.1. Collective Action Theory and Ideation
2.1.1. Collective action theory
Collective action is the manifestation of a group of individuals working together
to achieve a common goal. Collective action theory concerns the decision-making by
individuals to participate in the group activity to produce or obtain a public good, which
otherwise could not be produced or obtained unilaterally (Olson, 1965). Borrowing from
economics literature, a public good by definition is non-exhaustive (or non-rivalrous) and

9
non-excludable, which means that it can be consumed or enjoyed without reducing its
availability to others, who in turn cannot be excluded from doing the same (Chamberlin,
1974; Hardin, 1982; Samuelson, 1954). Based on the first two criteria mentioned -exhaustiveness and excludability -- there are therefore three other types of goods, namely,
private goods (exhaustive and excludable), common pool resources (exhaustive and nonexcludable), and club goods (non-exhaustive and excludable). However, these other types
of goods are not pertinent for collective action, because they are either exhaustive or
excludable. Nevertheless, to avoid the confusion that public good is for the public at
large, as with those provided by the government, such as national defense, the term
"collective good" (Marwell & Oliver, 1993) will be used in this study when referring to a
good that is non-exhaustive and non-excludable. An example of a collective good is a
union-negotiated wage increase, because it can be enjoyed by all employees in the group,
such as part-time lecturers, without regard to union membership. Further, the wage
increase is unlikely to be achieved by unilateral action, but is more achievable with a
collective effort (and including a threat of industrial strike). Similarly, a set of ideas
shared to solve a group problem is also a collective good, because the ideas do not
diminish as they are shared (non-exhaustivity) and everyone in the group can enjoy the
benefit from the problem solving (non-excludability), with ideation as the collective
action, and because the group problem-solving cannot be accomplished unilaterally.
Collective action theory however suggests that collective action is difficult to
occur because even though individuals in a group may share a common interest with
other members, they also have selfish interests (Olson, 1965). An individual aware of a
group problem would not normally have the incentive to share with others his or her

10
ideas to solve it. Instead, rational individuals would weigh the benefits accruing from
participating in the collective action against the cost that they would incur. Hence, if
participation is costly, and the benefit from the joint action is marginal or small, then
rational individuals will decide not to participate, and vice versa if the economic benefit
exceeds the cost. However, if the individual discovers that there is no cost to not
participating, in that he suffers no penalty, he could decide to free ride. If he observes that
others can also enjoy the good without contributing, due to the non-excludable property
of collective good, then he definitely will free ride.
Despite the possibility of non-participation, the theory nevertheless suggests that
collective action can still occur under two non-exclusive conditions. First, if the cost to
participate is reduced, and second, if the benefit from participation is increased.
Participation cost can be reduced if there was some kind of selective incentives, such as
status, material good or financial reward offered, which would help offset the upfront
cost or help overcome the temptation to free ride (Oliver, 1980; Olson, 1965).
Additionally, participation cost can also be reduced if there was someone sufficiently
altruistic or unselfish to make a large enough contribution that reduces the cost for
everyone, monetary-wise or effort-wise. This individual may be privileged to gain from
the outcome or gain significant personal benefit relative to others in the group (Olson,
1965) and wouldn't mind contributing more than others, especially in the early part when
the returns are not forthcoming (Markus, 1990; Marwell & Oliver, 1993). Hence,
someone who stands to gain tremendously from solving the group problem is theorized to
take a lead in generating and sharing ideas, thus reducing the cost of contribution to
others who then can participate more easily in discussing the ideas already shared.

11
However, as the collective good requires collective effort and cannot be produced
unilaterally, the individual still relies on others to do their part in order to ensure the
delivery or creation of the collective good.
Second, a small group of participants can combine and coordinate their efforts
towards securing the collective good. However, this requires them to communicate
beforehand with each other about the problem, so that the common realization or
solidarity about the shared problem or goal can occur, and efforts can consequently be
coordinated. This also has the effect of reducing the contribution cost for others.
Whichever way, benefit from participation may increase as and when more people
participate in the collective effort, who gets to realize the benefit from the collective good
to themselves. This is the "logic" of collective action, i.e. it is only "logical" for a group
to work together if they were in communication with each other, thus becoming aware of
the commonality of problem or goal (Olson, 1965).
Overall, the decision to participate in the collective action can be reduced to a
binary choice of contributing or not, depending on how the balance between cost and
benefit is tipped (Bimber et al., 2005). Essentially, the decision point, according to the
theory, is whether it is worthwhile to free ride the collective action, especially if the
decision to not participate carries no cost or penalty.
2.1.2. Collective action theory in online setting
With the advancement in communication technologies, many informational and
communicative tasks have been made easier. Search engines have made it easier to find
information buried in the vast network of websites. Personal stories and opinions have
become easier to publish and share. Communicative reactions to published materials have

12
also become easier to make. In terms of collective action, these technologies have made it
easier to coordinate independent actors to contribute towards a collective good, often at a
scale larger than small groups (McCaughey & Ayers, 2003). In organizational settings,
online databases residing on the intranet created by the community become a communal
good as the contents are shared among the members without affecting its availability to
others (Fulk et al., 1996). Outside formal organizations, interested individuals can be
coordinated to meet and act at a certain place and time in a "flash mob" (Rheingold,
2003) or participate in an industrial strike. More recently, the use of CMC to share
personalized stories of hope or suffering has mobilized individuals to assemble and fight
for a cause, in what Bennett and Segerberg (2012) term as connective action. These
collective goods are mainly characterized by the largely uncoordinated individuals
contributing information to a central place without knowing who the other contributors
are, and without realizing what they are creating is a communal product. Examples
include crowdsourced lists or online databases that can be used by unknown others to
further their own interests, such as a list of non-governmental organizations for use by the
international community (e.g. eldis.org; Bimber et al., 2005), or as simple as a list of
cooking recipes.
As individual contribution online becomes easier, the cost of deciding to
participate in a collective action becomes an unimportant factor (Yuan et al., 2005). For
example, in contemporary media, the request for someone to share or forward an email,
document, or message, is virtually costless (but not necessarily harmless), that there is
almost no consideration given to do it (except when thinking about the harm it can do).
Additionally, the use of certain technologies makes private information automatically

13
public, that free riding by withholding information becomes more effortful than sharing
(Bimber et al., 2005). Hence, the question of whether to free ride also becomes unhelpful
towards understanding collective action. The role of formal organization in coordinating
action that is the backbone of Olsonian collective action theory becomes limited when
explaining this new kind of participation (Lupia & Sin, 2003) and therefore was in need
of reevaluation in light of developments in communication technologies and especially
how people use them. Bimber et al. (2005) in particular argue that the decision to
participate in collective action should instead be reframed as the boundary-crossing from
the private to public domain, rather than a cost-benefit balance. In other words, whenever
someone contributes something in the online space, he has shifted private information
into the public space. Consequently, when two or more individuals do the same,
collective action is said to have occurred. The authors argue that communication
technologies have made the boundary between private and public more porous, resulting
in the ease with which information and knowledge sharing happens. Nonetheless, where
boundaries between private and public is firmer, such as within a group, organization, or
community, then the boundary-crossing becomes costly, and the free rider issue comes
into play. In other words, Bimber et al. (2005) are not rejecting the Olsonian theory, but
reducing it to a special case of collective action. The authors further argue that in such
situations, the role of the formal organization, often Weberian, becomes important in
order to persuade individuals to participate in the collective action, by way of selective
incentives mentioned earlier. On the contrary, when the boundary is porous, the role of
formal organization becomes diminished, and less formal organizational forms can take
shape if needed, depending on individual circumstances of the collective action.

14
In short, collective action theory that originated to explain how selfish individuals
can come together for a common purpose on the basis of economic considerations
became problematic when new technology reduces the organizing cost to almost zero.
Revisions to the theory that looked into how users appropriate new CMC to create new
explanations has made the theory more helpful in explaining collective action that occurs
online or is coordinated online. This serves as a basis for examining the ideation process,
which at the core is also a form of collective and connective action.
2.1.3. Ideation vis-a-vis brainstorming
For this study, ideation is defined as the problem solving process in which ideas
are collectively shared, debated, and evaluated, which occurs prior to the ideas being
presented to decision makers for consideration and implementation (Kelley & Littman,
2001; Wolfe, 1994). Ideas, meanwhile, are defined as suggestions made in response to an
identified problem. In other words, the ideation process is an intermediate process
between problem definition and management consideration, during which ideas are
developed into meaningful proposals. Ideation is thus a cornerstone process in
organizational innovation (Wolfe, 1994). This is necessarily a broader definition than
those found in some studies (e.g. Briggs & Reinig, 2007; Jackson & Poole, 2003) in order
to capture the communication practices surrounding the development of ideas, because
idea conception or generation alone -- as defined in those studies -- is insufficient for that
purpose. By this definition, ideation becomes an important organizational communication
process, as it embodies elements of collective action, knowledge sharing and
argumentation, which themselves are fundamental communication processes in
organizations, including for decision making (El-Shinnawy & Vinze, 1998).

15
As a problem solving process, ideation is similar to brainstorming (Osborn,
1963), although by this study’s definition, ideation does not mandate creativity or
creative procedures to generate ideas as does brainstorming. Additionally, in many
organizations, brainstorming connotes a structured and formal exercise or technique in
idea generation, whereas ideation is less formal and more flexible in order to facilitate the
exploration of thoughts and ideas to solve a problem (Donius, 2012). Moreover,
brainstorming is usually measured in terms of quantity of ideas generated (Osborn, 1963),
while ideation, as this study will argue, places a greater importance on quality. Also,
brainstorming is typically done in small, face-to-face groups of between 5 to 10 people,
because research has suggested that it is most productive when the group size is within
that range (Valacich et al., 1992). Generally, brainstorming productivity increases with
the number of participants involved, but above the upper threshold, the per person
productivity starts to plateau and decrease as the size grows further (Renzulli et al.,
1974).
Additionally, the facilitator is an important person in brainstorming, whose role
is to encourage participation and to manage the process by controlling the turn-taking and
enforcing the ground rules (Aakhus, 2001, 2013; Osborn, 1963). Without the facilitator,
the flow tends to be disrupted as it is a natural reaction for participants to quickly criticize
ideas that are incompatible with their existing understanding. Meanwhile, the participants
are selected based on their functional areas to provide constructive, relevant and diverse
input in the problem solving process, as studies have found that idea productivity and
creativity are enhanced when participants come from diverse knowledge backgrounds
(Perry-Smith, 2006; Zhou et al., 2009), although heterogeneous groups tend to be tougher

16
to convince. The participants are also of similar ranks to avoid productivity issues caused
by power differentials arising from status differences (Adams, 1953).
Deconstructing ideation into its phases -- idea generation, idea development, and
idea evaluation (Price, 1985) -- allows for the exploration of the communication activities
that support ideation, although it must be noted that these phases are based on the
normative model of facilitated, time-bound, face-to-face ideation exercise. First, the idea
generation phase is characterized by the production of ideas by participants in the
process. There are two main techniques for generating ideas, what the literature calls the
nominal group and the interactive group techniques. The nominal group technique (NGT;
Taylor, Berry, & Block, 1958) involves participants generating ideas individually before
being nominally brought together by the facilitator who collates the ideas without further
interaction. The interactive group technique (Osborn, 1963) sees participants sitting
together to contribute ideas in rotational sequence, actively aware of what others have
shared with the group. The interaction is guided by four principles: (1) focus on quantity;
(2) defer judgment; (3) welcome wild ideas; and (4) encourage existing ideas to be
combined and improved (Osborn, 1963). The intent of this guideline is to increase
ideation productivity while avoiding what Osborn described as “driving with the brakes
on” (Isaksen, 1998, p. 4) due to the tendency for individuals to criticize ideas that are
incompatible with their existing mindset.
The next phase is the idea development phase, which is characterized by
discussion about the shared ideas, which may include asking clarifying questions,
exchanging opinions, or arguing about the merits of the ideas (Price, 1985). The objective
of this phase is to eliminate redundant ideas as well as to consolidate and refine the

17
remaining ones in order to develop a case for evaluation in the subsequent phase. The
intended outcome would be a list of existing and new ideas with their respective strengths
and weaknesses, although it is entirely possible that some ideas will not be developed at
all or only to a limited extent.
Finally, the idea evaluation phase is characterized by assessment of the ideas
(Price, 1985; Wolfe, 1994). The goal is to have either a rank-ordered list or grouping of
ideas categorized by specific evaluation criteria. This helps to filter out poorly developed
or indefensible ideas and facilitates the subsequent process of decision-making by
management, by prioritizing the ideas. This phase may see the participants making some
collective decisions about the ideas, by voting or scoring them to give an indication about
the quality of the ideas. Nonetheless, it is also possible that the participants are not able to
reach this phase due to disagreement or a lack of consensus.
In sum, ideation process is more than just idea generation because of the
inherent communication activities, and it is also closely associated with brainstorming but
without the mandatory creative process. Understanding the normative phases of ideation
helps to illustrate the potential challenges of ideation as it is undertaken.
2.1.4. Theoretical communication challenges within the ideation phases
Much of the literature on ideation has been based on the information
management approach, which either ignores or takes for granted the communication and
social aspects of ideation. Communication however is very important in working the
ideation process and in shaping its outcomes. In the idea generation phase, ideas are
shared so that others may learn from it. Bandura’s (1977) social learning theory suggests
that this knowledge sharing triggers the cognitive process to compare and relate what is

18
learned from others with the knowledge that one already possesses. The learnerparticipant also observes how the contributor openly communicates his/her idea to others,
or as Young (1965) described as “submit[ting] to criticism by the judicious” (p. 32).
Together these challenge the mind to produce an idea to help solve the problem.
Appreciating the psychological benefit of conceiving an idea, the learner consequently
shares it with others to perpetuate the social learning experience. Social comparison
theory (Festinger, 1954) further suggests that participants in the group may be motivated
to elevate their own self-esteem and seek social recognition by emulating the level of
performance by others, by contributing more ideas and especially good ideas to the
ideation process.
The synchronicity of communication in face-to-face ideation however may
cause problems for some participants. Studies have documented several issues associated
with collocated social interaction in ideation, namely production blocking, evaluation
apprehension, and free riding. Production blocking is the participants’ inability to
contribute their own ideas after listening to others, after finding that their ideas have just
become less original, which causes their thought process to be interrupted, and feeling
inferior as a result (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987; Lamm & Trommsdorff, 1973). Evaluation
apprehension is the fear of being judged negatively by others for ideas that seem poorly
conceived or incompletely thought through (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987). If the judgment or
criticisms are unfettered, the situation may even evolve to become the fear of retaliation
(Camacho & Paulus, 1995). Meanwhile, free riding or social loafing is the nonparticipation by individuals who believe that their contribution is unnecessary and/or not
individually rewarding or not penalizable (Latane, Williams, & Harkins, 1979) because

19
the group interaction increases anonymity and reduces identifiability for recognition
(Harkins, 1987; Olson, 1965). Furthermore, face-to-face group discussions may also
involve tangential discussions (Jackson & Poole, 2003) and social conversations that
distract participants from producing good ideas compared to when participants are
focused on the task, although such conversations may also be argued to facilitate the
subsequent idea generation process (McGrath, 1984; Nunamaker et al., 1991).
In the idea development phase, participants may actively engage in social
learning and social comparison, as they debate or argue about the contributed ideas,
exchanging questions and answers, seeking clarifications and providing justifications, as
well as exchanging opinions for or against the ideas. This phase however may also be
unduly influenced by some dominant member’s social influence, pushing the group in a
certain direction, especially in cases of ineffective facilitation (Jablin & Seibold, 1978;
McGrath, 1984). Similarly in the idea evaluation phase, there may be social pressures to
conform with group norms or groupthink (Janis, 1972) when participants collaboratively
negotiate and decide how the different ideas should finally be decided upon. Overall, the
ideation process clearly demonstrates the collective action process embedded within,
where interactive communication and coordination play a critical role in shaping the
ideation outcomes.
In sum, face-to-face ideation presents its own communication challenges
throughout the normative phases. Some of these challenges may have been addressed
when the face-to-face interaction is substituted with a computer-mediated one, which
arises from the need to automate certain ideation tasks such as keeping track of shared
ideas and their discussion points. The flexibility of not being collocated at the same time

20
has enabled a different kind of interaction among participants, which gives rise to other
kinds of challenges. In the next section, the review turns to CMC and how it has and can
facilitate the ideation process, and whether the communication challenges previously
identified in face-to-face ideation still apply.
2.2. The Enabling Role of CMC in Ideation
Traditionally, CMC includes communication media that run on computer
software (McQuail, 2005), which would include email, instant messaging, computer
conferencing, and online databases (Walther, 1992), but exclude telephone and television
as well as physical communication artifacts such as letters, posters, and facsimile (Daft &
Lengel, 1984; Walther, 1996). Nowadays however, CMC includes basically all
communication technologies including smartphone-based ones, as well as any text-based
electronic communication such as text messaging (or short message service; SMS),
internet or web-based systems, and social media (boyd & Ellison, 2007; Katz & Rice,
2002; O’Reilly, 2005). CMC may also be classified into asynchronous and synchronous
types (Walther, 1992), but again nowadays, the boundary between the two is blurred due
to the modularity of today’s technology that enables a single technology to offer multiple
functionalities (Ellison & boyd, 2013).
From a communication perspective, however, CMC is largely text-based, despite
the technologies’ increasing use of multimedia content such as images and videos,
because subsequent interactions and replies are still mainly text-based. As such,
communication using text-based CMC necessarily provides a different experience than
face-to-face communication. The reduction of nonverbal cues in CMC prevents certain
kinds of messages -- those with high ambiguity and uncertainty -- from being

21
communicated effectively (Daft & Lengel, 1984). CMC also have less social presence
(Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976) suggesting that online conversations are impersonal
and cold, but which are efficient for task-based communication (Walther, 1996, 2011).
Nevertheless, social information processing theory (Walther, 1992) suggests that CMC
users look for cues in the communicated text as substitute for nonverbal ones, based on
the premise that they have an inherent social need to build relationships regardless of the
communication media available to them. Hence, given time and interest, CMC users have
the ability to transform impersonal communication exchange into interpersonal ones, and
may even elevate it to the hyperpersonal level, which occurs when their social
relationships and personal identity can be managed more effectively online than in faceto-face settings (Walther, 1996). Yet, when CMC users depend heavily on the technology
to communicate, it modifies how certain work and social tasks are performed (Ellison,
Heino, & Gibbs, 2006; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). CMC’s ability to support multiple
parallel and distinct conversations, compared to a serial conversation in face-to-face
settings (Valacich et al., 1994), therefore suggests it has benefits for ideation.
CMC have facilitated ideation in several ways. Electronic brainstorming systems
(Dennis & Valacich, 1993) have been used to record-keep ideas electronically,
substituting the role of idea recorder by enabling participants to manually type in their
ideas to a central database, which also features the ability to reproduce the list of
contributed ideas on-demand. Group decision support systems (DeSanctis & Gallupe,
1987) meanwhile offered several important functionalities for ideation, such as: enabling
the facilitator to start and stop the process to control the turn-taking; enabling each idea’s
strengths and weaknesses to be collaboratively documented by the participants; enabling

22
consolidation, refinement, or deletion of ideas; as well as enabling participants to vote on
or score the contributed ideas (Aakhus, 2000; Gallupe, DeSanctis, & Dickson, 1988;
Jackson & Poole, 2003; Leonardi, Treem, & Jackson, 2010).
Early implementations of these systems required participants to be physically
collocated in a meeting room (e.g. Poole, DeSanctis, Kirsch, & Jackson, 1994) or in a
laboratory setting. The real-time interaction afforded by this arrangement continues to
provide the facilitator with a degree of control over the participants and the environment,
to ensure the process achieves its desired outcome of producing a set of good ideas.
Later, the development of internet technology allowing remote connections to centralized
systems provided participants with the opportunity to participate in the ideation process
remotely from distributed locations (Valacich et al., 1994). Some implementations
continue to require participants to be online at the same time, while others allow
participants to share and discuss ideas without being bounded by space or time
(Cummings, Schlosser, & Arrow, 1996; Kiesler & Sproull, 1992). These implementations
leverage asynchronous CMC like electronic discussion boards, email listservs, and
newsgroups, which may be more readily found as part of an organization’s suite of
collaborative tools (Michinov & Primois, 2005).
The implication of using CMC for ideation is that it helps to address some of the
aforementioned ideation productivity constraints (Dennis & Valacich, 1993). For
example, by enabling participants to contribute their ideas at the same time, as soon as
the process is started without having to wait for turns, computer-mediated ideation
addresses the issue of production blocking caused by delays in contributing ideas
(Valacich et al., 1994). Additionally, in ideation systems that allow anonymity, the

23
evaluation apprehension issue may be addressed by making idea contributors
unidentifiable (Cooper, Gallupe, Pollard, & Cadsby, 1998). However, the anonymity may
also worsen the problem of free riding. Consequently, it is not surprising that research
found that computer-mediated ideation groups were more productive than face-to-face
groups (Valacich et al., 1994; Valacich, George, Nunamaker, & Vogel, 1994) especially
for large-sized groups (Dennis & Valacich, 1999), although the different nature of
interaction between online and offline makes the comparison unfair. For small groups
though, computer-mediated ideation may not be as beneficial, and working alone in a
nominal group may even be more productive (Pinsonneault, Barki, Gallupe, & Hoppen,
1999). Beyond contributing ideas, participants may for example engage in question and
answer (Q&A) exchanges about the ideas (Ehrlich, Lin, & Griffiths-Fisher, 2007; Thom
et al., 2011), as well as share opinions or make arguments and counter-arguments about
the merits of the ideas (Jessup, Connolly, & Galegher, 1990; Poole et al., 1994), although
these can also be done offline. In short, CMC may have some advantages in terms of
productivity when it comes to facilitating participants to undertake ideation, but a more
important difference is in terms of its ability to scale up participation.
2.3. Scaling-Up Ideation Beyond Small Collocated Groups
Recent research in organizational innovation and management suggests that
organizations are seeing enterprise-scale communication technologies as an opportunistic
tool that may be used to leverage on the collective intelligence of employees to help drive
innovation as well as to help identify and solve organizational problems (Chesbrough,
2003; Leimeister et al., 2009; Malone & Klein, 2007). Involving employees in
organizational decision-making, where and when appropriate, is beneficial not just to the

24
organization, but to the employees as well. Participatory decision-making is practiced in
organizations to varying degrees, depending on the process, the formality of the
arrangement, the duration of the involvement, and the extent to which employees may
influence the final decision, among other factors (Cotton et al., 1998). Certainly not all
situations warrant employee participation, such as in crisis or emergency situations, when
authoritative decision-making may be more efficient and effective (Bonn & RundleThiele, 2007; Dutton, 1986). In most other situations though, enhanced employee
participation has been linked to improved organizational outcomes such as increased
productivity (Cotton et al., 1988; Wagner, 1994). Human relations theory (Mayo, 1975;
Smith, 1998) suggests that organizations that view employees as individuals, rather than
as economic labor (e.g. Gillespie, 1993), tend to be more sensitive to the needs of
employees, whose cooperation may be secured via several ways, one of which is through
their direct participation in key organizational processes. Employees who are more
involved in the process, are more motivated and willing to contribute their efforts to
ensure the success of their participation (Cheney, 1995; Seibold & Shea, 2001), which in
turn is correlated with greater job satisfaction and productivity (Miller & Monge, 1986).
As such, the ability to engage employees in key organizational processes is desired by
many modern organizations, due to the benefits it brings not just to the organization, but
also to the employees (Stohl & Cheney, 2001).
Ideation is one of the organizational processes that may benefit from wider
employee participation. Employees are also an undertapped organizational resource due
to how they are organized by functional areas as Weberian structures do. As such,
crowdsourcing ideas from employees is a way to address both issues simultaneously.

25
Crowdsourcing is the act of getting the “crowd” or a large group of independent
individuals to give or do something towards a common purpose (Brabham, 2008, 2013;
Howe, 2006; Surowiecki, 2004). Usually the big task is parceled into smaller ones -called “microtasks” (Brabham, 2013) -- in a way that can help accomplish the big task. In
crowdfunding, which is a type of crowdsourcing, the big amount required to fund a
project is divided into smaller bits that can be funded more easily by more people, than if
funded fully by a few. The advantage of crowdsourcing is that small tasks can be
accomplished more easily, which also contributes to the completion of the larger task.
The disadvantage however is that the task must be easy enough, or the cause must be
interesting enough, to attract interest from a lot of people (Brabham, 2013). For ideation
to be crowdsourced, literature suggests that the process be done online, but also
subdividing the problem-solving process into smaller tasks, and offering it openly to all
target participants, so that there is enough critical mass who will participate in the
process. Nonetheless, not much else is known on crowdsourcing ideas, such as who
should be involved, how should online ideation be performed, or what should be in place
for large-scale online ideation to happen. This leads to the first research question:
RQ1: What are the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation?
2.4. Enterprise social media use in organizations
One of the more recent CMC seeing increasing adoption in the workplace is
enterprise social media (ESM) (Leonardi, Huysman, & Steinfield, 2013). ESM are not
merely a version of public social media tools implemented behind the corporate firewall
for internal use by the employees (Brzozowski, 2009; DiMicco et al., 2009), but are a
suite of integrated software programs based on Web 2.0 technologies (O’Reilly, 2005)

26
customized to fit the requirements of the adopting organization. Commercial examples
include IBM Connections, Jive, and Microsoft Yammer. The suite of programs allow
employees to perform several communication-related tasks, as Leonardi et al. (2013) put
it, namely to:
(1) communicate messages with specific coworkers or broadcast messages to
everyone in the organization, (2) articulate a list of coworkers with whom they
share a connection, (3) post, edit, and sort text and files linked to themselves or
others, and (4) view the messages, connections, text, and files communicated,
articulated, posted, edited and sorted by anyone else in the organization at any
time of their choosing. (p.2)
That said, in this era of rapid software development -- when functionalities change in a
flash and become obsolete quickly, and distinctions between features are increasingly
blurred by software mashups (Ellison & boyd, 2013) -- ESM could be argued to be any
CMC that allows employees to socially communicate, collaborate, and network with
fellow employees. So, a three-way mashup of the corporate email system (for
communication), the electronic shared folders system (for collaboration), and the
organization’s online staff directory (for networking), when combined by a single login,
would technically be an ESM -- except that it will still be used in a formal way. Social
software on the other hand tends to be used in an informal manner, because the nature of
communication is less official. So unless the assembled software suite is used in a less
formal way in the organization, including in terms of proper language use or following
certain protocols when communicating, then the system cannot really be called an ESM.
ESM are being adopted at a record pace (IDC, 2012, 2013) presumably due to
the net benefits that the technology offers. Most work organizations, except for leading
technology companies, are not known for adopting just any publicly popular technology.
This itself is interesting because CMC prior to Web 2.0 tend to begin life in organizations

27
first before being widely adopted by the public (e.g. email). This reversed adoption
sequence is perhaps because Web 2.0 technologies, as the backbone of ESM and social
media, are built around the user experience, enabling users for example to create and
publish their own content directly to the Internet (O’Reilly, 2005) and bypassing the
traditional media channels such as television and print publications. Readers may also
openly interact directly with the authors and fellow readers by commenting on blogs
(Efimova & Grudin, 2007; Huh et al., 2007), as well as collaborate and co-create
documents in wikis (Majchrzak, Wagner, & Yates, 2013; Kittur & Kraut, 2008), as
examples. The most notable user experience with social media technologies is arguably
the ability to form connections, or network, with other users in the online community,
and when mashed-up with the ability to exchange messages in almost real-time, this
creates an unprecedented form of online communication, that is manifested as social
network sites (boyd & Ellison, 2007; Ellison & boyd, 2013). boyd (2010) argues that
users of social network sites contend with a different kind of dynamics that shape the
communication environment. First, the existence of invisible audiences challenges how
one should behave and act online. In its place, users create imagined audiences to assess
if their behavior is socially appropriate, interesting, and relevant. Second, given the
different categories of relationships one would typically have, it is important that the
communication with these various peoples be properly managed, by strategizing the
communication, so that their impression of the self is maintained (Goffman, 1959). In
social media however, the openness and equal access others have with the online self,
collapse these various social contexts (Ellison, Gibbs, & Weber, 2015; Marwick & boyd,
2011; Vitak, Lampe, Gray, & Ellison, 2012) making it difficult to create a

28
communication strategy that satisfies the various impression and privacy requirements.
Third, without control over the contexts, the distinction between what is considered
private and public are increasingly blurred. In the context of ESM, the boundaries
between the personal and the official are similarly also becoming permeable. The
socialness of ESM is suggested to be incompatible with workplace norms (Treem,
Dailey, & Pierce, 2013), creating internal conflicts especially among the younger
generation of workers who perceive and are more used to using social media for personal
rather than official communication. For others who desire to clearly demarcate the two
relationship domains, the adoption of ESM in the workplace may have made it more
difficult to maintain the separation (Skeels & Grudin, 2009). Lastly, maintaining social
and work relationships on ESM have been found to be highly demanding of one’s time
and attention, resulting in strategic use (and non-use) of the technology in order to
accomplish work goals (Gibbs et al., 2013; Lampe, Vitak, & Ellison, 2013). Hence,
considering the challenges of using ESM, for work organizations to adopt these suites of
largely untested technological tools for internal use suggests that ESM may have some
unique abilities that decision-makers in those adopter organizations believe can address
some issues in the workplace, including for ideation.
2.5. Potential of ESM for Large-Scale Online Ideation
ESM seem to be well-suited for this kind of task as it is widely accessed by the
whole organization, especially when implemented in the corporate intranet. The equal
opportunity for all credentialed users to participate in online communication processes
has heralded ESM specifically, and social media more generally, as democratizing
participation (Campbell, Lambright, & Wells, 2014; Klang & Nolin, 2011; O’Reilly,

29
2005). Examining the activities of each ideation phase suggests that it is possible for
ideation to be crowdsourced. Contributing ideas, asking questions, providing answers,
sharing opinions, documenting strengths and weaknesses for each idea, and voting on the
ideas -- when done online -- are small enough tasks to make large-scale ideation possible.
If factors motivating individual participation in face-to-face ideation are unchanged, this
open access to ESM to perform small ideation tasks could lead to greater overall
employee involvement in the online ideation process. Furthermore, as long as the
involvement is pervasive throughout much of the organization, the technology could even
help to enhance communication across hierarchical, functional, and geographical
boundaries (DiMicco et al., 2008; Gibbs, Eisenberg, Rozaidi, & Gryaznova, 2015).
Nevertheless, there is still plenty to be learned about how online ideation on
ESM works because not many organizations have done it. Of the few studies on the topic
(e.g. Bjelland & Wood, 2008; Di Gangi & Wasko, 2009; Helander et al., 2007), the focus
was on the management of the ideation platform and/or process. For example, Bjelland
and Wood (2008) investigated IBM’s innovation jam, which was a large-scale ideation
session involving the global IBM organization. Employees contributed as many ideas as
possible for a few days about areas for future innovation, after which a managerial team
sat down to filter and review the ideas. Subsequently, the team shortlisted the good ideas
under several umbrella themes, present them back to the employees, who then
participated in the discussion again. Finally, the managerial team finalized the ideas that
were deemed innovative and feasible for the IBM organization to pursue. While the study
showcased the feasibility of using ESM to conduct large-scale ideation, it does not inform
us about how employees used the technology. It would be interesting to investigate for

30
example what aspects of ESM motivate employees to contribute ideas and discuss them
while being occupied at work. It would also be interesting to know how the ideation
process is actually subdivided into smaller tasks, which enables it to be crowdsourced
using ESM.
In order to address these questions, one approach that is seeing increasing
acceptance among organizational communication scholars studying technology use is the
affordance approach (e.g. Ellison et al., 2015; Gibbs et al., 2013; Majchrzak et al., 2013;
Treem & Leonardi, 2012). This approach is theoretically interesting as it avoids focusing
on either specific functionalities and features of the technology, which may change, or
how users may shape the technology through repeated uses (Fulk, 1993; Venkatesh,
Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003), but instead focuses on the intersection between the
material features of the technology and the intended goal of the users using the
technology. In other words, the approach allows for theorizing about how users
appropriate the technology to accomplish their goals, without being either technologically
or socially deterministic (Ellison et al., 2015).
2.6. The Affordance Approach to Understanding Technology Use
The concept of affordance originates from the works of psychologist James
Gibson (1986) who coined the term to describe the relationship between objects in the
environment and animals, humans included, who act on the objects. He argued that the
actor does not merely sees the object, but perceives the object as having certain
characteristics that enable only certain actions, depending on the environmental condition
and the physical characteristics of the actor. This ecological approach to visual
perception, which was also the title of his book, offered a way of explaining how the

31
same object may be used differently by the same or different actors. For example, a chair
affords a standing human to sit, but also a platform to stand on to reach higher shelving.
The same chair might be used by a cat as a resting place. In other words, an object’s
affordance is the result of the interplay between the intention of the user and the
perceived possibilities for action provided by the object.
From how objects are perceived, the concept of affordance was “reverse
applied” -- for lack of a better term -- by Norman (1988, 1990) and used instead to
approach how objects should be designed so that they are used as intended. For example,
a door may be designed to be opened by pushing instead of pulling by removing the knob
or handle so that the perceived affordance for holding and pulling is removed, and
replacing it with a push lever to obviate the perceived affordance for pushing, as often
seen in emergency exits. Subsequently, this affordance approach was extended to the
design of computer software’s graphical user interfaces (UI), such as how on-screen
buttons were skeuomorphically designed to make it easy for users to figure out and use,
and adding tactile and audible feedback to confirm actions (Gaver, 1991). This was
especially important in the early days of UI design, although now the practice has moved
to flat design. This flexibility in redesigning software interfaces and adding
functionalities may have contributed to the commodification of technology. Evidently,
we may observe multiple technological products that have essentially the same
functionality, sometimes differentiated only by their look and feel, especially when they
were first launched. For example, Facebook, Google+, Orkut, and Badoo were originally
social networking sites (boyd & Ellison, 2007), while Instagram, Flickr, and Pinterest
were originally photo sharing platforms. That said, the modularity of today's technologies

32
has resulted in technological products that have multiple functionalities, blurring the
distinctions between them (Ellison & boyd, 2013). Facebook for example today is not
only a platform for social networking, but also for multimedia sharing and even social
gaming. This product evolution has also occurred rather quickly, with features and
functionalities changing and becoming obsolete without much notice, as companies
developing the product are driven by investors to push-to-market quickly and to
continually enhance it so as to remain competitive and relevant in the dynamic
marketplace.
For the study of technology use, this rapid technological development has made
identifying and classifying technologies more challenging. However, the affordance
approach may be helpful in addressing this issue. By reversing Norman's (1988, 1990)
reverse application of the concept, the affordance approach allows researchers to identify
the core or material features of a technology based on how it is used by the users,
generalizing across product-specific features that may obfuscate the understanding. For
example, Twitter's tweets and Facebook’s posts may be classified as the affordance of
information sharing, and that Twitter's following and Facebook’s friending afford users
to create their own social network. In sum, the affordance approach allows researchers to
see through the technological characteristics and understand what the technologies are
essentially used for and how they are being used. In studying the use of CMC, the
affordance approach is finding increasing acceptance especially among communication
scholars as a way to understand how users interact with the technology to accomplish
their goals (e.g. Ellison et al., 2015; Gibbs et al., 2013; Majchrzak et al., 2013).

33
Some of the communication research that used the affordance approach to study
enterprise and public social media use are briefly reviewed here to illustrate the usage.
Treem and Leonardi (2012) propose that social media applications (wikis, blogs,
microblogs, social network sites, and social bookmarks) comprise the affordances of
visibility, persistence, editability, and association, arguing that the various social media
applications rank high across all affordances, while existing collaborative technologies
perform less consistently on the affordance scorecard. For them, the affordances
represent the material features of the technologies that may be perceived by users as they
use it in the context of organizations. For example, the persistence affordance suggests
that content shared on social media tends to remain on the platform, as it may easily be
replicated and widely distributed, even after the original was deleted or edited. As such,
users of the technology should be aware of the implications of sharing content online.
Majchrzak et al. (2013) suggest that ESM have the affordances of metavoicing,
triggered attending, network-informed associating, and generative role-taking, when used
to share and discuss knowledge at work, which may have positive and/or adverse effects
on the conversations. For them, the affordances are action potentials that may be taken
given the intention and the technology. For example, the metavoicing affordance suggests
that ESM users may participate in a conversation in multiple ways, such as by
commenting, upvoting, liking, or tagging. Depending on the context, users may
strategically choose how they appropriate the technology to best signal their intentions to
others, and possibly shape the outcome.
Gibbs et al. (2013) used the affordance approach to evaluate how users of a
social media tool manage the tensions arising out of the technology use. They argue that

34
the technology simultaneously affords visibility and invisibility, engagement and
disengagement, as well as sharing and control. For them, the affordances are strategic
features of the technology that enable certain actions to be taken as needed depending on
the situational circumstances. Ellison et al. (2015) used the affordance approach to argue
that enterprise social network sites may have not only individual affordances, but also
collective or organizational affordances, namely to support socialization and
interpersonal interaction, that enable a group of coworkers sharing knowledge using the
technology to accomplish their shared goals.
In sum, the affordance approach allows researchers to explain how the
technology may be used differently by users for different purposes, by investigating the
relationship between users’ intentions and their perceptions of the extant, material
features of the technology (Fulk, 1993; Leonardi, 2009; Treem & Leonardi, 2012).
Consequently for this study, in order to understand and characterize how ESM are being
appropriated by employees to support large-scale ideation, I therefore ask:
RQ2: What are the affordances of ESM for large-scale ideation?
2.7. Evaluating the Quality of Large-Scale Online Ideation Process
Earlier, it has been established that many idea crowdsourcing projects face
multiple challenges. Primarily, large-scale online ideation suffers from quality issues in
terms of the ideas and process. For example, Bjelland and Wood (2008) reported on the
case of IBM that conducted online ideation sessions called "innovation jams" across its
global organization. Around 150,000 employees were involved and they generated about
46,000 ideas. While seemingly impressive, the effort to review and refine the ideas was
reportedly tremendous, not just because of the high number of ideas involved, but also

35
due to the high number of duplicate, irrelevant and poorly formed ideas. It was a similar
story with Dell and its IdeaStorm platform where selecting ideas for final consideration
took months (Di Gangi & Wasko, 2009). Other studies reported similar results, in that the
online ideation process was generally productive, but obtaining meaningful results from
the process was challenging (Leimeister, Huber, Bretschneider, & Krcmar, 2009;
Lindegaard, 2011; Knoll & Horton, 2011). Furthermore, in many of these cases, idea
acceptance or rejection was undertaken offline and documented elsewhere. As such, it is
pertinent for the problems of large-scale online ideation to be recognized, and steps taken
to understand the issue. To that end, the quality of the ideation process need to be
examined, to understand how it can be operationalized and measured, as well as the
factors that may influence the measure.
2.7.1. Dependent Variable: Ideation Quality
Reinig et al. (2007) defined ideation quality as “the degree to which an ideation
activity produces ideas that are helpful in attaining a goal” (p. 144). They posit that
ideation quality can be measured by one of four approaches. First is ideation productivity,
as propounded by Osborn (1963), which is the number of ideas produced in the ideation
session. This is the most common approach because it is the easiest to measure, but it
does not address the idea quality issue at all, which is the source of the problem identified
by this study. The other three approaches are based on assigning a quality score to each
idea, and then either (a) totaling the score, (b) averaging them, or (c) counting the “good
ideas”, which are ideas that have a quality score above a set threshold (e.g. median). The
authors however were silent on the criteria. This is understandable due to the variety of
criteria available for scoring idea quality -- from a single measure of creativity,

36
originality, novelty, rarity, implementability, or appropriateness, among others, or some
combined measure thereof (e.g. Connolly, Routhieaux, & Schneider, 1993; Diehl &
Stroebe, 1987; Gallupe et al., 1992; MacCrimmon & Wagner, 1994). Further, the scoring
may be influenced by the experience or expertise of the raters, so interrater reliability
tests are critical. The scoring is also context-specific, in that one idea may be novel in one
situation but not so in another, so it may have limited external validity. Due to the
incomparability of research findings across ideation studies, Dean et al. (2006) proposed
to harmonize the dimensions of idea quality, by combining the constructs of novelty with
relevance, workability, and specificity, and providing a more objective evaluation scale
for each. However, based on the search of the online-accessible journal articles that cite
Dean et al. (2006), there has not been any study that empirically tested their proposed
measure, probably because it is too complex to administer. The key takeaway is that
because idea quality and ideation quality are quite subjective and can be complex to
measure, it is a generally accepted practice for a study to pick one or a combination of
several quality criteria, as long as they are valid and reliable measures, and relevant to
addressing the research question.
For this study therefore, a “quality” ideation process means that the process has
the appropriate characteristics to enable the deliberation of ideas. Such characteristics
may include the presence of a facilitator (Aakhus, 2001, 2013), involvement of a diverse
set of participants (Klein, 2010; Osborn, 1963), a platform for voicing (Poole et al.,
1994), and a commonly understood and shared end goal (Jackson & Poole, 2003).
Ideation quality therefore ranges from the lowest, in which ideas are only produced but
not deliberated, to the highest, where ideas shared are discussed from various angles,

37
evaluated as to their relative qualities, and some kind of decision made about them. In
other words, ideation quality is constructed by measuring the completeness of the
ideation process. The methodology chapter will explain further how the dependent
variable is operationalized.
2.7.2. Independent Variables: Diversity of Participants
Earlier in this chapter, the type and composition of participants in the ideation
process have been argued to influence the quality of ideas produced. Specifically, having
participants from diverse knowledge backgrounds in the ideation process have been
associated with greater idea productivity and creativity (Perry-Smith, 2006; Zhou, et al.,
2009). Participants chosen from similar ranks reduces status or power differential, which
eliminates apprehension and increases productivity (Adams, 1953). Put another way,
when a diverse set of participants are involved in discussing ideas, the ideas can become
more solid as ideas are validated across more than one perspective. On the flip side, an
idea can also be killed if it does not survive the validation across multiple knowledge
domains. One useful way to capture the various types and composition of participants
involved in the ideation process is by measuring participant diversity.
Diversity of participants can be examined in many ways, such as hierarchical,
functional, geographical, gender, cultural, national, and others. Each dimension
influences the dynamics of participant interaction in quite different ways. For example,
there may be some interaction bias if a group or team is composed of several
nationalities, as individuals naturally gravitate towards those whom they share apparent
traits such as language or ethnicity (e.g. Ibarra, 1995). For this study, the focus is on the

38
organizational dimensions (and not personal dimensions) that literature has established as
influencing creativity or idea productivity.
Functional diversity. Ideation research has shown that participants’ functional
diversity is positively correlated with creativity (Perry-Smith, 2006; Zhou et al., 2009),
which is one of the criteria for assessing idea quality (Dean et al., 2006). This is well
recognized even by Osborn (1963) whose brainstorming guidelines include
recommending participants to come from different areas in order to produce creative
inputs in the problem solving exercise. The diversity in perspectives and backgrounds is
an important factor for effective deliberation (Klein, 2010) and for innovation (Kavadias
& Sommer, 2009; Monge, Cozzens, & Contractor, 1992). In an ESM-based ideation
session, participation is expected to come from various functional areas due to its open
access. As ideas are shared and displayed, it is likely that some of those who are online
have some level of interest or knowledge in the subject. The ease of participating in the
ESM-based online discussion may lead them to share their knowledge and opinion about
the merits of the ideas. This communication activity is expected to be sustained as long as
there is interest in the subject, manifested by continued exchange of novel information,
which is associated with the diversity of the participants’ knowledge background (Aral &
Van Alstyne, 2007; Hansen, 1999). A higher level of participants’ functional diversity is
expected to sustain the deliberation of the ideas, increasing the quality of the ideation
process. As such, I hypothesize that:
H1:

The level of functional diversity of the participants in the ideation thread
is positively correlated with ideation quality.

39
Hierarchical diversity. Besides functional diversity, another measure of
participant diversity in ESM-based ideation process is hierarchical diversity. This is
defined as the degree to which participants come from different hierarchical levels or job
positions in the organization. Hierarchical diversity may contribute to ideation quality,
because different job positions may see the problem from different levels and thus
contribute and discuss ideas based on those perspectives. For example, support staff
could see the problem from an operational viewpoint, and give suggestions that concern
the details of effort. Managers could provide ideas based on resource management, while
top management could give ideas based on strategic organizational needs. Although it
may also correspond to how long an employee has been with the organization,
hierarchical diversity cannot be equated with tenure diversity (Burt, 1992). While it has
been argued that the same cohort of new employees tend to band together regardless of
which department or teams they are assigned to, due partly to the same newcomer
socialization process they went through, some employees rise up the ranks faster than
others. In traditional brainstorming sessions, participants are recommended to be of
similar rank to ensure status congruency (Adams, 1953; Osborn, 1963). Status and power
differences have been associated with reduced participation and productivity, as the
presence of higher ranked organizational members creates anxiety in lower ranked
members who feel they are being evaluated beyond the ideas, which adversely impacts
their performance (Adams, 1953; Diehl & Stroebe, 1987). However, the involvement of
higher ranked members may also be argued to bring greater maturity and experience to
the ideation process. Besides challenging fellow participants to consider the ideas from
various angles to develop the ideas further, these hierarchically senior members can also

40
share their knowledge about what ideas have and have not worked based on their past
experiences. While this may help to filter out low quality ideas, such an evaluation may
kill the creative problem solving process as well as future discussions about the ideas -- if
it happens too early in the process (Osborn, 1963). It is therefore hypothesized that:
H2:

The level of hierarchical diversity of the participants in the ideation
thread is negatively correlated with ideation quality.

2.7.3. Other variables
Thread duration. It has been suggested that the longer the time an idea is
gestated, the better it will be, due to the thinking that would have gone into the idea
(Gallupe et al., 1992; Olson, 1965). In terms of the ideation process, the longer an idea is
discussed, the greater the possibility that the idea will be decided upon, perhaps because
the deadline has been reached. As such, it is hypothesized that:
H3:

The duration of the ideation discussion thread is positively correlated
with ideation quality.

Length of discussion thread. The number of comments discussing an idea, as
represented by the length of the discussion thread, may indicate the extent to which an
idea is discussed. This however does not imply that a longer discussion thread would lead
to better idea quality because it can also go the other way. Similarly, a short discussion
thread does not necessarily indicate a poor quality idea because there could be a very
good idea that was accepted immediately. In fact, Adamic et al. (2008) found that thread
length was a significant negative predictor on the outcome of a question, i.e. the
likelihood of getting a “good” answer is worse with more comments. In terms of the
ideation process, the number of comments is related to the extent of discussion of the

41
ideas. This does not necessarily correspond to the number of participants, because two
participants may be taking turn to discuss the ideas. More generally though, the longer
the discussion, the more likely that the ideation process can be progressed to the next
level, and consequently its quality. Hence, it can be hypothesized that:
H4:

The number of comments in the ideation thread is positively correlated
with ideation quality.

Number of participants. Literature has established that the more participants
involved in the ideation process, the more ideas that will be produced, but only up to a
certain threshold beyond which, the number of ideas per person will decrease, as the
larger group size accommodates free riding more easily (Renzulli, Owen, & Callahan,
1974; Valacich, Dennis, & Nunamaker, 1992). In terms of the process, the more
participants involved in the discussion, the more likely that it will progress the ideation
process to the next level, and consequently its quality. Hence:
H5:

The number of participants in the ideation thread is positively correlated
with ideation quality.

In sum, to give a more complete look at the large-scale online ideation process,
from start to finish, the outcome of the process needs to be examined. To that end,
ideation quality has been identified as a measure of process outcome. Subsequently, the
factors that could influence the measure were explored from the literature, and five
variables were identified together with their own hypotheses about their correlation with
the ideation quality measure.
To recap, the chapter reviewed the literature concerning collective action,
brainstorming, and CMC in order to establish a base understanding from which to

42
investigate the large-scale online ideation phenomenon. Two research questions were
produced as a result, namely what are the enabling conditions for large-scale online
ideation, and what are the ESM affordances for ideation. Both questions should provide
an interesting insight into how ideation specifically and collective action more generally
plays out online and within organizational settings. The chapter concludes with five
hypotheses regarding the relationships between ideation quality (as a process outcome
measure) and five variables, namely functional and hierarchical diversity of ideation
participants, thread duration, thread length, and the number of participants. In the next
chapter, the methodology for answering the research questions and testing the hypotheses
are discussed.

43
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY
This chapter details the methods used to answer the research questions and to test
the hypotheses developed in the previous chapter. This study is characterized as a mixedmethods case study, based on a combination of quantitative and qualitative analyses of
the ESM server log files that captured user activities on the ESM platform, as well as
qualitative analysis from in-depth interviews with employees who were ESM users. This
approach is adopted to enable the identification of the enabling conditions for large-scale
online ideation (RQ1) and the affordances of ESM that contribute to the ideation process
(RQ2), as well as to test the hypotheses predicting the associative relationships between
ideation quality and multiple variables derived from the ESM server log files, including
functional diversity (H1), hierarchical diversity (H2), thread duration (H3), and thread
length (H4), and the number of participants (H5) in the ideation-related discussion
threads.
3.1. Case Study of a Single Organization
This study was undertaken as a case study of a single organization for three
reasons. First, the research concerned ideation on the ESM, both of which are highly
contextualized. In other words, how ideation takes place and what is being discussed are
heavily influenced by the organizational setting. Additionally, an ESM, unlike public
social media, is largely tailored to the organization in terms of access and functionality.
As such, a generalized study such as a survey would not be able to sufficiently capture
the conditions and nuances influencing the ideation process on the ESM. On the contrary,
a case study is able to provide a holistic and in-depth investigation of processes, structure,
and people in the organization (Yin, 2009). Case studies have been used in sociological

44
investigations as well as in business studies and organizational studies (Feagin, Orum, &
Sjoberg, 1991). They are designed to extract the details from participants and the
organization using multiple data sources from multiple methods of investigation (Stake,
1995), reflecting a triangulated research strategy. The triangulation comes from the
theories, data, and methodologies that help to confirm the validity of the protocols (Snow
& Anderson, 1991). The use of interviews, computer logs, surveys, and organizational
artifacts relevant to the matter in question help to ensure construct validity (Yin, 2009),
while the development of a formal case study protocol ensures its reliability (Tellis,
1997).
One issue affecting case studies however is access (Patton, 2002). While publicly
accessible documents could be sufficient to study an organization in certain contexts, the
research needs of this particular study necessitated greater access to the organization,
including for example, its technological systems, such as the ESM, its people and other
non-public information that would be subjected to non-disclosure agreements. While this
could seem to limit the replicability of this study in other organizations, many
organizations are open to be studied if the benefits to granting such access more than
offset the costs to them, which could be mitigated by adding certain conditions such as
anonymizing the organization or its respondents.
For this study, I have secured access to an organization at which I am an
employee. I was also able to secure access to the organization's non-public information
such as the server log files and pseudonymized employee information. While being an
insider could introduce some familiarity bias that could occlude certain insights, being
away from the organization for several years on study leave mitigated that risk, as the

45
changes in structure, systems, and people during the absence created some degree of
novelty to the situation. Consequently, having ready access to the organization formed
the second reason to undertake this research as a case study. The third and final reason
was that the constraints in terms of time and energy placed on this research necessitated
the focus on a single organization.
3.2. The Research Site
The organization chosen for this study was a national regulatory organization
overseeing the banking and financial industry, whose policies and initiatives have
implications for the national economy, somewhat like the Federal Reserve Bank in the
United States, or the Bank of England in the United Kingdom. The organization employs
about 2,800 employees in 35 departments, with offices located in two building complexes
about half a mile apart in the national capital, as well as in five small regional offices
throughout the country, and three even smaller representative offices for the American,
European, and Asian regions. The organization size as well as the functional diversity
and geographical distribution of the employees necessitated the use of centralized IT
systems, including email and the intranet, to facilitate work and communication across
the enterprise.
The intranet in this organization is known as K*net, which is an integrated
platform for enterprise-wide communication that combined Web 2.0 tools, such as blogs
and wikis, with a moderated discussion board, and an employee directory, among others.
These tools in combination represented the essential components of an ESM, in that they
provided users with the ability to, among other things, create an online profile of
themselves, write and share posts, respond through comments and flags, as well as locate

46
and network with other individuals. All employees were presented with the home page of
the ESM every time they logged in to the office network. This homepage highlighted the
latest news from throughout the organization, as well as posts from the discussion board
that were the most recently commented, amongst other items. The ESM was used by the
organization's management to communicate policies and programs to employees, and for
employees to comment or provide feedback and ideas on such matters. Employees who
chose to interact on the ESM through the comments were identifiable by their login
credentials although everyone who commented used a pseudonym instead of real names.
All activities on the ESM were captured or "logged" in a database on the server. This
server log file contained amongst other records, the metadata of user commenting
activity. This file was one of the two main sources of data, besides interviews, in
answering the research questions and testing the hypotheses.
3.3. Data Collection (Phase 1): User Activity Data from the ESM
As evidenced by earlier research on public social media tools such as Facebook
and Twitter (e.g. Burke, Marlow, & Lento, 2010; Naaman, Boase, & Lai, 2010), the use
of server logs as a data resource provides an accurate depiction of the activities of the
research subjects and is more reliable than methods that rely on self-recall. Using server
logs is also less intrusive for the research subjects compared to directly observing them,
although getting access to the data is a challenge in most cases, due to privacy and
proprietary reasons. For this study, the organization was asked for the dataset of users'
commenting activity, because an earlier study (Gibbs et al., 2015) suggested that such
data would offer a richer insight into understanding how the ideation process worked on
the ESM in the organization. The organization subsequently provided a pseudonymized

47
data of the user commenting activities on the ESM for the period between April 2008 and
October 2013. It also provided a pseudonymized list of employees as of September 2013
to help identify hierarchical positions and functional areas that were pertinent to this
study's requirements. No other data were granted due to internal policy. Rutgers
University’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) had approved the research protocol to
access the organization’s proprietary and confidential information, subject to taking the
necessary steps to protect the identity and reputation of the individual subjects and the
organization at all times.
Several steps were employed to prepare the data for analysis and to ensure the
replicability of the study. The first was to create a workable dataset from the different
formats of the data sources. Upon receipt of the server log and employee data,
respectively in text and Excel formats, the files were converted into a MySQL database.
This was done to facilitate interactive data query on a large dataset, due to the evolving
information need of this study. After conversion, the two datasets were merged to
connect the data about the ESM users with their demographic information. This is done
by matching the pseudonyms (technically their login IDs) in both datasets, thus providing
a richer categorical data about the users. The combined data were then checked for errors,
and any inconsistencies were rectified to improve its internal validity. Data
inconsistencies could come from employees who have changed departments, or promoted
to different job positions. Any such cases were updated to match the latest information
about the employees. For users who had left the organization's employment as of the data
extraction date -- as evidenced by user activity unmatched to any employee records -their hierarchical positions and functional areas were categorized as missing. The data

48
were not removed because the comments associated with the user could still be useful in
the qualitative analysis. Ultimately, the starting dataset that was used for the next step in
data analysis contained information that helped to identify the posts, the comments, and
their contributors (see Table 3.1). There was no sampling done to the data. This study
also did not make use of any data collection instruments. The merged and cleaned dataset
was converted back into Excel to facilitate subsequent coding.
Next, the dataset was partitioned to make it more manageable to code. As the time
and effort required for coding and analyzing the comments text in the complete dataset
was at the beginning unknown, the strategy was to first work on one year's worth of data,
so that upon its completion, a more realistic estimate of the time and effort needed to
undertake work on the rest of the dataset could be known. There was also a constraint due
to the sluggishness and occasional instability of Excel in handling and sorting large, textheavy worksheets. Eventually, only the latest 13-month data were analyzed due to the
resources required and the limited time available to complete the study. Nevertheless, the
13-month period covered all the annual events and activities in the organization, as well
as some unscheduled ones, which provided sufficient data points to establish a base
contextual knowledge of the organizational operations to inform the study.

49
Table 3.1: List of fields collected for data analysis
Field name
PostID
PostDate
PostTitle
CommentID
CommentDate
Commenter
Nickname
JobTitle
Department
JobPosition
JobGroup
Comment
CommentGenre

Description
Identifier number for the discussion thread
Starting date and time of the discussion thread
Subject of the discussion thread
Identifier number for the comment
Date and time of the comment
Pseudonymized name of the commenter
Display name of the commenter
Job title of the commenter
Department where commenter worked
Hierarchical group of the commenter, as per codebook
Functional area of the commenter’s department, as per codebook
The comment
The type of comment, as per codebook

3.4. Data Analysis (Phase 1): Qualitative Coding for Ideas
The comments in the dataset were openly coded to identify ideation-related
threads and their general subject matter (topic). At this stage, the starting dataset did not
have any explicit data about ideas, which remained embedded in the comments. Unlike
other systems, this ESM did not have a flag to indicate if a comment was an idea. In
certain ESM implementations, ideation posts were identifiable by them being in a special
section, such as in an innovation forum, or that some posts would be keyword-tagged or
explicitly labeled as an idea (e.g. Gibbs et al., 2015). For this study, ideation-related
threads were those that contained a suggestion, feedback, or idea in response to a
perceived problem, as well as all the follow up discussions. Threads that did not contain
an idea were excluded. A qualitative analysis therefore was performed on the comments
to extract ideation-related information. To that end, the dataset was arranged in
chronological order to organize the discussion threads and comments in the order they
were created. By naturally following how the conversations developed, the discussion of

50
ideas could be tracked and their contexts understood. It was not necessary to fully
reconstruct the discussion threads into a screen-friendly format for analysis.
The coding process used an open coding approach initially and selective coding
subsequently (Charmaz, 2006), because there was no prior knowledge of the contents of
the comments. Each line of comment was reviewed to identify its type and to develop a
codebook. A theme emerged that enabled the identification of ideation-related comments,
such as a suggestion or an idea, an agreement or disagreement with the idea, and whether
the idea was accepted, rejected, or taken into consideration. Other types of comments and
the topic of each discussion thread were also openly coded. Finally, non-ideation threads
were eliminated to create an ideation-only dataset. Some information from this phase of
the data collection and analysis was used for the qualitative data collection and analysis
phase. In particular, coding the comments for ideation-related threads enabled the
identification of a pool of the most active ideation participants and non-participants who
could provide a richer understanding of the online ideation process, as opposed to
randomly recruiting employees for the interview, which may have included non-active
ESM users.
3.4.1. Types of comments made in the ESM
After trimming the original ESM user activity dataset, there were 2,883 comments
made between October 2012 and October 2013. These comments were openly coded by
the author to identify the types of expressions ESM users make, in order to locate ideas
and ideation-related comments for the subsequent procedure. The coding exercise
revealed the following types of comments:

51
•

Complaints. Commenters shared their problems or issues and express frustrations
regarding almost anything that concerned them, such as with how an event was run,
or on a new policy being introduced. They requested something to be done. They
could also be sarcastic in how they raise the issue.

•

Advice and reminders. Occasionally in response to the complaints raised, some
commenters took the role of advising others to look at the issues in a more positive
light. Some asked or warned others to behave and not be rude when they write, citing
the community engagement guidelines. Some reminded others to be more grateful for
what they have received, citing God or religious verses.

•

Ideas. Often in response to the problems or issues highlighted, ESM users shared tips
or suggestions to address the problems or issues raised. Commenters also offered
alternatives or counter-proposals.

•

Opinions. Following up on the ideas, commenters shared their assessments that either
agree or disagree with the suggestions. At other times, commenters shared their
opinions related to current organizational issues.

•

Questions and answers. Users also used the ESM to ask questions to seek
clarifications on various matters and topics. Other users responded by sharing
answers, offer facts or other information.

Other types of comments include chants, well-wishes, compliments, and condolences.
The codebook for this first round of coding is provided in the Appendix. It is important to
stress again that the ultimate goal of the coding is to identify ideation-related discussion
threads, because the unit of analysis is a discussion thread, but that can only be achieved
by first identifying the types of comments within the threads.

52
3.4.2. Intercoder reliability test
In order to strengthen the validity of the coding, and to ensure it was consistent
and reliable, two independent coders were recruited and trained by the author to code a
sample of the ESM comments based on the newly developed codebook. The training
involved giving both coders the same set of 300 randomly-selected comments and asking
them to code each comment based on the codebook. Any confusion was clarified to both
coders and when necessary, the codebook was amended. At the end of the process, an
intercoder reliability test was performed. A Cohen’s (1960) kappa that exceeded .7 would
deem the coding reliable (Holsti, 1969; van Someren, Barnard, & Sandberg, 1994). For
this dataset, the Cohen's kappa was .82. Most of the mismatches were due to multiple
codes inconsistently assigned to a comment, because some comments contained multiple
comment types. For example, the following comment contained a congratulation, an
opinion or reminder, and a suggestion or advice:
Congratulations to the committee. I really look forward to attend the dinner. Just a
bit odd that there is still a bicycle being listed as a lucky draw prize this year
when previously there were complaints it was impossible to bring it home. Why
not let the winner pick it up at the office, so that he or she has the time to prepare
the transportation. I think there is still time to reconsider. (#12079)
Subsequently, the coders were asked to code a different set of 300 comments based on
the updated codebook, but asking them not to be fixated on identifying the comment
types at the sentence level. The interrater reliability then improved (Cohen’s kappa: .92).
Lastly, all the comment codes were reviewed at the discussion thread level to identify
threads that were ideation-related. An additional variable to flag ideation-related
discussions was added to the dataset for this purpose.

53
At the end of the long and tedious process of coding and recoding the comments,
threads that did not contain ideation-related comments were eliminated. With only the
ideation-related discussion threads remaining in the dataset, several measures were
developed based on each discussion thread, which was the eventual unit of analysis.
3.5. Measures
3.5.1. Dependent variable: Ideation quality
The dependent variable for the quantitative part of the study is ideation quality,
which was constructed from the values of three dichotomous variables relevant to the
ideation process. The dichotomous variables were Idea Discussed (whether or not an idea
was discussed in the thread), Idea Voted (whether or not there were agreements or
disagreements about the idea), and Idea Acted (whether or not an action was taken on the
idea). As such, the value of Ideation Quality ranges from 0 to 3, with level 3 indicating
the highest quality level in which the idea was discussed, voted, and decided. These were
qualitatively coded from the comments dataset because there was no such flag for voting
or action status in the ESM. It did not matter how many comments were made in the
discussion, nor were the number of votes for and against (agree or disagree), nor were the
type of action taken -- whether it was implemented, accepted, kept in view, or even
rejected. In summary, ideation quality is an ordinal variable with the following levels:
Level 0: Idea was not discussed, voted, or acted upon (a single comment thread)
Level 1: Idea was either discussed, or voted, or acted upon.
Level 2: Idea experienced any two of discussed, voted and acted upon.
Level 3: Idea was discussed, voted, and acted upon.

54
The measure was modeled after Reinig et al.’s (2007) measure of idea quality. In that it
was the number of "good" ideas produced, which in turn were ideas that met or exceeded
a set threshold of certain quality criteria such as novelty or completeness. A metastudy of
the literature by Dean et al. (2006) showed that idea quality was regularly measured
against a checklist of attributes. This study, however, was interested in the quality of the
ideation process rather than the quality of the ideas themselves. As with how the
completeness of an idea indicates its quality, the completeness of the phases of the
ideation process is be argued to indicate its quality.
3.5.2. Independent and other variables
Functional diversity of participants. In coding the dataset, it was found that there
were more than 50 departments to which employees were assigned. Some of the
functions of these departments were clear from their names, such as finance, I.T., human
resources, communication, security, and legal. The names of some others obscured their
function slightly because they were named for the segments of the industry for which
they were responsible, and these included research, policymaking, examination, or
enforcement. There were also a few specialized operations such as currency and treasury.
In terms of the reporting structure, the departments (headed by Directors) were divided
into sectors (headed by Assistant Governors). Generally, this sectoral assignment of
departments was based on the similarity of the functions, but the exceptions were many.
For the purpose of this study, the functional areas were coded as described by their
department names, except for those with industry segment descriptions -- they were
recoded based on their core functionalities. 16 functional areas were coded.
Subsequently, the employee records were updated to reflect this new functional area

55
assignment. Table 3.2 shows the list of departments and their respective functional area
codes.
Table 3.2: List of departments by coded functional area
Department Name
Office of the Governor
Islamic Banking and Takaful
Consumer and Market Conduct
Money Services Business
Development Finance and Enterprise
Foreign Exchange Administration
Payment Systems Policy
Financial Sector Development
Prudential Financial Policy
Banking Supervision
Financial Conglomerates Supervision
Insurance and Takaful Supervision
Internal Audit
The Mint
Currency Management and Operations
[Southern] Regional Office
[Northern] Regional Office
[Central] Currency Office
[Redacted] Regional Office
[Redacted] Regional Office
[Eastern] Regional Office
[Redacted]
Centralized Shared Services
Facilities Management Services
Hospitality Services
Museum, Art Gallery, and Knowledge
Management Services
Regulation and Supervision Administration
Organizational Development Administration
Human Resources and General Services
Human Capital Development Center
Human Capital Strategy
Monetary Analysis and Strategy
Economics
Statistical Services
Financial Surveillance
Security
IT Services

Functional area
1. Policy

2.

Audit

3.

Currency
Operations

4.

Services

5.

Human Resources

6.

Research

7.
8.

Security
IT

56
Strategic Communications
International
[Redacted] Islamic Financial Center Promotions
Risk and Strategy Management
Risk Specialist
Treasury and Financial Markets Operations
[American] Representative Office
[European] Representative Office
[Asian] Representative Office
Consumer Information and Advisory
Credit Counseling and Management Agency
Finance
Financial Intelligence and Enforcement
Office of the General Counsel
Employees on attachment at other organizations
Employees on extended paid or unpaid leave

9.

Public Relations

10. Risk Management
11. Treasury Operations

12. Financial
Counseling
13. Finance
14. Intelligence
15. Legal
16. On attachment

The functional diversity measure was calculated using Blau's (1977) index of
heterogeneity. Blau’s index provides a reliable and valid measure of the degree of
diversity in the whole population, be it functional diversity, hierarchical diversity,
ethnicity, national, or other groupings. It does not make any assumption about the
relationships between participants in and across the groups. Despite its relative
simplicity, the measure is sufficient to indicate the degree of diversity among the
participants in this study. Furthermore, this study assumed that the participants did not
know the other participants, because of the total use of pseudonyms, and because the
identifying information was located elsewhere in the ESM. As such, network measures
such as the strength of the relationships between the participants were not considered, and
the discussion threads were also not examined as a social network. Blau's index is given
by the formula:
!

𝑝!!

𝐵 =1−
!!!

57
where p is the proportion of group members in a given category i (e.g. “Policy” sector)
and k is the number of different categories across all members (which for functional
diversity, k=16). Thus, if all participants in one discussion thread came from the same
organizational sector, Blau’s index would be 0. On the contrary, if all participants in one
discussion thread each came from different departments, Blau’s index would approach 1.
The diversity index was then calculated using the R software (R Core Development
Team, 2008) specifically using Meyer's (2009) R function for Blau's index of
heterogeneity, which script is provided in the Appendix. The function took two
arguments, namely the discussion thread number and the code for the functional area for
each participant in the thread. Blau's diversity index values were generated for each
discussion thread that became the independent variable for functional diversity.
Hierarchical diversity of participants. In this study, there were many job titles
listed in the dataset, but as advised by the human resources department, there were only a
few categories of pay grades. Hence, the various job titles were classified and coded into
five hierarchical groups of top management, upper management, middle managers,
analysts, and support staff. This was similar to how Gibbs et al.'s (2015) study classified
the many employee job titles into more generic job levels. Hierarchical diversity was
subsequently also calculated using Blau’s (1977) index of heterogeneity. Table 3.3 shows
the list of job titles and their respective hierarchical levels.

58
Table 3.3: List of job titles by coded organizational hierarchy
Job Title
Governor
Deputy Governor
Director
Deputy Director
Manager
Editor
Actuary
Syariah Specialist
Risk Specialist
Senior Actuarial Analyst
Senior Analyst

Assistant Governor
General Manager

Organizational hierarchy
1. Top Management
2. Upper Management

Senior Architect
3. Middle Management
Senior Economist
Senior Engineer
Senior Financial
Investigator
Senior Legal Counsel
Senior Solution Architect
Senior Supervisor
Analyst
Engraver
4. Analysts
Associate Analyst
Executive
Associate Risk Specialist
Associate Executive
Associate Syariah Specialist Financial Investigator
Actuarial Analyst
Associate Financial
Associate Actuarial
Investigator
Analyst
Senior Inspector
Architect
Inspector
Architectural Assistant
Assistant
Audit Officer
Superintendent
Coin Designer
Legal Counsel
Curator
Associate Legal Counsel
Assistant Curator
Risk Analyst
Dealer
Associate Risk Analyst
Associate Dealer
Supervisor
Economist
Associate Supervisor
Associate Economist
Senior F&B Officer
Engineer
Solution Architect
Assistant Engineer
Administrative Assistant
Production Fitter
5. Support Staff
Administrative Officer
Production Officer
Executive Secretary
Receptionist
Secretary
Registered Nurse
Caretaker
Senior AV Officer
Clerical Officer
AV Officer
Sergeant
Senior Driver
Corporal
Driver
Constable
Forklift Driver
Currency Hand
Senior Maintenance
F&B Officer
Officer
Graphic Designer
Maintenance Officer

59
Graphic Officer
Handyman
Junior Maintenance Officer
Coin Design Assistant
Engineering Assistant
Office Assistant
Production Assistant

Senior Printing Officer
Printing Officer
Senior Technical Officer
Senior Technician
Technician
Senior Toolmaker
Toolmaker

Thread duration. Thread duration is the number of days that lapsed from the first
comment to the last comment in the thread. This system or technical variable was derived
by calculating the time difference between the first and the last comment in one thread,
and converting it into days. This was easily done in Excel arithmetically.
Thread length. Thread length refers to the number of comments in the ideation
thread. This technical variable was simply the count of comments per thread.
Commenter count. The number of participants is operationalized as the
commenter count, which refers to the unique number of commenters in the ideation
thread. This technical variable required sorting the commenters by unique identifiers in
each thread, and eliminating any duplicates. This could also be done programmatically.
Nonwork topic of discussion. This measure is not system-produced but needed to
be qualitatively coded from the comments dataset. Specifically, the title of each thread
was assessed as to whether they were work-related, or otherwise. Whether or not a topic
is work-related is subjective and contextual to the organization. In this study, the guiding
principle was that if they were related to employees doing office work or work related to
the central banking business, or related to employment terms and conditions, then they
were work-related. Another guiding principle was about who owned the information. If it
was one of the departments, then it was work-related. If it was one of the staff
organizations, such as Puspanita (ladies’ association), Persatuan (staff association), and

60
the Koperasi (employee credit union), then it was nonwork. Examples of work topics
include HR matters, seminars, and corporate news. On the other hand, nonwork topics
include social events like treasure hunt, company annual dinner, sports, and the Koperasi
promotions.
Presence of facilitator. A facilitator in this case could be anyone who either
encourages participation in the ideation process, encourages discussion of the ideas, or
dissuades participants from making (negative) comments that could derail the discussion,
while remaining neutral. This was also highly contextual to the discussion and thus
needed to be qualitatively coded. The guiding principle was first about encouragement,
namely the comments should encourage new discussion and contribution, or that it
discourages negative comments from derailing the conversation from the ideas. The
second principle was neutrality, that the comments should be about giving advice and not
taking sides. From the dataset, facilitators were generally be found in long discussion
threads, or topics owned by staff organizations.
3.6. Quantitative Data Analysis
Following the coding of the comments data, an ideation-only threads dataset was
created, from which several variables were developed to be used in statistical analysis.
Each variable was reviewed to identify their statistical properties, including plotting the
data to identify the shape of data distribution. This is needed for determining the kinds of
statistical analysis that could be performed. Where relevant, data transformations -namely log transformation of long tailed skewed data (Field, 2009) -- were performed to
enable certain statistical analysis to be done.

61
For the two control variables, namely the nonwork topic of discussion and the
presence of facilitator, additional statistical analysis were performed. First, the main data
was subset to produce two groups with dichotomous values that represented the control
variable. Specifically, the main dataset was subset to create work and nonwork groups,
and facilitated and unfacilitated groups. Next, certain variables -- namely, thread length,
thread duration, commenter count, and ideation quality -- were examined to see if their
properties were different between the two groups, and t-tests for differences of means
were performed to confirm if the means of the two groups were significantly different.
The alternative hypothesis was that one of the means was greater, depending on the
actual reading. These variables were tested because they were believed to be influenced
by the control variables.
3.6.1. Correlation Analysis
Given the five hypotheses involved testing associative relationships, bivariate
correlation tests were ordered. As the dependent variable Ideation Quality was a
polychotomous 4-level ordinal categorical variable, and that the independent variables
were continuous interval variables, polyserial correlation tests (Olsson, Drasgow, &
Dorans, 1982) were performed. Using R, the polycor package was installed and used to
run the correlation tests, without changing the default options. The coefficient and pvalues were tabulated for each independent variable against ideation quality. The
resulting correlation coefficients were evaluated for statistical significance, with the
appropriate null and alternative hypotheses. As the direction of the correlation was
uncertain for the two hypotheses (H1 and H2), a two-tailed t-test at 95% confidence (i.e.
p < .05), was performed to identify the significance of the derived coefficient.

62
Subsequently, the independent variables were also tested against each other.
Visual plots of two variables were also done to quickly assess their relationships,
including the check for non-linearity and non-monotonicity in the associative
relationships. Since the variables involved were continuous interval variables, and
because their distribution was not normal even after transformation, the test ordered was
a non-parametric Spearman’s rank-order correlation test. This is because it does not make
an assumption about the distribution of variables, nor the linearity or heteroskedasticity
of the relationship, but requires the variables to be at least of the ordinal type, and have a
monotonic relationship. All coefficients and p-values were recorded and tabulated. The
results were then checked against the hypotheses stated to find evidence of support or
otherwise.
3.6.2. Regression Analysis
As a last step in the statistical analysis process, a regression analysis was
performed to predict the value of the dependent variable based on the values of one or
more predictor independent variables. This exercise allowed for a better explanation of
the results and hypothesis testing, as the correlation test would only inform about the
relationship direction (positive or negative), whereas a regression would provide
evidence about the predictive power of the relationships. It is also a source of new
knowledge in studies due to how new variables are combined in the regression model.
For this study, the purpose was to predict the quality of the ideation process given
the values of multiple predictor variables identified in the comments dataset, namely,
functional and hierarchical diversity, thread duration, thread length, commenter count,
nonwork topic, and presence of a facilitator. Due to the types of variables at play, the

63
regression analysis became a procedure to produce estimates of the effect of predictor
variables on the dependent variable, at certain values of the moderator and control
variables (Hayes, 2013). In other words, given the values of the predictor variables, could
the ideation quality be predicted to be either of none (0), low (1), medium (2), or high (3)
quality? As the dependent variable in this study was a 4-level ordinal variable of ideation
quality, an ordinal logistic (also known as ordered logit) regression was performed
(McCullagh, 1980). The regression predicts the odds ratio that the dependent variable
will change one level, when the predictor variable increases by one unit, while other
variables remained constant. More specifically as an example, what are the odds that
ideation quality will improve from low to medium, or medium to high when there is one
extra comment in the ideation thread?
The initial model tested was for ideation quality to be predicted by hierarchical
diversity, functional diversity, thread duration, thread length, nonwork topic of
discussion, and presence of facilitator. Using R, several packages were required, namely:
foreign, ggplot2, MASS, and reshape2. Then, the polr function was implemented to run
the regression. Additional steps were done in R to find the p-values, and taking the
exponent of the coefficients of the regression to derive the odds ratio.
In order to find the model that best predicts the dependent variable, the regression
analysis were repeated several times while removing and adding variables at each step,
while assessing its Akaike Information Criteria (AIC; Akaike, 1973) value. R provides a
tool called StepAIC that automates the process. At the end of the sequence, the best
model is presented with the relevant coefficient statistics.

64
AIC is used in statistical data modeling when the true model is unknown and is
aimed at reducing information entropy (Bozdogan, 1987). A lower AIC value means the
information entropy or uncertainty about the model is lesser. AIC rewards a model’s
goodness of fit but penalizes extra parameters. In other words, a model with a lesser
number of parameters is preferred than a model with more parameters having the same
AIC value. For smaller sample sizes, a corrected AIC is calculated, using the formula:
𝐴𝐼𝐶𝑐 = 𝐴𝐼𝐶 +

2𝐾(𝐾 + 1)
𝑛−𝐾−1

where n is the sample size and K is the number of parameters in the model, whereby the
correction term becomes smaller as the sample size grows. Mathematically, for a model
that has 7 predictors (such as this study initially), the sample size that makes the
correction term to be adequately small (around 0.5) is 230. It is important to note that
AICc (and AIC) values are ordinal and are used to predictively rank the models, rather
than as determinant of explanatory power (Shmueli, 2010).
3.7. Data Collection (Phase 2): In-depth Interviews
While the coding exercise in Phase 1 served to identify the kinds of ideationrelated comments made on the ESM, it also revealed, to a limited extent, through the
reading of the discussion threads, how the users employed the ESM to virtually interact
with one another and perform ideation. In order to fully comprehend the ESM users'
ideational activities, it was necessary to engage with them using in-depth interviews. The
interviews would inform the study and/or validate what was known about the ideation
activities and phases, as well as how the ESM was used to undertake the ideation
activities in the context of the studied organization. This would get at both research

65
questions, as to what are the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation, and the
affordances of ESM for ideation.
3.7.1. Interviewee Recruitment (Sampling) Procedure
The interviewees were initially selected based on the analysis of the log data for
the most active discussant in ideation-related threads, in order to have access to
information-rich cases that directly informed the study about “issues of central
importance to the purpose of the research” (Patton, 1990, p. 169). Subsequently, the
interviewee pool was expanded by purposefully selecting (Schatzman & Strauss, 1973)
and adding other ESM users based on their hierarchy and function in the organization to
provide a fuller picture of the related activities, while also capturing some users who
were not actively participating in the ideation process. This provided a balanced approach
in informing the study about the ESM affordances and enabling conditions for large-scale
online ideation.
Invitation to participate in the study was sent out by email to the first 30 users in
this ordered list. In order to remove any element of coercion in the study due to my being
a fellow employee, anyone who was under my direct supervision when I was working
there between 1994 and 2007, or in anyway felt obligated to participate due to my
perceived supervisory status, was excluded. This was communicated in the invitation
email. Email replies that agreed to the interview were considered electronic consent. A
follow-up telephone call was done to schedule a time for the actual interview during
which time, they were reminded that participation was voluntary. Those who did not
initially reply were sent one email reminder after one week. Further non-response,
refusal, or disqualification was replaced by others further down the list. This continued

66
until 16 employees were interviewed when theoretical saturation on the theme was
achieved (Charmaz, 2006; Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Then 4 more employees were
selected to round up the list to 20, based on gaps in job categories, such as P17 from IT,
P18 from HR, and P19 from the upper management group. P20 was a substitute addition.
Table 3.4 shows the summary profile of the interviewees, who represented all
hierarchical levels and several functional areas.
Table 3.4: Profile of Interviewees
ID
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
P12
P13
P14
P15
P16
P17
P18
P19
P20

Hierarchical Group
Middle Management
Analyst
Support Staff
Support Staff
Analyst
Support Staff
Analyst
Middle Management
Middle Management
Top Management
Middle Management
Support Staff
Support Staff
Analyst
Analyst
Support Staff
Analyst
Analyst
Upper Management
Support Staff

Functional Group
Public Relations
Public Relations
Policy
Policy
Policy
Finance
Public Relations
Public Relations
Attachment
Policy
Security
Services
Intelligence
Finance
Currency Ops
Audit
IT
HR
Public Relations
Currency Ops

Gender
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male

Age
45
39
41
36
28
39
31
42
59
53
36
54
39
31
47
27
28
40
51
36

Tenure
22
10
9
14
5
17
7
13
36
29
13
34
18
7
8
5
4
8
8
8

3.7.2. Interview Protocol
At the start of the interview, I followed the protocol as approved by the IRB of
Rutgers University to inform the subject about the study, why they were selected, and
their option to either withdraw at any time or not answering any questions. They were
provided the opportunity to ask any questions about the study and procedure. Finally, the

67
subjects were asked permission to audiotape the conversation, and to sign another
consent form, a copy of which was provided them for their own record. If they refused to
be audiotaped, the interview proceeded without one, and no one refused. The consent
forms and the interview questions are as outlined in the Appendix. Occasionally, the
interviews digressed into questions concerning the organization structure, internal
communication culture, innovation programs, and technology implementations, but these
were valuable to help inform and enrich the case study. Most of the interviews were
conducted in English and lasted between 30-60 minutes. Some of the interviewees
however wished to be interviewed in the national language of the country, or a mix of the
two languages. Either case was accommodated as I am fluent in both languages. At the
end of the interviews, the subjects had another opportunity to ask questions, and after
which, the interview was completed, and they were thanked for their participation. There
was no monetary compensation for their participation. The audiotaped interviews were
transcribed verbatim and where necessary were immediately translated into English to
facilitate coding. Transcription of these interviews resulted in 602 typed pages of doublespaced interview data. Qualitative analysis of these interviews focused on identifying the
enabling conditions for ideation and the affordances of ESM for ideation, instead of
purely open coding, and the analysis suggested that theoretical saturation have been met.
3.8. Data Analysis (Phase 2): Qualitative Coding of Interviews
The transcribed interviews were coded and analyzed using MaxQDA, a software
program for qualitative data analysis software not unlike Atlas.ti. The coding procedure
emulated the conventions of the grounded theory approach (Charmaz, 2006; Corbin &
Strauss, 1990; Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Namely, the transcripts were first open coded to

68
identify the concepts and phenomena in the data, specifically using the constant
comparative method (Miles & Huberman, 1994), whereby each meaningful set of
conversational interaction was marked and labeled with a relevant concept. From this
open coding process, after some categories have appeared from the data emically (and
etically also from literature), axial coding was subsequently used to link the categories to
find specific themes and concepts. From these themes, knowledge claims were developed
guided by the research questions in order to arrive at a set of statements that best explain
the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation, and the affordances of the ESM
for ideation. To improve internal validity, “member checks” were performed to validate
the research findings with several participants. To that end, several interviewees were
randomly selected and the summaries of interview findings were shared to solicit their
feedback.
The qualitative analysis of the interviews produced some interesting themes,
which were related to how the employees used the ESM to perform ideation, and about
the ESM itself. These went towards formulating the qualitative findings. Some themes
such as anonymity were not used because it was not covered in the literature. Table 3.5
shows some sample codes and quotes from the analysis.

69
Table 3.5: Sample codes and quotes
Code
Suitability

Description
ESM is suitable
technology for
ideation

Visibility
(Virality)

Knowing small
issues because
it was on the
ESM

Paused
(Asynchronicity)

ESM use is not
real-time; wait
before
responding
Need not be
official or
formal when
using ESM

Bypass rules
(Informality)

Anonymity

Use of ESM
with a
pseudonym and
not knowing
others

Pressure

ESM pressures
people to
respond

Voluntarity
(Motivations)

Things that
drive people to
share ideas;
freedom to
contribute
Commenting
depends on
topic

Topic
dependence

Sample quotes
In K*net, there are usually more ideas.
Sometimes it's something that we would never
have thought of. (P4)
I find it engaging or even fun to read other
people's comments to understand their ideas. (P5)
I don’t play bowling, but I know about the issue
from K*net. (P15)
Because everyone has access to K*net, and lots
of eyes looking at it, and this issue, it will attract
attention to it. (P1)
I won’t wait after posting to see a reply. I'm not
an attention seeker. haha. (P4)
They may not reply on the spot, but we're hoping
that they will actually read our comments. (P5)
Usually IT problems you have to log in the
Helpdesk system. But for live streaming, staff
just complain on K*net and we know we have to
fix it. (P17)
Sometimes I get to know OSH issues from
reading the comments. There are better ways to
do this, to get it up to me. (P18)
The platform allows you to put nicknames, so
people take that as a guarantee that other people
may not know who they are. (P5)
If you used real names, then there won't be
anymore keyboard warriors. Definitely. Everyone
will give good ideas and positive comments, no
more negative ones, really. (P4)
K*net may not be the best for us, because it
creates pressure on us to respond. (P9)
It was a hot issue. Staff were asking me if I can
do something about it. I said I will bring it up to
management for discussion. (P10)
I give ideas because I can. … No one asked me
to. No one said I cannot. ” (P16)
When I see things that can be improved, I will not
hesitate to suggest, to voice out. (P2)
It depends on the topic. Some topics attract more
attention than others. Things like Annual Dinner,
um.. the salary increment, some events, they
usually tend to get more ideas than serious stuff.
(P1)

70
Facilitation

Encourage
sharing;
discourage
derailleurs

I would advice them to not simply say what they
want, and maybe check the facts first. (P3)
The discussion was going nowhere. I went in to
suggest to put it back on track. Focus on the main
issue, (P13)

To recap, this chapter detailed the procedures needed to perform this study, which
was designed as a case study of a single organization, using both quantitative and
qualitative methods to answer the research questions and test the hypotheses. The ESM
server log containing the comments and in-depth interviews were the main sources of
data. Correlation and regression analyses were outlined, as were the in-depth interview
and qualitative coding processes. The next chapter presents the results of the statistical
analysis.

71
CHAPTER FOUR: RESULTS FROM QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
This chapter presents the results from quantitative analysis of the comments
dataset from the ESM server log file, as well as from the correlation and regression
analyses. These results are used to test the hypotheses identified in the previous chapter.
4.1. Descriptive statistics of the comments dataset
The original ESM user activity dataset contained 12,992 comments created by
1,752 pseudonymized usernames between April 2008 and October 2013. This period
represented the time between the launch of the ESM and when the data was requested.
The original pseudonymized list of employees as of September 2013 contained 2,829
individuals. When this list of employees was merged with the aforementioned comments
dataset, 1,251 usernames were matched to individuals, while 501 were unmatched and
thus unclassifiable in terms of position or function. This meant that the participation rate
in the ESM was 52.6% historically, and 44.2% most recently. As all employees had
access to the ESM, this suggests that around half of employees chose to be lurkers or
non-active users. Table 4.1 shows the demographic distribution of employees by gender,
age, tenure, hierarchical level, and functional area.
Examining the distribution of commenters in each group, the level of participation
in the ESM was generally consistent with their proportion in the organizational
population. Certain groups had greater proportion of commenters relative to their sizes,
such as Support Staff in terms of job level, as well as the Security and Currency
Operations groups in terms of job function. This suggests that these groups had relatively
more free time due to how the ESM was used in between work periods, as discussed in
the next chapter. Nonetheless, using the z-test for proportions, except for Support Staff

72
(z=2.95, p<.01), these deviations were not statistically significant relative to the
population. (See Tables 4.2 and 4.3).

Table 4.1: Demographic distribution of employees (n=2,829)
Category
Gender
Age

Tenure

Group
Female
Male
Up to 25 years old
26-35 years old
36-45 years old
46-55 years old
More than 55 years old
Up to 5 years
6-15 years
16-25 years
26-35 years
More than 35 years

Count
1,395
1,434
147
1,017
907
643
115
580
1,160
579
480
30

Percentage
49.3%
50.7%
5.2%
35.9%
32.1%
22.7%
4.1%
20.5%
41.0%
20.5%
17.0%
1.1%

Table 4.2: Distribution of ESM Commenters and Ideators by Organizational Hierarchy
Organizational
Hierarchy Group
1. Top
Management
2. Upper
Management
3. Middle
Management
4. Analyst
5. Support Staff
Total
Unclassifiable
* p<.05, **p<.01

All
All
Employee Commenter
s
s
11
2
(0.4%)
(0.2%)
140
44
(4.9%)
(3.5%)
521
201
(18.4%)
(16.1%)
1,166
488
(41.2%)
(39.0%)
991
516
(35.0%)
(41.2%)
2,829
1,251
501

† https://www.medcalc.org/calc/test_one_proportion.php

z†
.045
.430
.842*
.987
2.953**

Commenters
in Trimmed
Dataset
0
(0.0%)
25
(3.5%)
117
(16.5%)
284
(40.1%)
283
(39.9%)
711
41

73
Table 4.3: Distribution of ESM Ideation Participants by Functional Area
Functional Area
1. Policy
2. Audit
3. Currency
Operations
4. Services
5. Human
Resources
6. Research
7. Security
8. IT
9. Public
Relations
10. Risk
Management
11. Treasury
Operations
12. Financial
Counseling
13. Finance
14. Intelligence
15. Legal
16. On
Attachment
Total
Unclassifiable
* p<.05, **p<.01

All
Employees

All
Commenters

z†

453
(16.0%)
439
(15.5%)
395
(14.0%)
252
(8.9%)
142
(5.0%)
217
(7.7%)
200
(7.1%)
114
(4.0%)
83
(2.9%)
61
(2.2%)
114
(4.0%)
85
(3.0%)
71
(2.5%)
67
(2.4%)
48
(1.7%)
88
(3.1%)
2,829

181
(14.5%)
171
(13.7%)
201
(16.1%)
121
(9.7%)
61
(4.9%)
93
(7.4%)
115
(9.2%)
58
(4.6%)
41
(3.3%)
24
(1.9%)
37
(3.0%)
31
(2.5%)
31
(2.5%)
39
(3.1%)
14
(1.1%)
33
(2.6%)
1,251
501

.550
.650
.858
.309
.036
.109
.877
.233
.153
.100
.310
.163
.000
.286
.174
.166

Commenters
in Trimmed
Dataset
116
(16.3%)
93
(13.1%)
103
(14.5%)
74
(10.4%)
47
(6.6%)
48
(6.8%)
55
(7.7%)
32
(4.5%)
21
(3.0%)
23
(3.2%)
18
(2.5%)
24
(3.4%)
13
(1.8%)
23
(3.2%)
7
(1.0%)
12
(1.7%)
711
42

† https://www.medcalc.org/calc/test_one_proportion.php

After the dataset was trimmed for reasons explained earlier, there were 2,883
comments that were made between October 2012 and October 2013 by 711 identified

74
commenters, with 42 usernames unclassifiable. Examining their distribution in terms of
hierarchy and function, none of the deviations from the full dataset was statistically
significant. This suggests the representativeness of the trimmed dataset, thus supporting
its validity for studying this ESM as an enterprise-wide tool. Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show the
distribution of commenters in the original and trimmed datasets, by organizational
hierarchy and functional areas respectively.
4.2. Dependent variable: Ideation quality
Ideation quality is this study was operationalized as an ordinal variable that
summed three dichotomous variables of Idea Discussed, Idea Voted, and Idea Acted
derived from each ideation thread. This made the range of values for the ideation quality
variable, called Ideation Quality, to be between 0 and 3, with a score of 3 indicating the
highest ideation quality, with the score of 0 meaning that the idea was essentially ignored,
despite the possibility of there being discussion in the thread. The frequency distribution
of the ideation quality variable (median=2, mean=1.49, s.d.=1.06) is shown in Table 4.4,
which shape is not normally distributed. This has implications on the type of statistical
analysis that can be performed on the variable.
Table 4.4: Frequency distribution of Ideation Quality (n=101 threads)
Ideation Quality Score
Frequency

0
30
(29.7%)

1
6
(5.9%)

2
51
(50.5%)

3
14
(13.9%)

4.3. Independent variables
4.3.1. Hierarchical and functional diversity of participants
From the comments dataset, there were 5 hierarchical levels and 16 functional
levels. The hierarchical and functional diversity measures were calculated for each

75
ideation thread using Blau’s (1977) index of heterogeneity, using R software, specifically
Meyer's (2009) R function for Blau’s diversity index. The resulting continuous variables
have values that ranged between 0 and 1, where 0 means no diversity in the group.
Across 101 ideation threads, the hierarchical diversity index (median=0.54, mean=0.47,
s.d.=0.21) and functional diversity index (median=0.77, mean=0.67, s.d.=0.26) were also
not normally distributed, due to several cases in which the index were 0. These were
threads in which participants came from the same job level or job function group.
4.3.2. Thread duration
Thread duration is the number of days that lapsed from the first comment to the
last comment in the thread. Due to the slow pace of how conversations on the ESM
develop, it could provide some time for participants to think about the ideas shared before
providing their own contribution to the discussion, so that the idea could be better
developed. Hence, a longer thread duration could indicate a higher ideation quality. The
frequency distribution of the thread duration is as Figure 4.1, which also followed a long
tail distribution, with a median of 4.3 days.
Figure 4.1: Frequency distribution of ideation thread duration

76
4.3.3. Thread length
Thread length refers to the number of comments in the ideation thread. A longer
thread is assumed to imply a healthier discussion of an idea. While it may not be
necessary for all comments to be about an idea in the thread, due to how ideation threads
were identified in this study, this possibility was minimized. The frequency distribution
of the ideation threads is as in Figure 4.2. It followed a long tail distribution, with 8
threads having only one comment, the median thread had 10 comments, and the longest
thread had 117 comments, which was about the annual company dinner.
Figure 4.2: Frequency distribution of comments in the ideation threads

4.3.4. Commenter count
Commenter count refers to the number of commenters in the ideation thread. A
greater number of commenters indicates that more participants were involved in the
ideation process. While not all commenters may be necessarily be discussing the ideas,
due to how ideation threads were identified in this study, this possibility was minimized.
The frequency distribution of the ideation threads is as in Figure 4.3. It also followed a
long tail distribution, with 8 threads having only one commenter, the median thread had 8

77
commenters, and the longest thread had 71 commenters, which was also about the annual
company dinner.
Figure 4.3: Frequency distribution of commenters in the ideation threads

4.4. Control variables
4.4.1. Nonwork topic of discussion
During coding of the comments dataset, certain discussion topics seemed to
garner more comments than other topics. Upon closer examination, the data suggested
that there could be a difference between work and nonwork topics in terms of
participation. This was guided by earlier studies that have divided communication on the
ESM into work and nonwork, with nonwork posts getting more attention over time
(Gibbs et al., 2015). Hence, the threads were qualitatively coded into work and nonwork
based on the title of the threads (Cohen’s kappa: 0.94; discrepancy due to misleading or
creative way some threads were titled). For example, the new human resource policy was
coded as “work topic”, and the annual treasure hunt was coded as “nonwork”. The two
groups were compared and a two-sample t-tests for differences of means were carried out
for several variables, namely thread duration, thread length, commenter count, and
ideation quality. The results of the t-tests as shown in Table 4.5 suggested the acceptance
the alternative hypothesis that nonwork topic had more comments than work topics, and

78
that more participants commented on nonwork topics than work topics. However, the
same t-test results suggested that work topics have better ideation quality than nonwork
topics, albeit by just a small margin of .02.
Table 4.5: Difference between work and nonwork topics for select variables

Thread duration
Log(1+Thread duration)
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µnonwork-µwork=0)
Thread length
Log(Thread length)
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µnonwork-µwork=0)
Commenter count
Log(Commenter count)
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µnonwork-µwork=0)
Ideation quality
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µwork-µnonwork=0)

Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

Work
(n=24)
4.38
4.79
1.31
0.92

Nonwork
(n=77)
5.01
4.75
1.50
0.81

t=-0.94, df = 34.93, p=.36
Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

17.33
25.05
2.04
1.30

18.74
21.32
2.34
1.17

t=–1.00, df=35.52, p=.16
Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

12.50
16.25
1.85
1.19

14.27
14.23
2.17
1.06

t=1.19, df=35.19, p=.12
Mean
s.d.

1.5
1.06

1.48
1.07

t=–.08, df=38.69, p=.47

4.4.2. Presence of facilitator
From the analysis of the comments data and subsequent interviews, the role of the
facilitator appeared as a potential variable that could influence participation in the
ideation process, and thus ideation quality. A facilitator in this case could be anyone who
either encourages participation in the ideation process, encourages discussion of the
ideas, or dissuades participants from making (negative) comments that could derail the

79
discussion, while remaining neutral. After recoding the dataset for the facilitator variable
(Cohen’s kappa: .78 due to difficulty in ascertaining neutrality), two sample t-tests were
again conducted across several variables, to check if the variable had any influence on the
ideation outcomes, including participation, discussion, and quality. The results as shown
in Table 4.6 suggested the acceptance of the null hypotheses that the means are different
for all test variables. In other words, the presence of a facilitator made a huge difference
(despite the smaller number of cases) in improving participation and discussion, which
also led to improved ideation quality.
Table 4.6: Difference between having a facilitator or not for select variables

Thread duration
Log(Thread duration)
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µfacilitated-µunfacilitated=0)
Thread length
Log(Thread length)

Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

Log(Commenter count)
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µfacilitated-µunfacilitated=0)
Ideation quality
t-test for differences of means
(H0: µfacilitated-µunfacilitated=0)

Unfacilitated
(n=76)
3.51
3.26
1.23
0.79

t=6.46, df = 58.60, p<.001
Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

t-test for differences of means
(H0: µfacilitated-µunfacilitated=0)
Commenter count

Facilitated
(n=25)
8.99
6.09
2.15
0.55

44.28
26.85
3.62
0.62

9.90
11.25
1.82
1.00

t=10.63, df=67.58, p<.001
Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.

30.32
15.69
3.28
0.53

8.43
9.38
1.71
0.94

t=10.4, df=74.10, p<.001
Mean
s.d.

1.92
.99
t=2.45, df=42.99, p<.01

1.34
1.05

80
4.5. Polyserial correlation analysis
Bivariate correlations were performed in order to test several hypotheses about
the relationships between several independent variables and ideation quality (as the
dependent variable). To recap, the hypotheses were that there is positive correlation
between functional diversity of participants in the thread and ideation quality (H1);
negative correlation between hierarchical diversity in the thread and ideation quality
(H2); positive correlation between thread duration and ideation quality (H3); positive
correlation between thread length and ideation quality (H4); and positive correlation
between number of participants and ideation quality (H5). As the ideation quality
dependent variable was a polychotomous 4-level ordinal categorical variable, and that the
independent variables were continuous interval variables that did not satisfy the
assumptions of the more typical correlation tests, polyserial correlation tests (Olsson,
Drasgow, & Dorans, 1982) were performed using R’s polycor package. Bivariate
correlations between other variables used the Spearman’s method. The results are as
presented in Table 4.7. It shows that the correlations between functional diversity,
hierarchical diversity, thread duration, thread length, and number of participants
(commenters) were all positively correlated with ideation quality at the .10 confidence
level. Other correlations were highly significant. Thread length (number of comments)
and number of commenters was almost perfectly correlated. Hence, H1, H3, H4 and H5
were supported, but H2 was not supported.

81
Figure 4.4: Visual correlations between study variables and ideation quality

82
Table 4.7: Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations Among Study Variables
Variable
1. Ideation quality
score
2. Functional diversity
3. Hierarchical
diversity
4. Thread length
5. Log(Thread length)
6. Thread duration
7. Log(1+Thread
duration)
8. Commenter count
9. Log(Commenter
count)

Mean
1.49

S.D.
1.06

2
.60*

3
.45*

5
.61*

.67
.47

.26
.21

---

18.41
2.27
4.86
1.46

22.14
1.20
4.74
.84

-----

-----

-----

13.85
2.10

14.67
1.10

---

---

---

7
.43*

9
.60*

.58*** .85*** .54*** .88***
-.53*** .31*** .56***
--.64*** .99***
---.61***
---

---

*p <.10; **p <.05; ***p <.01; Polyserial not using ML

4.6. Ordinal logistic regression analysis
Regression analysis is performed to predict the value of the dependent variable
given the values of one or more predictor variables. In this study, as the dependent
variable in this study was a 4-level ordinal variable of ideation quality, an ordinal logistic
regression was performed (McCullagh, 1980). The regression predicts the odds ratio that
the dependent variable will change one level, when the predictor variable increases by
one unit, while other variables remained constant.
The initial model tested was for ideation quality to be predicted by hierarchical
diversity, functional diversity, thread duration, thread length (number of comments),
number of commenters, nonwork topic of discussion, and presence of facilitator. The
results are as in Table 4.8. The results show that functional diversity and thread length
were the two significant predictors of ideation quality at the 0.05 level. The results show
that for a 1 unit increase in functional diversity, there was a 85-times greater odds that
ideation quality will improve by one level, such as from a score of 1 to 2, or 2 to 3, while

83
other variables are untouched. In other words, as more participants from different
departments join in the ideation discussion thread, there is bigger chance for ideation
quality to improve. These numbers however are not additive. Compare this to the odds of
when more participants from different job positions join in the discussion, the results
suggest that the chance for ideation quality to improve is only about 5 times greater,
although the quality will still improve. Meanwhile, the results also suggest that with just
1 additional comment, or 1 additional day of discussion, there is just a 8% and 2% chance
respectively that ideation quality will improve up a notch. Nonetheless, the same results
suggest that an additional commenter has a slight chance of reducing ideation quality, if
other variables remain constant. Quite surprisingly, the odds of having a facilitator in the
discussion thread who will improve ideation quality, is less than not having any
facilitator, but only so slightly. Similarly, work topic is said to have just a slightly better
chance of producing higher ideation quality than nonwork topics. All these other odds
however were not of sufficient statistical significance. In short, the results suggest that
ideation quality is very likely to be increased if more participants with diverse knowledge
and work backgrounds participate, or if participants contribute more comments to the
discussion, which is rather unsurprising.
Table 4.8: Ordinal logistic regression analysis, initial model (n=101)
Predictor
B
S.E.
t
p
OR
Hierarchical diversity
1.58
1.28 1.24
0.21
4.87
Functional diversity
4.44
1.53 2.90
0.00
84.68
Thread duration
0.02
0.06 0.34
0.74
1.02
Thread length
0.08
0.04 1.96
0.05
1.08
Number of commenters
–0.09
0.06 –1.54 0.12
0.92
Nonwork topic
–0.41
0.50 –0.82 0.42
0.67
Presence of facilitator
–0.52
0.66 –0.79 0.43
0.59
Model AIC=211.02, Residual deviance=191.02, AICc=212.22

84
In order to find the model that best predicts the dependent variable, the regression
analysis were repeated several times while removing and adding variables at each step,
and assessing the AIC and AICc values, in which a lower value reflects lower
information entropy and thus predictive power of the model. R provides a tool called
StepAIC that automates the process. The final model chosen had the lowest AICc of
203.92 but the variables that remained were functional diversity, thread length (number
of comments), number of commenters, presence of facilitator and an interaction term of
thread length and facilitator. Table 4.9 shows the regression results.
Table 4.9: Ordinal logistic regression analysis, final model (n=101)
Predictor
Functional diversity
Thread length
Number of commenters
Presence of facilitator

B
4.44
0.18
–0.16
1.42

S.E.
1.41
0.07
0.08
1.02

t
3.16
2.58
–2.10
1.40

p
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.16

OR
84.51
1.20
0.85
4.14

Thread length x
–0.08
0.04
–2.20
0.03
0.92
Presence of facilitator
Model AIC=203.92, Residual deviance=187.92, AICc=204.55
The results show that all predictors were significant at the 0.05 level, except for
the facilitator presence. In this model, for a 1 unit increase in functional diversity, there
was the same odds (84.5 times) that ideation quality will improve by one level, while
other variables are constant. The results also suggest that with just 1 additional comment,
there is an improved 20% chance that ideation quality will improve up a notch. However,
one additional commenter will have a slight chance of reducing the ideation quality, as
was with the interacting variable. Interestingly, the presence of a facilitator has a 4 time
greater odds of improving ideation quality, although it was not significant at the 0.1 level.
It needs to be reminded that these numbers are however not additive. In other words, 2

85
additional comments (instead of 1) cannot be said to double the 20% odds of improving
ideation quality by one level. While the final model made use of only four predictor
variables, none except two of the predictor variables in the original model was
significant. As such, this model is considered more useful in predicting the ideation
quality, and thus helps to answer the question of what factors contribute to ideation
quality.
To recap, this chapter presented the results of the quantitative analysis of the
comments dataset, bivariate correlations, and regression analyses. The results were used
to test the previously established hypotheses. Polyserial correlations showed that
functional diversity, hierarchical diversity, thread duration, thread length, and number of
commenters all had positive relationships with ideation quality. Hence, H1 (functional
diversity), H3 (thread duration), H4 (thread length) and H5 (number of commenters) were
supported, but H2 (hierarchical diversity) was not. Ordinal logistic regression showed
that functional diversity, thread length, and number of commenters were the important
predictors of ideation quality, as other predictor variables were not significant and had
low odds of improving ideation quality. Additionally, the presence of facilitator and
thread length together was found to significantly influence ideation quality.

86
CHAPTER FIVE: FINDINGS FROM QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
This chapter presents the findings from the qualitative analysis from both the
comments data in the ESM server log file and the interviews. The findings intend to
answer the two research questions developed in an earlier chapter, namely, to identify the
enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation as compared to small group
brainstorming, and to identify the ESM affordances for ideation.
5.1. Findings on the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation
The study found three main themes to answer the first research question on the
enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation. They were non-handpicked
participation, longer or rolling deadlines, and emergent facilitation. Together, these
conditions help ensure large-scale online ideation could take place, distinguishing it from
small group brainstorming.
5.1.1. Non-handpicked participation
First, this study found that in instances in which large-scale online ideation
occurred, the participants were not handpicked or predetermined. This opening of
participation to all, enabled more employees to be involved, or at least to be aware of the
problem that needed ideas, even if it was only concerned with a small part of the
organizational population. This is different than traditional brainstorming in which
particular individuals were identified and chosen to be in the group. In large-scale online
ideation, anyone who was willing to contribute could share ideas towards resolving the
problem and/or join in the discussion and argumentation. There wasn’t even a condition
set on the capability of employees in order to participate, such as having knowledge of
the subject matter, which instead is a typical condition for small group brainstorming. In

87
fact, as shown in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 in the previous chapter, ideation participants came
from diverse hierarchical positions and organizational functions.
Willingness to participate and share ideas was driven by the motivation to
improve things, as mentioned by several interviewees. For example, P2 said, “when I see
things that can be improved, I will not hesitate to suggest,” or P1 who said, “I comment
and give idea because I have something to say about the event, how it was run, … to add
to the discussion about how it can be better for next year.” Other interviewees said that
they self-selected the issues they were interested in, and voluntarily shared ideas based on
their familiarity with the subject matter. P1 for example said, “Some problems are a bit
too technical for me to comment. And by technical, I mean I need specialized knowledge
to be able to comment or give good ideas.” Or P5, in response to a question about what
triggered him to share ideas, who said, “the problem itself, the nature of the problem, and
what other people have said about it.” In short, any employee who wanted to contribute
ideas and opinions could do so on the ESM without being asked or asking for permission.
In fact, one situation exemplified the scaling-up of the ideation process, when a
small brainstorming group decided to open up participation to all employees in order to
address a problem that impacted the whole organization. P14, who was involved in the
initiative to explore cost-cutting measures for the organization, said that initially her team
of six was tasked to brainstorm ways to reduce organizational spending, but then:
We felt [that] ... we shouldn't be the only ones thinking of ideas to save cost,
when everyone in the Company will be impacted. ... One of us suggested to
expand the task force ... to get one rep from each department. But we argued that
it still won't be good enough, because 40 out of almost 3,000 staff leaves out a lot
of people. ... then someone suggested that we should just get all staff to be
involved.

88
In this case, limiting participation to only a few, leaves out many, and starves them of the
opportunity to participate in the process and contribute ideas to the organization. So
everyone was roped in. P14 continued to explain how the ESM came into the picture:
We were not sure how [to do it] initially. We thought of sending out an email
blast, and then asking people to email back their ideas. But then, we thought
surely there will be duplicate ideas if no one knows what others are doing. So we
thought of displaying ideas on a website, and that's when someone suggested we
use K*net, because it can get people to give their ideas, and display it also. … We
talked to the IT department to help us create a page for the contest. … They did
that, and away we go! … People then started giving ideas on K*net.
Here, email was initially considered, but its limitation prompted the suggestion for the
team to use the ESM. More importantly, this case demonstrated the non-predetermined
nature of participation in large-scale online ideation, as it was opened to all employees
without conditions. This is akin to the concept of “democratized participation” in social
media (Campbell et al., 2014; Klang & Nolin, 2011) in which anyone could voice their
opinions, but the focus here was not so much on the population having the power, but
more on the problem owner who did not need to find people to give ideas. As P9 who
managed the Koperasi said:
Most members choose to come to the office to talk to us. They can directly ask
questions and get answers immediately. With K*net, it's another channel to reach
us, and many choose to talk to us that way. … And [they shared] ideas not just on
the timing of advertisements, but on the kinds of products and services we should
bring next time [for the sales event]. … I told them I would take the ideas into
consideration for future sales events.
Other issues that concerned the whole organization included the revised career
progression policy (T15658133) issued by the human resource (HR) department, or the
company’s annual dinner (T16308485), and the implementation of a new visitor
management procedure (T14949397). This kind of issues, when raised, naturally attracted
the attention of the majority of the organization, as it affected all of them.

89
However, there were several issues in the study that were specifically concerned
with only a small segment of the organizational population, such as the date change for a
bowling tournament (T15841810) and the Koperasi’s special withdrawal scheme
(T16059639). Through ESM, these issues became widely known to other ESM users in
the organization, namely those who did not bowl or those who were not a member of the
Koperasi, as evidenced by the following comments: “I’m not a member of the Persatuan,
but from what I heard, the original date conflicted with another event. But Persatuan
should have been more transparent about it,” (C11850) and “This is a good move by the
Koperasi to allow special cash withdrawal for Eid. I wish I could benefit, but I’m not a
member,” (C12196). In other words, the non-handpicking of participants freed up more
people to be involved in the ideation process.
Interestingly, there was not an issue with regard to managing the large number of
participants, which is known to be a challenge in face-to-face settings, as CMC has
alleviated much of the physical coordination issue. Furthermore, the large-scale ideation
process was made more manageable by scoping down the topic for ideation, as was done
with the cost-cutting project or the sales events of the Koperasi, which helped to narrow
the focus and create clearer boundaries for problem-solving. Consequently, this played a
part in making the ideation process more successful, as with the cost-cutting project that
saw almost 50 ideas being contributed, or the Koperasi that accepted the idea to change
the timing of its advertising.
In sum, large-scale online ideation was enabled when participants were not
handpicked by problem owners like brainstorming groups, but allowed to participate on
their own volition. This is especially important in ideation projects that impacted a large

90
part of, or even the whole organization, where limiting participation would rob
employees of the opportunity to take part in organizational-level process and decisionmaking that would ultimately impact themselves.
5.1.2. Longer or rolling deadlines
Second, this study found that in the large-scale online ideation cases, there was a
longer deadline set for ideas to come in, relative to small group brainstorming. This time
limit was in terms of days or weeks, as compared to small group brainstorming which
deadline is usually limited to a few hours. One evidence is the cost-cutting project that
had three months to deliver its proposals to management, and so the team gave
employees one month to share ideas on the ESM because they were already a few weeks
into the project. One reason why the deadline was longer is the asynchronicity of the
ESM. Unlike face-to-face or instant messaging, in which users expect an almost
immediate response (Gibbs et al., 2015), the ESM were not used continuously by
individuals and the interactions were not in real-time. P2 for example, said he used the
ESM five or more times a day, while P12 said after the first session of using the ESM in
the morning, he came back on only later in the day. Due to this non-continuous,
intermittent usage of the ESM, the conversations within which were also slow to develop,
even when aggregated across individuals. As a result, it was more practical for problem
owners to set a longer deadline for ideation on the ESM than they would otherwise set for
small brainstorming groups.
That said, there was a case in which there was seemingly no set deadline for
receiving ideas, but that ideas were “welcomed anytime.” As the Koperasi manager (P9)
said:

91
No, there is no deadline. Whenever anyone has an idea on how to improve what
the Co-op does, they can give it to us anytime. For the sales promotion for
example, [it is done] quite regularly, at least once or twice a month, … So when
there are problems, we welcome suggestions anytime, so that we can improve
them in the next round. … And yes, [members] did give ideas on K*net
afterwards [after the sales event]. … And I told them I would take the ideas into
consideration for future sales events.
Despite claiming to have no deadline, the situation as explained showed that the activities
were ongoing, so it did not make sense to have a fixed deadline, because ideas received in
one cycle was considered for implementation in a future cycle. Effectively, this made it a
rolling deadline. After all, ideas can come anytime, and not forcing participants to give
ideas on the spot like in small group brainstorming but giving ideation some time,
enables more participants to be involved and more ideas to come in.
In sum, longer deadlines -- that spanned days or weeks, compared to hours in
typical brainstorming groups -- were important for ideation because it enabled large-scale
ideation to occur. This is not by choice but by design, because the asynchronicity of the
ESM made conversations develop more slowly, which made setting a brief deadline for
ideation on the ESM impractical.
5.1.3. Emergent facilitation
Third, this study found that in many cases of large-scale online ideation that
progressed beyond the idea generation stage, there was usually someone who assumed
the role of a facilitator, who tried to encourage participants to share ideas and/or discuss
them, or moderate the negative comments from derailing the discussion. Interestingly,
some of these facilitators were not someone who was formally assigned to the role, but
emergent from the participants involved. This is different than in brainstorming groups in
which the facilitator role is formally assigned to someone who is usually an independent

92
party. For example, P4 emerged as a facilitator to encourage more people to share ideas
about the places to visit for a trip that the Puspanita was planning:
There was a trip being organized to go somewhere, like Johor or Korea, and I saw
people asking about places to visit. Some shared about what places to go and what
places to skip. … I joined [the conversation] to ask for the reasons. I also asked
others for more ideas. And then I brought them up to the organizing committee as
a member, and they liked it. … But I think the ideas are … not really proper ideas.
It's like, … fleeting, one liners. You have to follow up to get the details, and then
you can get a clearer picture of the idea.
The facilitator emerged because of an interest to get the details in the subject matter, and
because the ideas were originally not well formed. Meanwhile for P2, the facilitator role
was assumed because he was in charge of communication for the Persatuan, but it was
still emergent because he did not initiate the process:
In Persatuan, I'm in charge of communication, so whenever we put up something
and people comment [on the emergent issues], I compiled them for our committee
meeting to discuss what to do with them. Some comments of course are just for
the sake of commenting, so I ignored them. But for others, if I see there [can be] a
potential improvement that can be done based on the suggestion, I go in to ask for
details, and then I will take it up [to the committee] for consideration.
Similarly for P14, who was part of the cost-cutting project team, was tasked to oversee
the ideation process, but to come in only when necessary to prompt participation from
employees:
[Team members] were expected to join in the conversation and prompt whenever
we see that things are not moving, or rather that ideas are not getting a fair
amount of discussion. I mean, it's on us to get ideas to present to management. So,
when we saw any good ideas, we challenged them, asked questions -- What about
this and that? Will that work? and such. … We got a lot of people to contribute,
about 50 good ideas altogether.
In short, the facilitators emerged for various motivations -- interested, invested, and
assigned -- but they had the same goal of encouraging ideas to be developed, and in doing
so, helped to get more people involved.

93
Facilitators also emerged to moderate the negative comments from derailing the
discussion. P4 reported her experience in trying to diffuse an argument from “religious”
people about an idea to organize a singing competition:
There was a singing competition being organized, and people were discussing
ideas for it. … That was a social kind of event, so in the comments you saw
several people becoming "ustazah" (religious gurus) saying things like we
shouldn't be courting disaster from God because the event is distracting from
worship. So I went in to say that other people may have different views, and we
should respect the views of others. … [I did it because] I don't want the so-called
"conflict" to continue. There are so many keyboard warriors in the Company, and
they can be very spirited.
Although the facilitator in this case did not encourage idea contribution or discussion per
se, the intervention helped to stop the ideation process from being derailed, while
remaining neutral. Similarly, P5 also used to intervene in the ESM to “urge [participants]
to be rational and sensible, to actually mind their language. … [and] mind the
sensitivities.” P3 also intervened as a neutral party to try to correct the misperceptions
perpetuated by some people, when she said:
They commented about HR is this and that, but we don't really know the goingson in HR. So we need to correct that. We can't agree with things that we don't
know. … In my opinion, we have to get the facts first, we can't just criticize
freely. … I do this based on my experience. You know HR is busy, and whenever
I deal with them, I would call them up and discuss. So I understand better about
HR things. These people on K*net comment without checking with HR.
The facilitator that emerged in this case was driven by her sense of responsibility to
correct a situation based on her own experience in dealing with the HR department. In
short, facilitation is not just about encouraging more ideas to be shared and more people
to join in the discussion, but also to discourage turns that could otherwise inhibit the
ideation process from progressing.

94
In sum, large-scale online ideation was enabled by the active role played by the
facilitator to get more people involved and to keep the process running healthily. While
facilitators could be someone formally assigned to take up the role, such as in some of the
cases above and in brainstorming groups, it was also interesting to observe that the role
was also assumed informally by some of the involved participants on the ESM. These
individuals were interested and invested in achieving a greater outcome for the ideation
process -- but more importantly, they were not the problem owners.
Hence, with respect to the first research question, the above findings showed that
non-handpicked participation, longer or rolling deadlines, and emergent facilitation were
the important conditions needed to enable large-scale online ideation, as compared to
small group brainstorming. Without these conditions, it was difficult for the problem
owners to scale up the ideation process to involve a larger number of participants to share
and discuss the ideas, despite the technology. That said, technology -- and in this case,
the ESM -- did play an important role in this, and so the second research question intends
to identify the affordances of ESM for ideation.
5.2. Findings on the affordances of ESM for ideation
The study found three new affordances of ESM for ideation, namely virality,
informality, and asynchronicity. The ESM affordances supported the various phases of
ideation, namely problem identification, idea sharing, idea development, and idea
evaluation.
5.2.1. Virality
Evidence from the interviews showed that users felt that the ESM enabled them to
create a wider awareness of their issues than they could with other platforms. This was

95
tied to a number of observations about how large-scale online ideation was performed on
the ESM. First, the ESM enabled a large number of participants to openly and visibly
share their diverse views in the ideation process, and especially so when the problem
impacted a sizeable part of the organization. As P1 explained:
If the issue concerns the whole organization as a whole, or a large part of it, then
using K*net to brainstorm ideas makes sense, because then you get lots of inputs
from various people. You get multiple angles on the issue. … So K*net is a good
platform to discuss or see if the ideas are good or not. People have various points
of views.
Second, ESM enabled idea contributors to be visible to a lot of people, which if the
contribution was written carefully, could result in a better reputation, and thus an
advantage in the workplace (DiMicco et al., 2008), as P2 said:
When you share ideas in K*net, at the back of your mind, you know the whole
Company is looking at it. So you will be motivated to be smarter in commenting,
not just by saying simple things, but you want to be strategic in putting your ideas
forward. …You want to improve things. So K*net being a place that you can
share openly is a great advantage because it also gives you visibility offline and
online.
These two quotes allude to the visibility affordance of ESM (Treem & Leonardi, 2012)
but the focus of the latter quote is on the contributor rather than on the content in the
ESM. P4 shared the same sentiment about the visibility of ESM when she said, “K*net
has a large audience. If we give ideas there, many people can see it [because] everyone
has it on their PCs.” What these quotes suggest is that ESM may also exhibit a different
affordance for large-scale online ideation, namely that of virality, in which the
technology lets users to widely disseminate and promote their issues and ideas to a large
audience. As P9 said:
K*net is just the right platform for us to easily reach out to the members. We can
broadcast about our sales activities, our notices for meetings, changes to loan
rules, and so forth. They can also easily reply to provide feedback. Of course, it is

96
also as easy to criticize us, and we receive that a lot, but we focus on the
suggestions they give to improve the Co-op instead.
In other words, the ESM’s virality allowed problem owners to reach participants more
easily and quickly, but unlike traditional broadcast media, the audience could
immediately provide in-context feedback, including ideas and complaints.
That said, it may be argued that email as a CMC also shares the same affordance
of virality as ESM. While true by design, evidence from this study shows that for largescale ideation, email is not suitable because of organizational norms, in that it was not
acceptable for employees to exchange emails with everyone when sharing and discussing
ideas, unlike on the ESM. As P14 said,
We thought of sending out an email blast, and then asking people to email back
their ideas. ... At the same time, we don't want staff to send emails to everybody.
It would be a mess, and [the IT department] won't allow that. Maybe emails can
work for the [few in the] task force, but not when it involves all staff.
It was the same with P2 who said emailing and cc-ing everyone about ideas “will screw
up your life in the Company,” alluding to the unacceptability of the practice.
In short, the virality affordance of ESM enabled problem owners to reach out
widely to potential participants. With the same affordance, participants were also creating
greater awareness to others about their contribution. Together, the affordance made the
ideation process visible to everyone. This increased degree of transparency had some
unintended outcome, by creating some pressure on the problem owners to act, as P9
confessed:
When there are complaints about Co-op on K*net, they actually are seen by many
people, including the bosses. Especially when there is a lot of talk about it. It
creates pressure or a sense of urgency on me to respond. Several times, one of the
Board members … asked me what I was going to do about the comments. … [He]
also suggested that I respond to the comment on K*net to at least show that [the

97
Co-op was] listening. So I did that, even if it was to say that we will look into the
problem.
In other words, the virality of ESM have the potential to progress the ideation process by
prompting action from outside the system, which also reflected the extent to which the
ESM were integrated in the organizational environment.
Overall, virality is an important affordance in the ideation process because users
could use the ESM to establish issues and elevate them to the whole organization to gain
wider awareness or attention. While organizational level issues would readily attract the
attention of many, relatively smaller or localized issues that would otherwise only be of
concern to a small segment of the organizational population, could also be “viralled” to
the whole organization, but only if it resonated with other users, perhaps due to a shared
experience, or a shared or opposing sentiment about the matter. In turn, this enabled
participants to meaningfully start contributing ideas to address the issue. The increased
online interactions technically caused the ESM to algorithmically identify the discussion
as one of the most active, and indicated it as such on the home page, not unlike how
Facebook configures its Top Stories newsfeed. Consequently, this prominence attracted
even more attention to it. It was also possible for an issue to spill over into the physical
realm as and when the issue was discussed offline in the physical workplace, attracting
the attention of other employees in the rest of the organization. As an upper management
interviewee (P19) commented, "I rarely read the comments in K*net, but so many people
were talking about it in the office, that I had to see for myself what the hoo-ha was all
about," when referring to the revised career progression policy announcement
(T15658133). Although this was outside the ESM, the virality certainly enabled this to
happen. Furthermore, this increased attention online and offline further improved the

98
chances for the issue to be addressed, even though not all issues raised on the ESM were
highlighted or even received a response.
5.2.3. Informality
The study also found that the ESM were used for ideation in ways that did not
necessarily follow the formally established structure, rules, and procedures in the
organization, including that of conventional brainstorming. In many organizations, there
are established rules and procedures to bring attention to issues or problems. There are
also certain expectations of formality that accompany such rules, such as writing the issue
or suggestion properly, and escalating it to the right person in the correct order. Even
conventional brainstorming has certain procedures established for it, including assigning
facilitator, selecting participants, and setting deadlines. Evidence from this study showed
that practically anyone in the organization could contribute ideas, and as mentioned in the
previous section, they were quite diverse in terms of hierarchy and function. Furthermore,
there was generally no organizing beforehand such as calling for ideas, selecting
participants, and appointing a facilitator, as highlighted earlier. Additionally, several
interviewees mentioned that the virtuality of the ESM, as opposed to face-to-face, made
them feel they could contribute ideas without much consideration in terms of protocol or
formality. For example, P12 said:
On K*net, I don’t have to wait for a meeting to give ideas. I don’t have to know
whom I’m writing to. I don’t have to bother writing formally. I also don’t have to
think too much about my idea. I just write and click submit.
Technically, the ESM enabled this behavior by allowing users to easily review and
respond to the issues by providing a comment box, which is not unlike how public social
media sites like Facebook or Twitter provide a prompt for users to quickly reply to a post

99
or comment. In other words, contributing ideas was relatively easily done on the ESM.
This was echoed by P4 who said that ideas were sometimes “fleeting, one liners” and not
elaborately written. Some examples were the following ideas: “Start it on the first day of
school holidays,” (C10801) when discussing the book sale timing issue; “Publish the
names of the top eight bowlers,” (C10307) when discussing the issue of player selection
to a bowling tournament; or “Have one in the regional office,” (C11834) in response to
an issue about the Koperasi promotional activities being held only in the head office.
However, these terse comments were well understood given the context of the thread
within which they appeared, and were enough for others to start discussing them as well.
More importantly, all these evidence suggested that there was a large degree of
informality when the ESM were used for ideation.
Additionally, when using the ESM for ideation, it did not matter that the
participants did not know who the problem owner was. For them, posting on the ESM
was sufficient, and the expectations was for the relevant problem owner to also use the
ESM and read the discussion about the issue and the ideas. As P12 said, “It’s not
difficult. When you post the article, you are responsible for it. You’re responsible for
reading the comments, and discovering the issues, and getting the ideas.” This was
echoed by P5 who said, “The problem owner should take accountability and
responsibility to read the feedback, and consider those feedback for whatever future
things they do.” In other words, these quotes suggested that the ESM allowed employees
to bypass the traditional organizational communication protocol, of going through the
proper channels and following formal reporting procedures in order to bring a problem
and related ideas to attention. It also meant that the contributors did not care that the ideas

100
were unsolicited. For them, it was the responsibility of the problem owner to deal with it.
That said, if the problem owner was known or familiar to the complainant, it was better to
contact them direct, because it had a better chance of getting a response. As P2 explained:
If you knew the supervisor, better for you to directly email or call [that person].
For the cafe case for example, I emailed the supervisor direct, because I knew
who was in charge. I won't post it on K*net. Although there are lots of comments
about the cafe problems in K*net, I think the best is to tell them direct. … After a
week, the cafe management called me. They tracked me and asked what
happened. So I related my experience, my sour experience.
In this case, email was used instead of the ESM, but it was because the problem owner
was known. In general, it was just easier to use the ESM to highlight an issue and share
ideas and solutions due to the virality affordance. This was echoed by P9:
I think K*net is easy enough already for people to give ideas. I think what is more
important is for some sort of control, so that people don't just complain but also
give ideas. … Make it more civil, instead of just complaining to no end.
In other words, the informality of the ESM is a double-edged sword; it allows not just for
ideas to be shared easily, but also the problems, with the problems seemingly more
forthcoming than the ideas.
In short, the informality affordance alluded to the ability of ESM users to bypass
certain formal protocols to highlight issues and send ideas to problem owners. Using the
virality and informality affordances of ESM, users can perform ideation without strictly
following the rules established in conventional brainstorming. And due to the way ESM
is used, especially how users can easily write and broadcast their contribution and
comments to a large audience, many of the formal rules and procedures become difficult
to enforce. Save for the potential chaos, the resulting informality affects the way ideation
is implemented on the ESM. For instance, it may not be necessary to assign a facilitator
to oversee the ideation process, but as evidenced in this study as discussed previously, the

101
role may emerge organically from amongst the participants, but depending on the topic.
Additionally, problem owners may directly receive the complaints and ideas from the
users without solicitation when they use the ESM, because the technology allows users to
transcend traditional boundaries when communicating with the problem owners. Even if
the problem owners were not an active ESM user, he or she may eventually know it
through "social escalation” of the issue and ideas by others who were ESM users, again
as evidenced earlier. Additionally, it did not matter that the problem owners were
relatively unknown to a large segment of the organizational population, because they
were expected to also use the ESM and thus be aware of the messages directed to them.
In short, this informality allowed ESM users to bypass formal organizational hierarchy
when communicating, to deliver the messages directly to the problem owners.
5.2.3. Asynchronicity
As identified in an earlier section, the ESM exhibited the asynchronicity
affordance because it was not used by the users in real-time. Unlike instant messaging in
which usage is typically continuous for a period of time and the response is often realtime, the ESM usage by individuals was intermittent, with responses to comments
occurring at an unpredictable rate. P6 for example used the ESM “many times a day”
whereas P8 used it “once in the morning and once in the afternoon before [he goes]
home.” P4 meanwhile reported that after she commented on the ESM, she “would wait
for half an hour or so before refreshing [to see if anyone replied].” As a result,
conversations on the ESM did not always happen in real-time, and as P14 remarked when
she observed a hot topic conversation developing, "It’s almost like watching a drama, but
in slow motion." As to the possible reason why the ESM usage was as such, P4 said,

102
“With K*net, people don’t comment much, [because] perhaps they don't have time and
have work to do. Some people open it once in the morning and that's it.” In other words,
while the ESM was ubiquitous and regularly accessed, its use in the organization was
constrained by work, so conversations on the ESM developed more slowly.
For ideation, however, the asynchronicity of ESM and the unhurried pace of turntaking in conversations meant that there was time in between comments. Compared to
small group brainstorming, this slow turn-taking became a benefit for ideation, namely to
improve the ideas, as P1 explained:
In [face-to-face] meetings, … usually you have to say it out first whatever you're
thinking. Here [on K*net], you can kind of wait and see how things go, how ideas
develop. … But I wouldn't say [if I waited,] my idea or opinion would be better
than others, but it will be a more informed one.
In effect, the ESM’s asynchronicity had resulted in ideas having a protracted gestation or
discussion period, which translated into the ideas having a potentially higher quality. P2
however disagreed with this approach of waiting before contributing, and argued that the
resulting idea would not be original enough, or the idea would even be abandoned:
A lot of people say let's wait and see how it evolves, how it developed… But then
you're influenced, it's not natural, not original. What comes first to your mind is
probably the best, but write it properly. If you wait, you’ll start to change your
perspective…. If you see 10 other comments that are totally opposite to what
you're thinking, you will either abandon giving the idea, or try to change it. … So
that is why I don't wait.
Ultimately, it did not matter whether an idea was the first to be shared, or that it was not
the original, because as long as the conversation progressed past the idea generation
phase, the quality of the ideation process would be improved.
In short, the asynchronicity affordance allowed users to slow down the online
conversations. For ideation, this meant that participants had more time with the ideas,

103
either as the original contributor who interacted with others in order to improve the ideas,
or as the informed contributor who waited to observe and improve their own ideas. Either
way, this affordance helped to progress the ideation process on the ESM past the idea
generation phase.
In the subsequent phase of ideation, given the freedom to participate in the
ideation process on the ESM, studies have shown that there could be numerous ideas
shared by the users that made processing them a difficult task (Bjelland & Wood, 2008;
Di Gangi & Wasko, 2009). There are however several ways of dealing with this issue. In
the IBM case for example, the large number of contributed ideas was taken offline for a
committee discussion before they arrived at a few thematic suggestions about the areas of
focus (Bjelland & Wood, 2008). Meanwhile, public social media, certain discussionbased websites like Reddit, and some ESM come with a feature to “like” a post or
comment. This feature may be used as an indicator of preference, or collectively for
voting. In effect, this can be used as a social filter for ideas, like crowdsourcing, so that
only interesting or quality ones rise up in prominence and visibility, and have a better
chance to be discussed and evaluated, while the rest become less visible. The ESM in this
study however did not have that feature, although it was a frequently mentioned request,
such as “I want to like that idea, but there’s no button” (C11819) or “Where is the like
button?” (C10616) or P14 who said:
There wasn't a way to vote for the best ideas. Also, if you let people choose, it can
be the best, but it can also go the opposite way, depending on the popularity or
sensitivity of the topic. So, that's why the task force took over that job of choosing
the best ideas.
In other words, the voting feature while may be useful to help surface ideas, it can also
produce the opposite result, depending on the sentiment or popularity of the issue. That

104
notwithstanding, ideas that have been collectively surfaced to prominence can then be
discussed by more people. Here, the asynchronicity of ESM helps to protract the
discussion period for ideas, during which more thought and discussion can be put into the
ideas, which may or may not result in the ideas being improved.
To complete the discussion, in the last phase of ideation, after ideas have been
generated and discussed, action needs to be taken on the idea, whether to accept, reject,
and keep it view. Acceptance in this context does not necessarily mean implementation,
but also if it is brought up for consideration at the management level. The responsibility
for taking such decision lies with the problem owners. Using the virality, visibility, and
persistence affordances of ESM, users can persuade problem owners to take some kind of
action. As evidenced in this study, this happened to the Koperasi manager who was
pressured to act on the complaints and related suggestions being posted on the ESM, even
if it meant replying to say that the suggestions were being taken into consideration. While
the ESM in this study did not have a flag for accepted ideas unlike the study by Gibbs et
al. (2013), the comments in the log data did provide some indication of status. This was
in the form of in-context explicit statements like “Thank you for the suggestion. We will
update it accordingly” (C10839) for ideas accepted and implemented, or "HCDC (the
training center) will consider your ideas in our planning of future KBO Book Sales”
(C10826) for ideas accepted but not implemented, or “Popular Bookstore is not
participating in this Book Sale, thank you” (C10836) for a rejected idea in response to a
suggestion to include a particular bookstore in the promotion.
In sum, the new affordances of ESM for ideation, namely virality, informality,
and asynchronicity, helped ESM users to perform ideational activities differently across

105
ideation phases than in conventional brainstorming. Specifically, in the problem
identification phase, users could viral their small group issues to the enterprise level for
wider attention. In the idea generation phase, users could bypass certain protocols to
reach problem owners. In the idea evaluation phase, users could socially surface up good
ideas for discussion. Finally in the idea deliberation phase, users could collectively
persuade problem owners to take action. Table 6.2 summarizes how each ESM
affordance contributes to the ideation process across its phases.
Table 6.2: New affordances of ESM for large-scale online ideation
Ideation Phase
1. Problem Identification
2. Idea Generation

3. Idea Development

4. Idea Evaluation

Action
Viral the issue: Highlight small group or
localized issues to the whole organization
Bypass the protocol: Easily contribute
ideas directly and indirectly to the
problem owner, without necessarily
conforming to established rules
Collectively surface good ideas: Flag
ideas that are worth discussing, and
collectively develop them over time.
Persuade the problem owner: Increase
attention on certain issues and ideas to
pressure problem owners to respond or
take action

Affordance
Virality
Informality

Asynchronicity

Virality

Hence, with respect to the second research question, three new affordances of
ESM were found to support ideation, namely virality, informality, and asynchronicity.
Summarily, virality describes the ability of ESM users to widely and quickly disseminate
and promote their information to a large audience, such as the whole organization.
Informality describes the way ESM users interact without necessarily following formally
established organizational structure, rules, and procedures. Asynchronicity describes the
non-real-time nature of user interaction on the ESM that allowed more time for ideas to

106
be developed. While some of these affordances could also be described for other CMC,
ESM had the practical advantage in enabling users to undertake ideation throughout all
its phases.
To recap, this chapter aimed to answer the two research questions in this study,
namely to identify the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation, and the unique
affordances of ESM for ideation. This study found that three conditions enabled largescale online ideation, namely non-handpicked participation, longer or rolling deadlines,
and emergent facilitation. Without any of these conditions, large-scale online ideation
would be difficult to accomplish and be no different than small group brainstorming,
especially from the perspective of problem owners. While CMC expectedly also played a
role in enabling large-scale online ideation, this study found that ESM in particular had
three new affordances that made it better suited for ideation compared to other CMC.
Specifically, the affordances were virality, informality, and asynchronicity. These two
research findings, taken together with the results from the quantitative analysis from the
previous chapter, have implications for theory and practice.

107
CHAPTER SIX: DISCUSSION
The objectives of this study were to identify the enabling conditions for largescale online ideation and the affordances of ESM for ideation. This study also intended to
find out the factors that influenced the quality of the ideation process. This study used
collective action theory as a theoretical foundation, but updated to explain how
individuals appropriate CMC to create communal goods and share personalized
experiences, in order to connect and organize themselves to take action collectively. The
study also used brainstorming theory to understand how ideation works, but updated to
explain how CMC enabled participants to interact differently online, making certain
problems less concerning, while enabling ideation to be scaled up. The study also
examined ESM, as a recent CMC, through the affordance lens, to understand how users
appropriate the technology to perform large-scale online ideation. Lastly, the study
looked at ideation quality as a measure of process outcome, and explored the factors that
could influence the measure. Together these form the theoretical framework to
investigate the phenomenon of large-scale online ideation. To that end, the study used a
mixed-methods, single organization, case study approach that took advantage of access to
the organization’s ESM server log, in order to delve inside the organization
unobtrusively, to understand how employees used the ESM for ideation. The study also
used in-depth interviews for the same purpose. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses
were performed on the data in order to answer the two research questions and test the five
hypotheses, as restated below in Table 6.1.

108
Table 6.1: Summary of research questions and hypotheses
RQ1

What are the enabling conditions for large-scale online ideation?

RQ2

What are the affordances of ESM for large-scale ideation?

H1

The level of functional diversity of the participants in the ideation
thread is positively correlated with ideation quality.

H2

The level of hierarchical diversity of the participants in the ideation
thread is negatively correlated with ideation quality.

H3

The duration of the ideation discussion thread is positively correlated
with ideation quality.

H4

The number of comments in the ideation thread is positively correlated
with ideation quality.

H5

The number of participants in the ideation thread is positively
correlated with ideation quality.

6.1. Summary of main results and findings
Analysis of the comments dataset showed that the participation rate in the ESM
was 52.6% historically and 44.2% most recently. As all employees had access to the
ESM, this suggested that around half of employees were lurkers or non-active users.
Nonetheless, the distribution of ESM users by hierarchical and functional groupings was
generally consistent with their proportion in the organizational population, suggesting the
validity of studying this ESM as an enterprise-wide tool.
As the ideation quality dependent variable was a 4-level ordinal variable, and the
independent variables of functional diversity, hierarchical diversity, thread duration,
thread length, and commenter count were all continuous interval variables that did not
satisfy the assumptions of the more typical correlation tests, polyserial correlation tests
were performed. Results showed that functional diversity, hierarchical diversity, thread
duration, thread length, and number of commenters all had positive and significant
relationships with ideation quality. Hence, H1 (functional diversity), H3 (thread

109
duration), H4 (thread length), and H5 (number of commenters) were supported, but H2
(hierarchical diversity) was not supported. Lastly, results from the ordinal logistic
regression showed that functional diversity, thread length, and number of commenters,
were the important predictors of ideation quality, as other predictor variables were not
significant and had low odds of improving ideation quality. Additionally, the presence of
facilitator and thread length together was found to significantly influence ideation quality.
Multiple iterations of the regression model that added and removed predictor variables
confirmed this model as the highest ranked one.
Meanwhile, the qualitative analysis of the comments dataset and the 20 interviews
found that three conditions enabled large-scale online ideation, namely non-handpicked
participation, longer or rolling deadlines, and emergent facilitation. Without any of these
conditions, large-scale online ideation would be difficult to accomplish and be no
different than small group brainstorming, especially from the perspective of problem
owners. While CMC expectedly also played a role in enabling large-scale online ideation,
this study found that ESM in particular had three affordances that made it better suited
for ideation compared to other CMC. Specifically, the affordances were virality,
informality, and asynchronicity.
6.2. Theoretical implications
6.2.1. Ideation and brainstorming
This study adds to the ideation and brainstorming literature in several ways. First,
this study demonstrates that ideation need not be limited to small groups in order for it to
work, in contrast to Valacich et al. (1992) who suggested that ideation is most productive
with small groups. While it may not be as proportionately productive -- in other words,

110
the number of ideas generated does not necessarily correspond to the larger number of
participants involved -- the intent of the ideation process, which is to generate and
develop ideas to solve a given or known problem, is not defeated. The fact is that free
riders (Olson, 1965), lurkers (Muller, 2012), or non-contributing participants are only to
be expected in activities that involve a large group, or activities done in a computermediated environment, due to the freedom of choice to participate as well as
inefficiencies in monitoring and ensuring participation. Even if participation was made
compulsory, with penalties for non-participation, that is a counter-productive effort,
because quality will suffer and the challenge then goes back to identifying "good" ideas
from among those generated. Similarly with the concerns about production blocking
(Lamm & Trommsdorff, 1973) and evaluation apprehension (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987),
which are said to reduce the potential for contributing ideas, these are traceable to
research that focused solely on ideation productivity, hence the obsession with idea
quantity. This study on the contrary, adds to the research balance by focusing not on the
quantity of ideas produced, but on the quality of the ideation process. Nonetheless,
identifying and evaluating the quality of the ideation process remained a problem. This
study has attempted to address this problem by operationalizing ideation quality as a
four-level measure comprising dichotomous variables of whether the ideas were
discussed, voted, and acted upon. This study also tested several independent variables to
see if they influenced ideation quality, and found that the functional and hierarchical
diversity of participants, thread duration, thread length, and number of commenters all
had significant positive correlations. This suggests that the characteristics of participants
as a group, and the extent of the ideational conversations, both have a role to play in

111
influencing ideation quality. In terms of predicting the outcome, the ordinal logistic
regression’s final model showed that functional diversity, thread length, number of
commenters, as well as threads that had facilitators were significant predictors in their
own right, each having a good chance in improving ideation quality, especially for
functional diversity. This finding about the model has several implications.
First, the model suggests the importance of having a diverse group of participants
involved in the ideation process, particularly in terms of functional backgrounds, in
improving the ideation quality. Indeed, the second way this study contributes to the
ideation and brainstorming literature is by confirming that participant diversity is
important for ideation, but adds that functional diversity is relatively more important as a
predictor than hierarchical diversity in improving ideation quality. It has been established
that diverse knowledge backgrounds contribute to more creative and quality ideas (PerrySmith, 2006; Zhou et al. 2009). Arguably, functionally heterogeneous groups may be
tougher to convince and achieve concurrence due to their different knowledge
backgrounds, but participants in such a group interact more -- such as by asking more
questions to clarify ideas, or to challenge the ideas -- thus adding to the improved
understanding and validity about the contributed ideas. On the contrary, hierarchical
differences are said to inhibit participation in heterogeneous groups especially if
management is involved, due to evaluation apprehension, feeling of inferiority, or respect
for authority (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987; Lamm & Trommsdorff, 1973), which can lead to
groupthink (Janis, 1972). This study however did not find support for this argument
because the positive correlation between hierarchical diversity and ideation quality
suggests the opposite. That said, the Blau diversity variable in this study did not

112
differentiate the distance between groups -- for example, support staff (level 1) and top
management (level 5) is 4 levels apart -- but merely that they are from different groups.
In hindsight, there could have been a dichotomous variable for “top management
involved” so that the hypothesis that in threads where top management is involved,
ideation quality is lower, could be tested.
Second, the model suggests that ideation quality is likely to be improved when the
participants are actively engaged in the online conversations and especially when a
facilitator emerges from the group to steer the discussion towards helping decisions being
made about the ideas. In fact, this is the third way this study contributes to the ideation
and brainstorming literature, which is by affirming the importance of the facilitator’s role
in the ideation process, and extending it to large-scale online ideation. Brainstorming
literature has established the need for a facilitator to manage the flow of discussion in the
ideation process, so that ideas are free to be generated without criticisms that would
otherwise curtail contribution (Osborn, 1963). But when the ideation process is scaled up
to the whole organization, it creates a physical limit as to what the facilitator can do to
manage participants, resulting in the drop in ideation productivity (Valacich et al., 1992),
and the rise in free riders (Olson, 1965). With CMC, the physical management constraint
is removed, but the issue of free riding ceases to be a concern because it stopped
becoming a problem given the little effect free riders have on other participants. As a
result, the focus of the facilitator shifts from managing participants to managing their
contributions to ensure that the ideation process progresses. For an assigned facilitator,
this need to shift in focus is well understood and taken in stride, as evidenced in this
study with the case of the facilitator tasked with finding ideas for reducing organizational

113
spending. However, for cases in which there was no pre-assigned facilitator, this study
makes a new contribution to the literature by suggesting that the facilitator role can
actually emerge from amongst the existing participants. Some of the motivations found
included having an interest in the problem and to see it resolved, and being invested in
the outcome due to other related responsibilities that they hold. In those cases, this study
found that ideation quality was higher and significant, compared to those without
emergent facilitators, due to the level of progress achieved in the ideation process (See
Table 4.6). That said, for other cases that did not have a facilitator -- whether assigned or
emergent -- the ideation process was quite unpredictable and inconsistent, in that some
problems have ideas contributed and discussed, while other problems did not even have
any ideas contributed. Moreover, not all ideas were discussed and run completely through
the nominal ideation phases, resulting in differing quality outcomes.
That said, a regression model is only as good as its predictors, and there could be
other variables that may influence and predict an improvement in ideation quality,
besides participant diversities and discussion thread characteristics, although as
mentioned earlier, quality is not as easy as quantity to measure. This study attempted to
measure the quality of the outcome of the ideation process by quantifying the presence of
components, or completeness, of the ideation process. This is not too different than the
industrial standard for process quality such as ISO 9000 in which seven quality principles
are prescribed, that if met, shall make the process eligible to be certified for quality
assurance. It is therefore not important to rename this study’s dependent variable as
“ideation process completeness” when quality is defined as meeting a set criteria.
Nonetheless, the ideation quality variable in this study could be influenced by other

114
factors, such as the involvement of subject matter experts or senior management
members in the discussion which is different than measuring the overall group diversity.
It could also be influenced by the intensity of the discussion on a topic which is more
complex than thread length, thread duration, and type of topic being discussed. How the
technology is set up to enable the ideational discussion could also play a role, such as
whether or not there is a formal ideation space. Having these variables in the regression
model could improve the predictive power of the model, but it could also worsen it,
depending on how the variables are constructed and measured. In short, while the current
model may not be perfect, it is a starting point for research in this direction, and needs to
be tested by further studies in order to crosscheck and widen its validity in different
contexts.
In sum, this study makes a fresh contribution to the ideation and brainstorming
literature in three ways. First, this study suggests that ideation need not be limited to
small groups in order to be successful, but that CMC, especially ESM, is needed to
support the large number of participants, and also that the focus should also be on
ideation quality rather than just productivity. Second, this study affirms the importance of
participant diversity in the ideation process, but adds that functional diversity and
presence of an online facilitator are important factors in achieving higher ideation quality.
Third, this study affirms and extends the importance of the facilitator’s role in ideation -whether pre-assigned or emergent -- and especially in large-scale online ideation, to help
progress the ideation process and thus increasing its quality.
6.2.2. Affordances of ESM

115
This study contributes to the ESM literature in two ways: First, by adding to the
affordances of ESM but in terms of large-scale online ideation, and second, by creating
new understanding of how differently ESM afford users to interact during the various
phases of ideation. As ESM is a relatively recent addition to the suite of technologies that
comprise CMC, but which are increasingly being adopted by organizations (Brzozowski,
2009; Leonardi et al., 2013), there is a vast opportunity to learn about how ESM is used
for various tasks. Instead of examining ESM through its features, namely by what it can
do, the affordance approach (Gibson, 1986; Norman, 1988, 1990) is adopted to
understand how the technology is used. This promises to be a more versatile approach, as
the focus is not just on the technology (which can change), or the users (who can have
diverse intents), but also on how the two parts interact to create possibilities for action
(Gibson, 1986). ESM has been studied for knowledge sharing (Treem & Leonardi, 2012;
Gibbs et al., 2013) and some affordances have been suggested as a result, such as
visibility, editability, and persistence, to name a few. For large-scale online ideation
however, extant studies on ESM for ideation (Bjelland & Wood, 2008; Di Gangi &
Wasko, 2009) have not examined this aspect of affordances. Therefore, this study
contributes to the ESM literature by identifying the new ESM affordances for ideation,
namely virality, informality, and asynchronicity.
Virality builds upon the previously suggested visibility affordance of social media
(Treem & Leonardi, 2012). The affordance however focuses more on what the problem
owners can do with ESM than the participants, such as promoting their issues to the
wider organization for attention, although the participants can also capitalize on this
affordance for their own goals. The virality affordance is fundamental for ideation

116
because it is the starting point in the ideation process, when a large number of users are
made aware of the problems that need ideas. Whether or not there is subsequent
interaction is secondary.
Informality builds upon the understanding that ESM enables more communication
across hierarchical boundaries (Gibbs et al., 2015). It adds to that understanding by
suggesting that organizational rules and procedures may not always be strictly
enforceable online. It has always been assumed that technology use would follow
existing organizational practices closely or it will be incompatible with workplace norms
(Treem et al., 2015). Email for example can be used to send direct messages across
organizational boundaries, but in practice, it is unusual for email to be used that way
unless with valid reasons such as for work. For example, a support staff in the finance
department will not usually send an email to the director of the research department,
unless it is for official reasons. Instead the communication will usually first go up and
then laterally across the organization. Nonetheless, in using ESM for ideation, it is
acceptable for communication to happen upward, downward, laterally, and diagonally.
Even conventional brainstorming rules need not be followed when performing ideation
on the ESM. Hence, the lack of formality and strict concordance with organizational rules
suggest that ESM has the informality affordance.
Asynchronicity builds upon the persistence and visibility affordances of social
media (Treem & Leonardi, 2012). In other words, contribution and comments made on
the ESM will remain on the system and be accessible later on. As such, users do not need
to use the ESM on a continuous and real-time basis as opposed to how instant messaging
platforms are used, as ESM users can resume the use whenever they are available, such

117
as in between work periods. This affordance also results in online conversations on ESM
to develop more slowly. However for ideation, this allows for a protracted gestation
period for ideas, during which more thought and discussion can be put into the ideas,
which may result in the ideas being improved.
Going forward, these affordances, when considered with respect to the evolving
technology, or when a new technology is replaces it, should provide for a more stable
understanding of how technology is being used for specific purposes. In other words, the
virality affordance for instance should be valid across technologies as long they are used
for ideation. Take for example a more recent communication technology such as mobile
group messaging platforms -- such as Whatsapp or Telegram -- that are increasingly
being used for communication by employees in the workplace alongside emails and webbased platforms. In terms of affordance, the question becomes whether or not these
technologies are used in the same way as before for a specific purpose, namely for
ideation. In other words, do the affordances endure the technological change or are they
ephemeral? The answer to that question lies in how users appropriate the technology for
the said purpose. Anecdotally, Whatsapp has been used to quickly viral messages to large
groups of people, becoming a sort of social organizing tool for collective action, such as
to boycott a product, or to alert certain populations about an event that was just
happening. It bypasses the formal structure in the organization of users, if any, because
there is no centralized control in the way messages are disseminated. Whatsapp however
does not feature a discussion thread, which makes it difficult to follow or keep track of
the conversations happening within the platform at any one time. Therefore in terms of
ideation, the technology may afford virality of an issue or idea, as well as the informality

118
of the communication structure, but the lower degree of persistence in the technology
makes it difficult to keep track of, or even hold a discussion about an idea. In other
words, virality and informality may be enduring affordances for ideation, but
asynchronicity may be an ephemeral one. Hence, the affordance approach helps to
understand the tension between the enduring and the ephemeral characteristics of
technology use.
Going beyond the current technologies, such as artificial intelligence or bots that
can generate content, or algorithms that can facilitate discussion or prioritize the topics or
threads for discussion, the affordance approach requires the examination of the new or
evolved technology in terms of usage, in order for the established affordances to be
validated across technologies. That said, these new technological developments can
potentially reshape and restructure the ideation process, such as by making it less reliant
on having a diverse pool of participants, or making it less difficult and faster to find good
ideas for implementation. Machine learning however requires the right inputs, so until
that time when bots can help make a decision, it is pertinent on the human participants to
communicate properly and wisely on the ideation platform.
6.2.3. Collective action theory
This study adds to the collective action literature in a number of ways. First, it
adds to the literature by providing new understanding of how large-scale online collective
action works in an organization whose employees perform large-scale online ideation
using ESM. The study shows that even without formal organizing, the ideation process
can happen. The lack of pre-identified roles, as mentioned earlier, did not inhibit ideation,
and the emergence of role-taking by certain individuals support the claim by Bimber et

119
al. (2005) that less formal organizing would take shape in the absence of formal
organization. Furthermore, the study shows that participants did not need to know who
the others were in the ideation process before contributing. However, the largely
uncoordinated manner in which online ideation occurs has resulted in a more varied
outcomes to the collective action process.
Second, this study helps to identify the boundary conditions in which large-scale
online ideation happens. It does this by freeforming the process, namely by not requiring
problems to be predefined in most cases, and not assigning any roles to anyone, in order
to see the extent to which large-scale online ideation can occur. The study showed that
employees made a conscious decision on whether to participate in online ideation on the
ESM, because the data showed that not all employees were actively participating, as
about half were lurkers on the system. Lurkers in this case however may not necessarily
be considered as free riders (Olson, 1965), because even though they do not seem to be
making any contribution by commenting, they are making a contribution to the process
by expanding the invisible audience (boyd, 2010) for the issues and ideas. This ties in to
the finding that even non-active ESM users can be aware of an issue, such as that top
management interviewee mentioned earlier. In short, while the lurkers may seem to be
quiet, they do play a role in the process. That said, among those who participated, the
study showed that there was some consideration made before joining, because ideation
requires some thinking in order to generate an idea to solve a given problem, which is not
quite effortless. It is especially effortful for those who are not familiar with the topic of
the problem being discussed, which can help explain some non-participation. In this
respect, boundaries for participation can be said to be firmer for some, and looser for

120
others (Bimber et al., 2005). Moreover, the decision to free ride remains valid and cannot
be totally dismissed when there is some cost to participate, even though contributing in
online systems itself is nearly costless.
On collective action more generally, one takeaway from this study is the concept
of decentralized collective action. This study showed that collective action did not need a
central authority to initiate and regulate the process when performed online. Large-scale
ideation on the ESM at this site still occurred without a formally appointed leader at the
onset, unlike a flash mob that still requires at least a coordinating figure in the online
space (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012; Bimber et al., 2005). Some role-taking that emerged
during the process was evidence that some individuals were already aware of what they
needed to do once they started participating in the ideation process, and existing
organizational practice of small group brainstorming have helped to explain it. What this
means is that collective action can occur in a decentralized manner, if potential
participants knew what to collectively do when presented with the opportunity to produce
the collective good.
6.2.4. Organizational communication
This study contributes to the organizational communication literature in several
ways. This study shows how ideation embodies knowledge sharing in all its phases, from
how participants shared their problems to create awareness with other users, to how they
shared ideas to solve the problem, and to how they shared opinions to discuss and
evaluate the ideas. Importantly, the knowledge sharing was done without any extrinsic
reward to motivate participation. Instead, participants shared their knowledge because
they felt they could make a useful contribution, which is a kind of intrinsic motivation.

121
Additionally, the sharing of personalized content, be it a problem, idea or opinion, that
then results in others joining in the conversation with their own content to help solve the
problem, reflects the connective action (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012) inherent in the
process. Certainly, it cannot be denied that ESM has a role in enabling this level of
knowledge sharing, not just because it democratizes participation (Campbell et al, 2014;
Klang & Nolin, 2011; O’Reilly, 2005) -- which gave everyone in the organization the
opportunity to participate at their own volition without the need to handpick anyone -- but
also because of the informality, or the lack of formality, expected in the actions that is
more reflective of social settings. It was earlier thought that the informality or socialness
of ESM is incompatible with workplace norms (Treem et al., 2013) but in this case it
showed that ESM users embraced the socialness of ESM when they used it for ideation.
This study even showed that certain organizational rules and protocols were bypassed in
using the ESM for ideation, suggesting that users would negotiate their way around the
more rigid organizational structures to accomplish their communication task goals.
This study also contributes to the literature by demonstrating how communication
across formal organizational boundaries is greatly facilitated by ESM as found by earlier
studies (e.g. Gibbs et al., 2015; Ellison et al., 2015). This study showed that lower ranked
employees can communicatively interact with upper management more easily, vice versa,
and at scale, which otherwise, would be very difficult to accomplish even when it is
possible, such as with email and instant messaging. ESM also facilitated communication
across functional groups on very diverse topics, which under normal circumstances, is
difficult to happen due to the departmental silos that exist in many organizations. The
ease at which communicative boundary-crossing happens on the ESM is a boon to

122
crowdsourcing (Brabham, 2013) because the process needs a large audience to reach the
critical mass in order to work and be sustained. The study further showed how the bulk of
the large-scale ideation process from idea generation to development being outsourced to
the masses but ultimately passing on to the decision-makers for action, mirrors how
crowdsourced projects typically work, in that participants know they are contributors but
do not ultimately make the decisions. In the same vein, employee engagement is also
made easier by the ESM, where management can engage with employees across the
various organizational boundaries, to have a sort of “conversation” with the employees to
get them to contribute and be involved in organizational-level projects, which in turn can
improve job satisfaction and productivity (Miller & Monge, 1986). Lastly, this study
shows that ESM can be used by organizations for more "productive" purposes such as
ideation for innovation, although organizations should also be cognizant that the
socialness of ESM (Treem et al., 2015) such as the nonwork-related chats, or seemingly
distracting nonwork activities, may have a role in improving workplace morale and
relationship with coworkers, that in turn may lead to better work outcomes.
6.3. Practical Implications
This study has some practical implications for both organizations and researchers.
For organizations, this study firstly shows that organizations can use the ESM as a tool
for problem solving and innovation -- by surfacing problems, finding ideas, and
facilitating discussion and decision about the ideas -- even though the ultimate decision
on which problem to address with which idea may lie with the organizational
management. Second, this study shows that it is possible for organizations to undertake
large-scale online ideation, subject to certain conditions as presented earlier. Indeed,

123
many organizations like IBM and HP have done this before. Even this research site has
done crowdsourcing for ideas more recently, such as for its “Fintech Hacks” and “TN50
Finance” initiatives, which was open to the public using social media. Third, this study
helps the organization to understand the boundaries or limits of large-scale online
ideation by having no predefined problems in most cases, no pre-assigned roles, and no
expectations of outcomes, in order to see the extent to which large-scale online ideation
can occur. As a result, the findings of this study can be transformed into organizational
guidelines for conducting large-scale online ideation, such as specifying the roles
employees are expected to play if they were to become problem owners, facilitators, and
commenters. The guidelines can also include expected behaviors on how the participants
should articulate or express themselves, so that ideas are more easily understood, and so
that discussions are more fruitful. The guidelines can also suggest the desirable
composition of participants, such as by job position and function, in order to have a more
diverse experience in discussing the ideas. Lastly, the guidelines can also include other
tips and tricks for large-scale online ideation, such as the setting of deadlines, or the
establishment of special "rooms" in the ESM to discuss specific topics or problems.
For researchers, this study shows that the comments data in the ESM can be a
“goldmine” in that tremendous effort is needed to process and sieve through the
materials, but the result would ultimately be rewarding. The richness of the ESM
comments data also provide an unobtrusive look into the organizational life, at a different
level than what a direct participant-observation or ethnography can provide. From this
study in particular, researchers for example can “feel the pulse” or life at the organization
from reading the comments in sequence, and be able to identify which topics were more

124
important to employees. In this study, social topics and human resources-related topics,
such as compensation or working conditions, were actively discussed. On a related note,
researchers can also explore how the comments data can be mined more efficiently and
effectively, because line-by-line coding and processing of the rich text embedded in the
comments requires tremendous energy. A computer algorithm to process the text in a
qualitatively meaningful way (i.e. not just word counting) would be a valuable tool for
researchers taking this route. The IBM study mentioned earlier did have an algorithm to
classify suggestions by keywords, and indeed there are already big data and qualitative
digital social science research in this area (e.g. Hand & Hillyard, 2014; Karamshuk et al.,
2017) but the point here is that such tools should be made more widely available to
researchers. Translation is also an issue that needs to be taken into consideration by
multilingual research.
In sum, the practical implications from this study can help organizations
appreciate the potential uses of ESM for both social and task purposes. Additionally, this
study can be useful for communication and social science researchers to appreciate new
data sources, such as the server log data of user comments and activity, that allows them
to get an unprecedented level of access into understanding how the organization works.
6.4. Limitations and Future Research
This study is not without limitations. First, this study is based on a case study of a
single organization. Generally speaking, a single organization is not good for
generalizability, although a detailed case study can provide an in-depth look into in the
organization, which cannot be accomplished with a multiple organization study if given
the same constraints of time and resources. The use of interviews and ESM comments

125
data in this study however, provided it with the level of detail necessary to be a rich-data
case study.
Second, the working dataset in this study looked relatively small compared to
similar studies of ESM, such as Gibbs et al. (2015). Furthermore, when the working
dataset was coded for ideation, the resulting dataset became even smaller. Ideation
however is just one of the types of activities undertaken on the ESM, and it is not the
most popular activity. Again, in similar studies of ESM (Bjelland & Wood, 2008; Gibbs
et al., 2015), the proportion of activities related to ideation was also relatively small.
Furthermore, ideation in those organizations was performed quite formally, which
contributed to the larger dataset. So unfortunately, the dataset for this study is limited to
what is available. Generally, a statistical analysis on this size dataset would result in
reduced explanatory power. That said, the regression model produced was intended to be
predictive rather than explanatory, and the small sample size was compensated in
subsequent computational adjustments.
Third, the ESM in the research site did not have the full functionality of public
social media platforms such as Facebook or Twitter. So the dataset did not have the data
for certain measures. For example, it did not have a "like" or similar function to indicate a
preference. As such, this study resorted to coding comments for words that indicated
preference, which may not be as objective, but the interrater agreement rate was within
the acceptable range. Consequently, this study was not able to enumerate certain
independent variables based on the system, such as the number of votes for and against
an idea, which thus cannot be included into the statistical analysis. Hence, the statistical
model may lack certain variables that may confound the results.

126
Fourth, the study did not cover certain topics such as social network relationships
among commenters, which could provide richer information about the participants. It also
did not cover the use of mobile communication devices and mobile apps, such as
Whatsapp, Instagram, and Wechat, which seemed to be the trend in many organizations
these days, except briefly in the discussion. This decision to not do these things was
deliberate in order to focus on answering the research questions and testing the
hypotheses.
In order to address some or all of the limitations, future research may be done by
restudying the same organization in new areas. For example, future research could focus
on an updated ESM that has features similar to public social media, in order to provide
more technical data for statistical analysis. Experiments could also be conducted using
the ESM to compare ideation with a deadline and without, and on certain topics, and with
certain combinations of participants. A dedicated section on the ESM could also be
created to facilitate this, similar to that done in some other organizations. This would
enlarge the data, and have more predictive power to illustrate the differences that various
factors could have on ideation quality. Then, if more interviews were conducted, they
could focus on understanding how ideation was done on other platforms or in other ways,
including face-to-face meetings.
To recap, this chapter discussed the results and findings in terms of implications
to theory and practice, for collective action, ideation, and CMC. For collective action, this
study had implications on how large-scale online collective action is understood, bringing
to light the more recent concepts of connective action into the explanation. This study
also forwarded an argument about the concept of decentralized collective action. For

127
ideation, the study brought home the point that ideation can be performed quite
successfully in larger groups, as opposed to the established understanding that ideation is
best done in small groups, although it needs certain conditions to be in place. Further, the
problems associated with large group ideation are argued to be critical only when the
research focus is productivity, but when quality is the focus, those problems become less
important. Participant diversity was also affirmed to be important for ideation, as was the
role of the facilitator although now the role of the “online” facilitator is more emergent.
For CMC, the three ESM affordances for large-scale ideation -- namely, virality,
informality, and asynchronicity -- had implications on how ESM was understood to
influence the ideation process. For organizational communication, this study affirms the
understanding that ESM make cross-boundary communication easier. In terms of
practical implications, organizations can benefit from this study in many ways but
especially on the use ESM for crowdsourcing ideas. Researchers can also benefit from
this study by appreciating the need to have better qualitative (rather than just quantitative)
tools to research big data.
6.5. Conclusion
This study's purpose was to examine the enabling conditions for large-scale online
ideation and the factors that may influence the quality of the ideation process. This study
was grounded in collective action theory that was updated to better explain collective
action and connective action in online setting. It also reexamined brainstorming theory in
the context of a large group and using CMC to facilitate the online ideation process. The
study also examined how ESM were used for ideation through the affordance lens.

128
The findings and results of the study provide a better understanding of how largescale online ideation works, as well as the role of the ESM in the process. In particular,
this study showed the importance of non-handpicked participation, longer deadlines, and
emergent facilitation in enabling large-scale online ideation. It also showed that ESM has
some unique affordances for large-scale online ideation, namely, virality, informality, and
asynchronicity, that provided new insights into understanding how differently ESM
influenced the way ideation is performed. Furthermore, this study showed the importance
of participants’ functional diversity, and the role of the facilitator in making the ideation
process more predictable and with improved quality. The results and findings have
important theoretical implications for ideation, enterprise social media use, and online
collective action, as well as practical implications for organizations and researchers.
Going forward, understanding large-scale online collective action processes will only
become more important as personal mobile communication becomes more pervasive,
creating a population that is continually connected and engaged, hence creating new
opportunities for organizations to innovate.