EXPLORING THE CONVIENIENCE VERSUS NECESSITY DEBATE REGARDING
SCI-HUB USE IN THE UNITED STATES
This study used multiple regression modeling to explore the relationship between SciHub use in the United States and the characteristics of the areas surrounding the download
requests. The purpose of this study was to examine Sci-Hub usage in the United States to explore
the validity of academic journal publisher claims of convenience over necessity. This study was
broken down into two parts: 1) how Sci-Hub download requests are related to the institutional
characteristics of research-intensive universities and 2) how Sci-Hub download requests are
related to the population of their geographic location. Convenience, for the purpose of this study,
was based on Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort.
In the first part of this study, universities were associated with Sci-Hub download
requests within a 10-mile radius of the institution. The predictor variables for this section
included an institution’s journal expenditures, the size of the graduate student and faculty
population, and the amount of research funding from NIH and NSF. Research funding was found
to have a positive, significant relationship with Sci-Hub use when controlling for the other
predictors. Additionally, an interaction between the amount of research funding and the size of
graduate student and faculty population was included in the final model. Institutions with larger
numbers of graduate students and faculty and higher levels of research funding were found to
iv

have the highest levels of Sci-Hub use. This interaction effect suggests that necessity may be
more of a driver of Sci-Hub use than convenience.
In the second part of the study, Sci-Hub download requests were split up by the corebased statistical areas (CBSAs). The models in this section examined population size, the
percentage of the population with an advanced degree, the number and type of higher education
institutions, and the number of graduate students. Advanced degree holders were found to have a
positive, significant relationship with Sci-Hub use when accounting for the other predictor
variables. This finding may suggest necessity as people outside of higher education often do not
have access to academic literature. Taken together, the two parts of the study suggest that
necessity is likely driving people to use Sci-Hub.


INTRODUCTION

“Information is power. But like all power, there are those who want to keep it for themselves.
The world's entire scientific and cultural heritage, published over centuries in books and
journals, is increasingly being digitized and locked up by a handful of private corporations.”
From Guerilla Open Access Manifesto, Swartz, 2008
In the greater context of higher education, academic literature is both of utmost
importance and an afterthought. Through a macro lens, the role of academic literature is to
disseminate and share knowledge and theory and help advance scientific pursuit. Through a
personal, micro lens, academic literature is a primary factor in career advancement under the
current publish or perish model of academia (Liebowitz, 2015). However, despite the systemic
and personal value of academic literature, the industry that has arisen around it can be
overlooked even by those who participate in it (Kocken & Wical, 2013).
As a major source of information in higher education, scholarly journals serve to
disseminate the research findings and theories put forth by academics, but access to these
journals is frequently limited to individuals and institutions willing and able to pay for it. Studies
indicate that roughly three-quarters of academic literature reside behind paywalls (Khabsa &
Giles, 2014; Piwowar et al., 2017). Paywalls are the name given artificial restrictions placed on
materials to ensure revenue for accessing the content (Estok, 2011). For those without
subscriptions or an affiliation with a subscribing institution, individual articles can cost upwards
1

of $40, including an article I co-wrote (Saleh, Ratajeski, & Ladue, 2014) that would cost $42 for
24 hours of access. It was in this context that Alexandra Elbakyan, a graduate student in
Kazakhstan at the time (Bohannon, 2016b), developed Sci-Hub in 2011. Sci-Hub is a repository
that aims to host free copies of academic articles that can be used by academics, or anyone, to
access research findings. What makes Sci-Hub controversial is that it circumvents copyright laws
to offer free copies of materials that would otherwise be paywalled.
Publishers argue that Sci-Hub use, especially in highly developed nations, is a matter of
convenience, not necessity (Bohannon, 2016b). They point to mechanisms such as site licenses,
open access, and other means which will be discussed in further detail in this chapter, as legal,
alternative methods to access academic literature (McNutt, 2016). However, these assertions of
convenience over necessity are more theoretical than data-driven, as there have been limited
studies that can provide insights into this phenomenon.
In this study, I explored Sci-Hub usage in the United States from two angles. First, the
relationship between the number of Sci-Hub download requests near research institutions, the
academic journal expenditures of that institution’s library, and other institutional characteristics
was examined. Secondly, the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub download requests in
a geographic area and the number of residents in that area with advanced degrees was examined.
This relationship was further explored by looking at how the presence of higher education
institutions in that area changed this relationship. Examining the relationship between Sci-Hub
usage, higher education, and advanced degree holders can inform whether the current academic
literature system meets the needs of information seekers. While neither approach can definitively
explain why people choose to use Sci-Hub, this study provides a better understanding of the
phenomenon.

2

In order to frame the importance of Sci-Hub, this chapter examines the issues
surrounding Sci-Hub and how it relates to the larger field of academic literature. This chapter
begins with an examination of the history and purpose of academic literature and how it is and
has been accessed. This chapter then discusses what Sci-Hub is, how it works, and how
publishers have pushed back against it. Next, why studying access to academic literature is
important, both functionally and theoretically, is explored. Lastly, the value and significance of
this study within the field of higher education is explained.

Figure 1. Sci-Hub Usage and Higher Education Institutions in the United States
This figure illustrates Sci-Hub download requests along with all degree-granting higher education institutions.

1.1

BACKGROUND ON ACADEMIC LITERATURE AND ACCESS

To understand the current academic publishing field and the reasons that Sci-Hub was
developed, it is important to understand the history of academic literature and how access has
developed and changed throughout that history.
3

1.1.1

A Brief History of Academic Literature

The scientific journal has existed for hundreds of years, beginning with the Journal des
sçavans and Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London in the mid-seventeenth
century. Prior to the creation of journals, scientists would frequently keep their findings secret
for fear they would be stolen; after gaining popularity, journals shifted this mindset and scientists
began sharing their findings early and often to establish ownership and garner peer recognition.
Over time, journals became more specialized and advances in printing allowed for greater
dissemination. Most journals were the output of academic societies and the fees associated with
subscriptions went to cover the costs of production and overhead for the society. While the
distribution methods have changed over the centuries, the purpose of journals remains the same
as when they began: a means of disseminating new theories and research to further the
advancement of science and knowledge (Regazzi, 2015).
The growth in scholarly journal publishing mirrors the growth in higher education. In the
United States, the G.I. Bill opened the path to a college education for many returning
servicemen. As enrollments grew, new institutions were founded and existing institutions
expanded; growing enrollments required more faculty members to meet the needs of colleges
and universities. As the ranks of the professoriate grew, administrators looked to different
metrics to gauge candidates and guide tenure and promotion decisions. The publish or perish
model that emerged from these metrics created incentives for faculty to publish their research at
greater and greater volumes (Greco, 2015) or risk being passed over for tenure and promotions.

4

1.1.2

Serials Crisis

Academics’ greater need for publishing articles, combined with the tradition of
publishing these articles without direct financial remuneration, created an environment ripe for
exploitation. New journals were launched that gave these new articles a forum, but many of these
new publications were not the scholarly output of academic societies, but were instead created
and maintained by commercial publishers who saw a profitable market. Academic libraries tried
to keep apace of the new offerings, but rising journal prices accompanied by a rising volume of
titles created what has become known as the serials crisis (Gennaro, 1977). The serials crisis,
especially in the pre-digital publishing age, was borne out of multiple factors, including: a shift
from academic or professional societies as publishers to commercial publishers, commercial
publisher mergers decreasing competition, and the increase in titles and specializations of
journals (Pascarelli, 1990).
The serials crisis was first identified in the 1970s when periodical price increases
outpaced the consumer product index by over 200% (Gennaro, 1977). Concern about journal
pricing and the increasing difficulties libraries had in maintaining their collections grew
(Dougherty, 1989; Easton, 1999); as did journal prices and titles. By 1988, the number of
journals had risen to over 40,000 (Broad, 1988) and serial expenditures rose by 227% between
1986 and 2002 (Association of Research Libraries, 2002). As digital publishing came to
prominence, some scholarly societies like the American Chemical Society and the American
Physical Society were established well enough that they were able to manage the format shift
from print to electronic. However, many other disciplines were unable to make the change;
society journals unable to make the shift to digital publishing were either acquired by
commercial publishers or the societies made agreements with commercial publishers to provide a
5

platform. This consolidation of content under a small number of commercial publishers
coincided with sharp increases in publisher profits (Larivière, Haustein, & Mongeon, 2015).
In 1989, the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) laid out a series of options that could be
taken to combat the serials crisis, including: education efforts to increase awareness in librarians,
faculty, and administrators; identifying problem publishers and coordinating protests; resourcesharing; finding alternative, credible, non-commercial publishers; and working to reform
academic promotion criteria to limit the pressure to excessively publish (Ivins, 1989). In 1998,
ARL established the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition (SPARC)
(Association of Research Libraries, n.d.); SPARC’s mission is to “enable the open sharing of
research outputs and educational materials in order to democratize access to knowledge,
accelerate discovery, and increase the return on our investment in research and education”
(SPARC, n.d.-b).
While frustrations with rising journal prices grew, the solutions were limited and some
were fraught with their own perils. Libraries formed consortia to increase their bargaining power
in attempts to negotiate lower journal prices with publishers (Wellen, 2004). The publishers’
solution was to bundle journal titles and sell the bulk packages at a discount when compared to
pricing per title. At first glance, journal bundling appears to offer libraries a respite from their
financial duress, but a closer inspection uncovers less altruistic motives on the part of the
publishers. The end result of these package deals is that high-demand journals are grouped
together with titles that publishers might not otherwise be able to sell due to relatively low usage
(Frazier, 2001; Wellcome Trust, 2003; Wellen, 2004). The bundles mean that while each title
might come at a discount, some of the included titles might not otherwise be subscribed to. The
true beneficiary of these deals are the publishers who have found a way to sell subscriptions to

6

journals that would otherwise see little demand. While the greater access to information is
desirable, the costs of these deals frequently forces libraries to make cuts elsewhere, resulting in,
at best, a net neutral and likely a net negative.

1.1.3

Open Access

While librarians and other concerned participants in the academic literature field looked
for ways to slow the crippling cost increases of academic journals while still providing students
and faculty with access to the information they needed to perform their roles, it was the creation
of the World Wide Web that provided the technical mechanism needed for cheap mass
dissemination of information. As academics began to see the implications and possible usages of
the Web, the open access movement began to emerge. Open access is free and unlimited access
to scholarly works (Suber, 2015). There are several methods of achieving this goal which will be
discussed further, but the ability for anyone to access scholarly output is the crux of the open
access movement.
Many open access advocates argue that their aim is not new, it grows out of the scholarly
tradition previously described where researchers and academics would present their findings in
journals to further the advancement of science and knowledge (Regazzi, 2015); the difference is
that the Internet has opened a new avenue for information sharing that can circumvent the costs
of traditional print journals (“Read the Budapest open access initiative,” 2002; Willinsky, 2006).
Although publishing open access journals stills requires some expenditures to cover technology
and possibly editorial staff and typesetters, the costs are mostly limited to formatting and hosting
the articles.

7

Groups such as SPARC, having already identified access and cost issues, quickly
embraced the open access movement and have adopted it as one of their core missions (SPARC,
n.d.-a). In Germany, a consortium of libraries, universities, and research institutes has formed
with the goal of paying publishers an annual fee to access all of the publishers’ content and have
all articles with a German first author open to the world. While negotiations are ongoing and
some publishers seem more hesitant than others, the consortium plans to hold firm and believes it
will lower costs will increasing access (Vogel & Kupferschmidt, 2017).
As the open access movement has matured over the years, two main models have
emerged: the gold model and the green model. The gold model involves publishing an article in
an open access journal, or a hybrid journal that allows authors to choose whether the article is
open or behind a paywall (Björk, 2016; Suber, 2015), while the green model involves placing
articles in institution- or field-specific repositories. As previously stated, while open access
journals can cost significantly less to publish than traditional journals, especially ones with print
versions, they are not free to reproduce. A common method for cost recovery in open access
journals is through an article processing charge (APC) which is paid by either the author or the
author’s institution, although some journal publishers have foregone the APC model for authors
coming from institutions that pay an annual membership (Suber, 2015).

1.1.3.1 Open Access Journals (The Gold Model)
While open access has the ability to democratize access from the end user perspective, it
is far from a panacea. Commercial publishers have found a business model that can maintain
their profits if scholars choose to publish in their journals with high APCs. While the Managing
Director for Scholarly Exchange, a not-for-profit publishing software provider, made claims as
far back as 1998 of being able to publish an article with an APC between $50-$100 (Fisher,
8

2008), many of today’s top commercial publishers charge a great deal more. Elsevier charges
between $500-$5000 (Elsevier, 2016; “Open Access,” n.d.) and Springer charges a flat rate of
$3000 (“Springer Open Choice,” n.d.). These high fees leave many researchers in less wellfunded institutions or disciplines unable to afford placing their work in these types of open
access journals.
Another barricade to more open sharing of research findings is the current publish or
perish model of academic advancement. If institutions, departments, and administrators continue
to use the same criteria to evaluate candidates for hire or promotion, then a large part of the
problem that caused the serials crisis will continue. If a few journals in a discipline are
considered to be the gold standard by tenure committees and administrators and those journals
are owned by for-profit, commercial publishers, then the journals can continue to charge
exorbitant prices whether those come via subscription or APC. In essence, these departments and
schools are a major contributor to the vicious cycle that keeps journal prices skyrocketing at rates
that far outpace inflation.

1.1.3.2 Repositories (The Green Model)
The green model of open access revolves around repositories, generally either discipline- or
institution-specific repositories. Repositories can contain either post-print or pre-print versions of
articles. Post-print articles have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication; pre-print
articles are generally the version that is initially submitted for publication, but has not yet been
peer reviewed. Post-print repositories are either institutionally run, like Harvard’s DASH and the
University of Pittsburgh’s D-Scholarship@Pitt (D-Scholarship@Pitt, n.d.; Office for Scholarly
Communication, n.d.), or subject-specific, like PubMed Central and the NSF Public Access
Repository (National Library of Medicine, n.d.; National Science Foundation, n.d.-a). Some
9

repositories are optional; however, funders such as the National Institutes of Health and the
National Science Foundation require articles published stemming from their research grants to be
uploaded to the repository within a certain timeframe from the date of publication (National
Science Foundation, n.d.-b; NIH, n.d.-b).
Pre-print repositories began in 1991 with the creation of arXiv, a repository based at the
Cornell University Library that focuses on physics, mathematics, and similar fields. Articles
hosted in arXiv are moderated to “verify that they are topical and refereeable scientific
contributions that follow accepted standards of scholarly communication” (arXiv, n.d.), but they
are not peer reviewed. While arXiv has been around for decades, there has been a relatively
recent growth in the number of pre-print repositories and their popularity. Services such as
F1000Research, bioRxiv, SocArXiv, and PeerJ Preprints have come along with their own
subject-specific pre-print repositories (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, n.d.; F1000Research,
n.d.; PeerJ, n.d.; SocArXiv, n.d.). One of the top criticisms of these services is that pre-print
repositories, as previously mentioned, do not provide peer-review for the articles prior to making
them publicly available. However, as arXiv advocates point out, traditional peer-review does not
certify research results or protect against fraud and the overhead costs and delay in publication
make timely access to findings difficult (Gunnarsdóttir, 2005).

1.1.4

Interlibrary Loan

Interlibrary loan (ILL), also known as document delivery, is the process that libraries use
to request materials that they do not possess from other libraries for patron use (ALA, n.d.).
Libraries can be both borrowers and lenders in this process and often form consortia and
partnerships (Shrauger & Scharf, n.d.). Borrowing libraries pay a fee to the lending library to
10

offset the costs of sending the material. This method works to help libraries with large
collections offset some of their expenditures and for libraries with smaller collections to meet
their users’ needs without exceeding their collections budgets.
While this process worked well for physical journal articles that would be otherwise
inaccessible, and still works well for physical materials, it creates cumbersome time and process
delays for users seeking electronic journal articles. As an example, article requests at the
University of Pittsburgh can take four days to be completed (Colbert, n.d.) and students at Grove
City College need a signed form from a professor before an article request will be processed
(Cavanaugh, n.d.). The ILL process, while technically capable of meeting users’ information
needs, creates delays in access to information that exist solely because information is paywalled.

1.1.5

Article Sharing

A more informal method of article dissemination is through articles being shared by the authors.
People interested in reading an article they do not have access to have long been able to write to
the authors and ask for a copy, even when that method involved sending a letter and hoping to
receive a copy through the mail. The rise of social media, including academia-focused social
media sites like ResearchGate (“ResearchGate,” n.d.) and Academia.edu (“Academia.edu,” n.d.),
have made it easier for potential readers to connect with authors. While these sites have
encountered legal issues when authors post their articles there (Chawla, 2017), the sites can still
be used to send messages to authors to ask for articles to be sent via email.
Another recent development in access is article sharing through publishers. SharedIt, available
through publishing giant Springer, allows authors to send a link to an article to collaborators and
other interested parties, including by posting on social media. While the SharedIt program
11

provide an alternative method to the traditional open access methods for articles that would
otherwise be behind a paywall , it does not allow for these articles to be printed or downloaded
(“Principles and guidelines,” 2016). Additionally, this requires the authors to post the link
somewhere that potential readers can find it or respond to email inquiries asking for access.
While better than providing no access method beyond paying a fee, there are still limitations to
access and use.

1.1.6

Guerilla Open Access

Guerilla Open Access is a term coined by activist Aaron Swartz (2008) to describe the
process through which individuals with access to academic literature can, and should, share
otherwise paywalled information with the masses. For Swartz, the act of sharing these materials
may be illegal, but justifiable. “It's called stealing or piracy, as if sharing a wealth of knowledge
were the moral equivalent of plundering a ship and murdering its crew. But sharing isn't immoral
— it's a moral imperative.” (Swartz, 2008). For the purposes of this study, Guerilla Open Access
(GOA) will be defined as a method of providing access to paywalled information that
circumvents intentional access limitations, regardless of legality.
While Sci-Hub may be the most well-known and largest example of GOA, it is certainly
not the only example. Swartz himself downloaded 4.8 million articles from the journal database
JSTOR using the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s network. The results of Swartz’s
downloads and the discovery of his act led to Swartz being charged by the federal government
under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Swartz hanged himself before going to trial
(Bombardieri, 2014). Thankfully, most acts of GOA do not end in tragedy.

12

The Scholar subreddit (“Scholar,” n.d.) is a forum that allows users to request a document
by providing the DOI, PMID, or ISBN. Other users, known as fulfillers, will then retrieve a copy
of the file and place a link to it in the comments (RoyalKoala23, n.d.). The #ICanHazPDF
hashtag on Twitter follows a similar small-scale method of GOA where an individual makes a
request and another individual procures the article and shares it. In this method, requestors tweet
an article title, DOI, or some other unique identifier with the #ICanHazPDF hashtag and their
email. A second user will download a copy of the article and email it to the user; upon receipt,
requestors are encouraged to delete the tweet to conceal the transaction (C. Gardner & Gardner,
2015). A study of these crowdsourced types of GOA found that users’ primary motivation is
utilitarian, these methods are faster than interlibrary loan (C. C. Gardner & Gardner, 2016).

1.2

SCI-HUB

While smaller one-to-one examples of GOA provide some relief to information seekers
stymied by paywalls, they are not scalable to a degree that would meet the information needs of
everyone. Sci-Hub declares itself to be “the first website in the world to provide mass & public
access to research papers” (“Sci-Hub,” n.d.). To explain why Sci-Hub is worthy of study, it is
important to understand what Sci-Hub is, how it works, and how publishers have responded to it.

1.2.1

What is Sci-Hub?

Sci-Hub is a web service with an associated repository. The aim of Sci-Hub is to provide
free access to academic literature through a single, simple search interface. The site hosts and
13

serves out articles regardless of their copyright status. To better understand why Sci-Hub was
launched, its creator, Alexandra Elbakyan (2015), describes her rationale for developing SciHub:
I would like to clarify the reasons behind sci-hub.org website. When I was a student in
Kazakhstan university, I did not have access to any research papers. These papers I
needed for my research project. Payment of 32 dollars is just insane when you need to
skim or read tens or hundreds of these papers to do research. I obtained these papers by
pirating them. Later I found there are lots and lots of researchers (not even students, but
university researchers) just like me, especially in developing countries. They created
online communities (forums) to solve this problem. I was an active participant in one of
such communities in Russia. Here anyone who needs research paper, but cannot pay for
it, could place a request and other members who can obtain the paper will send it for free
by email. I could obtain any paper by pirating it, so I solved many requests and people
always were very grateful for my help. After that, I created sci-hub.org website that
simply makes this process automatic and the website immediately became popular. (para.
3)
Essentially, Elbakyan experienced the same access limitations outlined previously and took
actions designed to circumvent these limitations.
When users search for an article on Sci-Hub, a search of the repository is performed. If
the article is stored in the repository, the user is taken to the hosted copy of the article. However,
if the article is not in the repository, Sci-Hub uses the credentials of someone at an institution
with access to obtain a copy of the article; this copy is both presented to the requestor and stored
in the repository for future use (Cabanac, 2016). As these copies are taken directly from the

14

publishers’ platforms, an article obtained via Sci-Hub is no different for the reader than a copy
attained legally, unlike articles in pre-print repositories which may differ slightly from the final
version. Additionally, this process helps ensure that the most popular articles are in the
repository, since it is the demand of users that feeds the repository.
Since its launch, Sci-Hub has generated a lot of web traffic. An analysis of the server logs
during the six-month period from September 2015 through February 2016 shows that 28 million
documents were served out to users all over the world (Bohannon, 2016b). The Chronicle of
Higher Education reached out to the authors of Sci-Hub’s most downloaded articles for their
reactions and found they were generally pleased with the increased exposure, citations, and
dissemination, although one was worried about the long-term effects on society journals (Ruff,
2016). Elbakyan (2015) adds that Sci-Hub has “never received any complaints from authors or
researchers, only Elsevier is complaining about free distribution of knowledge” (p.2). From an
access perspective, Sci-Hub has created a method of sharing information beneficial to both
authors and readers.
Sci-Hub, while important for meeting the needs of information seekers, is not a panacea.
At its core, Sci-Hub is a repository of materials generated using other means and does not
provide for peer-review and some of the other important work that goes into creating academic
literature. Sci-Hub is also primarily run by one person and the functions of the site are
susceptible to the whims of Elbakyan. In September 2017, Sci-Hub announced that it would be
blocking the site to Russian users (Standish, 2017). In a letter posted on the Sci-Hub homepage
at the time, Elbakyan states the decision was based on what she deemed offensive behavior by
Russian scientists toward her, including naming a parasitic insect after her and alleging that she
is insane. She did, however, offer suggestions on other methods of accessing information to

15

those in need (McLaughlin, 2017). While her stance and this maneuver may be understandable, it
also highlights the need to look at how information needs are met, or not, in the long term.

1.2.2

How Publishers Fight Sci-Hub

Unsurprisingly, the academic publishing companies who hold the copyright of the articles
hosted in Sci-Hub have pushed back. Elsevier and the American Chemical Society (Association
of American Publishers, 2017; Schiermeier, 2017) have filed suit against Sci-Hub in the
American courts and won. As a result of Elsevier’s suit, Sci-Hub had to undergo a domain name
change; however, as Sci-Hub is based in Russia, these lawsuits have been unable to shut the site
down (Bohannon, 2016b). Not only have these lawsuits been ineffective in stopping Sci-Hub,
there is evidence that each legal challenge resulted in an increase in Google searches for the SciHub website (McKenzie, 2017).
In addition to the lawsuits, publishers have worked in concert with colleges and
universities to block the methods used by Sci-Hub to garner access to articles. One such method
to thwart Sci-Hub from accessing an institution’s resources is to require two-factor
authentication to access copyrighted content from off-campus. Two-factor authentication, as the
name implies, requires two separate sets of credentials, to authenticate access. Common forms of
authentication include username and password, ID and PIN, and software tokens (Elsevier, n.d.);
frequently two-factor authentication manifests itself by having credentials sent to smart phones
for confirmation (“Multifactor Authentication at Pitt,” n.d.). Two-factor authentication, while
creating extra work for users, is intended to prevent credential sharing. Where access rules are
circumvented, publishers will also cut off access to resources for an institution if there is
evidence of massive downloading. In my professional role as a systems librarian, I have had to
16

assist in tracking down information on accounts associated with excessive downloads.
Institutional access is restored once the offending account has been disabled.
Publishers are so concerned with the threat posed by Sci-Hub that they have even taken
to attacking academics who present information about it. In 2016, Gabriel Gardner, a librarian at
California State University, Long Beach, discussed Sci-Hub as part of a conference panel on
resource sharing and the future of interlibrary loan. As a result of this discussion, the president of
the Association of American Publishers wrote a letter to Gardner’s dean admonishing Gardner,
framing his comments as supporting Sci-Hub as opposed to explaining it. While the dean sided
with Gardner (Jaschik, 2016; Masnick, 2016; Peet, 2016), the implied intent of this intimidation
is to keep academics from even discussing Sci-Hub.
In an interview about the findings of a study on Sci-Hub examined in more detail in the
next chapter (McKenzie, 2017), Himmelstein adds that new technologies could allow papers to
be hosted in a manner that would not be centrally located, which would make it nearly
impossible to shut down a service like Sci-Hub. He added,
I think the larger picture of this study is that this is the beginning of the end for
subscription scholarly publishing. I think it is at this point inevitable that the subscription
model is going to fail and more open models will be necessitated. One motivation for
doing the study is that I want to bring that eventuality into reality more quickly.
(McKenzie, 2017).
As publishers continue to impose roadblocks on Sci-Hub usage, the rapidly changing
technological environment will continue to make that more difficult.

17

1.3

IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING ACCESS TO ACADEMIC LITERATURE

Research findings and theories, the primary content of academic literature, on their own
do nothing; it is through sharing that they have value. Therefore, a study of academic literature
must also examine access to the literature. The function of academic literature is to share with
others, it is through that process that new theories and lines of inquiry are developed, scientific
progress is made, and knowledge is disseminated. Academic literature also serves as the product
created by scholars in their role as workers in higher education and research institutions. It is this
role of academic literature that necessitates examination through a critical theory lens.

1.3.1

The Functional Importance of Access to Academic Literature

College and university faculty are the most frequently mentioned group of people
affected by access limitations. The primary reason for this is the faculty’s role in research,
although keeping abreast of developments in their respective fields for teaching purposes is also
vital. Access to academic research provides an example of a virtuous cycle. The more open and
available research findings are to people, the greater the opportunities to build off this research
and make further scientific gains. These new findings are then shared with the community and
the cycle continues. Berry (2001), a chemistry professor at the University of Chicago, frames it
as, “These are goods whose value does not diminish with use. In fact, because science functions
in a cumulative way, building on previous knowledge, the more the results are used, the greater
is their value.” (p. 38). Not only are journal articles non-rivalrous goods in that reading one does
not diminish its value for the next reader, the knowledge garnered can be utilized to further build

18

upon it. By creating easier pathways for researchers to share their work and absorb the work of
others, there is a clear benefit to all parties involved.
For individual faculty, access to academic literature can also be personally beneficial.
From the late 1970s through 2001, Tenopir and King (2001) surveyed nearly 15,000 scientists to
track their communication and reading habits. One of their most interesting findings is the
relationship between journal article reading and professional success; award winners read 53%
more than non-award winners and scientists considered high-achievers by their peers read 59%
more than their colleagues when holding other variables constant. These findings help to
underscore the value of access to academic literature. Professional advancement and notoriety is
another reason why access matters to faculty. One important factor in faculty tenure and
promotion decisions is how often publications have been cited. Fewer access restrictions on an
article means a wider audience for the work which can increase the likelihood of an article being
cited (Suber, 2015).
For faculty and researchers in the developing world, access to information is crucial and
frequently hard to come by. Much like their counterparts in wealthier countries, faculty and
researchers in developing nations need access to research to improve the health, food supply,
environment, and policies of their countries. The United Nations recognized this need and over
the past decades developed a series of public-private partnerships known collectively as
Research4Life. Research4Life includes HINARI, AGORA, OARE, and ARDI representing
health, agriculture, environmental studies, and science and technology, respectively. These
programs, in conjunction with journal publishers, provide free or low cost access to developing
countries (“Research4Life home,” n.d.). Greater access for these scholars can lead to real,
tangible, and immediate benefits to their societies.

19

The virtuous cycle of sharing research findings and theory with the other members of the
academic community, combined with the personal benefits that more universal access can
provide, help to demonstrate why access to academic literature is important for faculty and
researchers. However, faculty are not the only group of people who benefit from greater access
to academic literature. Graduate students, in their dual roles as students and budding researchers,
may face the greatest challenges in terms of access. In their role as students, they need their
faculty members to have access to all recent developments in the field so that information can be
shared and discussed. Secondly, as researchers, graduate students require access to academic
literature in similar ways that faculty, as researchers, need it. While most undergraduates do not
participate in research in the same way as their peers in graduate programs, they can still be
stymied when trying to complete their coursework.
Additionally, the public benefits from greater access to academic literature. With the
recent glut of misinformation and propaganda in the public sphere (Timberg, 2016; Wingfield,
Isaac, & Benner, 2016), there is a need for the public to have access to high quality, accurate
information. While academic literature is not written with the layman as the intended audience,
barriers to access to this literature creates a need for the results to be filtered through a third party
that is subject to its own agendas. These third parties can change the message of the research for
myriad reasons ranging from the relatively benign of trying to make them more sensational to get
more readers (Nolan, 2012; Whiteside & Hardin, 2011) to purposeful mischaracterization for the
sake of changing public opinion, or at least sowing the seeds of doubt, on issues like climate
change (Harvey, 2016; Lewandowsky, Ballard, Oberauer, & Benestad, 2016). While not every
individual will have the desire to read academic literature, there will be some who do and who
can help their fellow citizens combat misinformation. The value of academic literature for

20

research and teaching purposes is clear, but, in this form, it can also function as the third piece of
the academic triad: service.
It is important to understand the benefits of greater access to academic literature, but
understanding the deleterious effects of access limitations is also essential to understand the
importance of studying the subject. Access limitations can be placed into two categories:
inability to access and access hindrances. The inability to access academic literature is, as the
name suggests, having no legal method to retrieve needed information. While this form of access
limitation is the most difficult to overcome, the second form is also pernicious. Access
hindrances mean that while there are methods to acquire the desired literature, the path is often
cumbersome, time consuming, and requires knowledge of the procedures to request access.
For those with no ability to access academic literature, it is likely that they are not
associated with a higher education institution, hospital, or research institution or they are in a
developing nation that does not have interlibrary loan agreements. For members of the public in
the United States, this type of access limitation could include teachers looking to stay current
with trends in both the field of teaching and in their subject area, health professionals at clinics
without an affiliation with a large hospital system, or a member of the general public researching
a topic meaningful to them. This could mean lower quality of teaching, healthcare that does not
meet the most recent protocols, or the inability to be informed about a topic relating to
themselves or their family.
Internationally, while the aforementioned Research4Life program (“Research4Life
home,” n.d.) provides access to journals in certain fields for developing nations, these programs
do not include education or the humanities. While the subject-areas covered may be more
pressing for survival, they do not offer the full breadth of research available in wealthier nations,

21

exacerbating existing inequalities. Additionally, these programs are contingent on the continued
participation of the publishers and can be revoked at any time (Z. Kmietowicz, 2011), making
access tenuous.
Access hindrances, while less severe than their counterparts, are also problematic for a
number of reasons. Without the institutional knowledge of how to circumvent these hindrances,
the hindrance becomes a de facto inability to access. An undergraduate student preparing to
apply to a PhD history program describes their experience with access limitations:
‘The library at [CSU attended] does not have a lot of resources for students who want to
conduct research work in history. My research paper [the one I wrote about in my
statement of purpose and submitted as a writing sample] was not as good as it could have
been because of the resources available at (CSU attended) were so limited.’ (DeAngelo,
2010, pp. 27–28)
While it is likely that this student could have retrieved the desired literature through the
university’s interlibrary loan program, that process could have added costly time delays to the
application process and if the student was unaware of the program, this hindrance becomes a
roadblock.
Additionally, these access hindrances work against human behavior. Zipf’s Principle of
Least Effort (1949), described in greater detail in chapter two, posits that people naturally
gravitate towards their desired outcome along a path that provides the most immediate solution
that does not simultaneously create long term problems greater than the problem at hand. This
theory has been applied to information seeking in higher education and a study suggests that
information seekers in higher education are looking for the best answer in the least amount of
time and with the least effort expended (Connaway, Dickey, & Radford, 2011). While

22

information seekers may technically have access to an article, the delays involved with
interlibrary loan may lead to the use of a different article, even if it does not meet the information
need as well. This could also explain why some interlibrary loan requests are never retrieved
even after they have been filled (Shrauger & Scharf, n.d.).

1.3.2

The Theoretical Importance of Access to Academic Literature

To this point, the functional purposes of academic literature and how access affects
academia as a whole and the individuals who comprise it have been discussed. However, there is
also a need to step back and look at academic literature through another lens. Critical theory
embraces the critical method inherent in Marxism and focuses it on the political and cultural
structures of society. Instead of focusing on a rigid system of thought, critical theory focuses on
liberation from current forces of oppression (Bronner, 2011). A key component of both
traditional Marxism and critical theory is historical materialism. Historical materialism places
facts within their historical context as products of social action. The economy, the state, and
culture are the primary components of the totality, the all-encompassing social relations that
shape the world. Within this framework, moments and movements are recognized as being both
influenced by and influencing the totality (Sherman, 2016). Critical theory provides another
framework for understanding why studying the production and dissemination of academic
literature is important.
Alienation and reification are two common, intertwined themes in critical theory.
Alienation, in critical theory, is the separation of the person from the product they create. With
its basis in Marxism, alienation often reflects the concerns of the assembly line worker whose
labor creates one small part of a larger item and, thus, divorces the worker from the finished
23

product and distances workers from each other and their final products. The resultant alienation
from the finished products of labor results in a lack of fulfillment and misery (Fromm & Marx,
1966). Reification is the idea of reducing a person to a part or role; the worker is simply one
more piece of equipment in the assembly line. For example, the capitalist would look at a worker
as a welder, not a person who welds as part of the larger project (Bronner, 2011; M. Peters,
Lankshear, & Olssen, 2003). Horkhemier (1982) posits that the elevated social position given to
scientists leads them to believe that they do not fall within this structure, but without a critical
theory frame the work of scholars and scientists reinforces the status quo and perpetuates the
process of recreating the hegemony. In other words, as Fromm states in Marx’s Concept of Man
(1966), “Intellectual activity is of course, for Marx, always work, like manual or artistic
activity.” (p. 47). While faculty and researchers may not work on an assembly line, they still
work in the highly segmented realm of higher education and are still subject to the forces of
alienation and reification.
Historical materialism is the totality of social relations, the combination and coordination
of political, economic, and cultural forces. Critical theory, relying on historical materialism,
requires placing issues in the context of their time and place. In an era heralded as the
Information Age (Birkinshaw, 2014) or within a knowledge economy (Powell & Snellman,
2004), access to information becomes a key struggle. Researchers, faculty, and students become
both producers of information and users of it. Access to information becomes a privilege for
those who can afford it or can align themselves with an organization that can afford it, thus
exacerbating existing gaps.
Reification, as outlined above, is the act of turning people into things. Recently, the
singular thing that is frequently used to describe people is as a consumer. By framing people as

24

consumers, the neoliberal hegemony shifts all human interaction into commercial transactions. If
an academic article exists, the author is the producer and the reader is the consumer or perhaps
more accurately, the author is the laborer who creates the material, the publisher is the capitalist
who sells the article, and the reader is the consumer.
Furthermore, in this capitalistic formation of knowledge creation and dissemination,
academics are put into competition with one another. Their work becomes not a piece of a
greater whole dedicated to furthering human knowledge, but a steppingstone to greater
individual glory. The number of articles published, the number of citations these articles
generate, and the perceived value of the journals where these articles are published lead to tenure
and career advancement. With these goals in mind, colloquially known as publish or perish,
researchers become divorced or alienated from their work as a summation of their findings and
focus on what these findings can do for them. The need for greater numbers of published articles
creates a vicious cycle where journal publishers create new journals to accommodate this
perceived need. Publishers then sell these journals back to the institutions that fund the
researchers, generating ever-increasing profits. However, critical theory challenges the
assumption that academic literature must follow this market orientation.
Pyati (2006) applies the works of critical theorist Herbert Marcuse to the field of
information studies through Marcuse’s focus on technological rationality. Technological
rationality is the idea that advanced societies make scientific and technical progress into
instruments of domination. For Pyati, in this techno-capitalist framework, “Information, in its
modern sense, became dissociated from affective, contextual, and cultural processes, thus
making it much easier to be commodified, reified, and abstracted.” (p. 85). By removing
academic literature from the process of scientific discovery and theorizing and divorcing it from

25

the authors creating it, the literature becomes an abstract object that can be repackaged and sold
in whatever manner is most profitable.
Critical theory is not only a framework for critiquing societal ills, but also necessitates
praxis for actively challenging the status quo. A decade ago, Pyati (2007a) examined open access
through a critical theory lens and found a number of methods used to combat the serials crisis.
He noted SPARC, described earlier, as a coalition dedicated to reducing the economic hardships
caused by rapidly increasing journal prices. Libraries and librarians are a major focus of Pyati’s
article; specifically, their role in promoting, and even creating, open access journals along with
their work with repositories. While these methods are commendable for having helped slow cost
increases, the underlying problems persist.
From a critical theory perspective, Sci-Hub can be viewed as tool for subverting the forprofit publishing model. Sci-Hub shows a direct action taken to make access to information more
universal; less concerned with the legality imposed by the powerful and more concerned with the
morality of universal access, Elbakyan has taken a stand against the status quo. This stand is not
without risk as Elbakyan “is at risk of financial ruin, extradition, and imprisonment because of a
lawsuit launched by Elsevier” (Bohannon, 2016b). While critics of some of the methods
employed by Sci-Hub will cite the extralegal or possibly illegal activities, critical theory is
concerned less with what is legal and more with what is right and just.
Understanding the importance of access to academic literature falls into two categories.
For the functional purpose of academic literature, the benefits of greater access and the
deleterious effects of access limitations demonstrate how valuable access is. Knowing what
access looks like is vital to understanding what needs to be done to provide more universal
access. For the producers of academic literature, it is important to understand how access

26

limitations have been used to commodify knowledge and divorce it from its creators. Through
this greater understanding, steps can be taken to make researchers part of a community that
builds upon each other’s work for the betterment of all instead of in competition with each other
for personal gain.

1.4

SIGNIFICANCE AND PURPOSE OF THE STUDY

At the heart of the debate around the use of Sci-Hub, especially in the United States, is
the question of whether academic literature is a public good, designed to share information and
knowledge, or a commodity, a product to be sold like any other consumer product. While the
open access movement has presented the academic publishing industry with an alternative
method for sharing journal articles, the industry has still found a way to profiteer from the
process. Sci-Hub, however, represents the first large-scale disruptive force to challenge
publishers’ hegemonic control. The relative newness of Sci-Hub and its legally questionable
methods have contributed to limited studies regarding its use. This study sought to better
understand how Sci-Hub usage in the United States is related to higher education and the
educational attainment of population centers.
In the commodity view of academic literature, creating a market and profiting from the
publication of scientific research is not only reasonable, it is right and just. Proponents of the forprofit publishing model, regardless of the method of revenue generation (traditional reader-pays
model or APCs), argue that the industry has not restricted growth in knowledge creation and
sharing, but has actually increased the speed of development (Jongejan, 2003). The purchasers of
this product, primarily academic libraries, make choices to subscribe to the academic journals
27

that best fit the perceived needs of their patrons. Publishers further assert that if a library’s user
needs access to an article from a journal that the library does not subscribe to, there are legal
methods in place for acquiring that article (McNutt, 2016) and that use of Sci-Hub in countries
like the United States is based on convenience, not necessity (Bohannon, 2016b).
The clustering of Sci-Hub download requests in the United States near the locations of
research institutions (see Figure 2) suggests support for the convenience over necessity
argument. However, there has been no previous analysis comparing the journal collections of
academic libraries with the Sci-Hub download requests in the United States from the areas
surrounding these institutions. One purpose of this study was to look at the relationship between
academic library journal expenditures and the number of Sci-Hub download requests near said
library. Additionally, a post-hoc analysis was performed that took a sample of Sci-Hub download
requests, ascertained the journal that published the article, and searched the nearby academic
library’s catalog to determine if the library subscribes to that journal.

28

Figure 2. Research Universities and Sci-Hub Download Requests
This figure shows the location of the 335 research universities and all Sci-Hub download requests in the United
States.

A second set of research questions examined the relationship between Sci-Hub download
requests and the population of the geographic area where the request was generated (see Figure
3). As academic literature is primarily written for members of higher education institutions and
professionals, an analysis was performed to better understand the relationship between the
number of Sci-Hub download requests in a geographic area and the percentage of the population
with an advanced degree, specifically with a Master’s degree or higher. Further analysis was
done to account for the number of higher education faculty members, the number of graduate
students, and the number and type of higher education institutions in the region.

29

Figure 3. Sci-Hub Download Requests by CBSA
This figure shows Sci-Hub download requests overlaid on a U.S. map divided by CBSAs.

1.4.1

Delimitations

While a definitive answer to who is using Sci-Hub and why would be helpful for
understanding Sci-Hub’s role in information dissemination in the United States, this study cannot
provide that. The nature and content of the datasets forces some assumptions that, while likely as
a whole, probably have some exceptions. For instance, a Sci-Hub download request from near a
higher education institution cannot indicate if the user is, in fact, associated with that institution.
Also, the rise in online higher education programs means that the geographic location of a person
is less indicative of where they attend college.
As outlined previously in this chapter, different academic disciplines have their own
protocols and practices regarding information sharing. As an example, the fields of physics and
mathematics have been using arXiv as a repository for decades to share findings (arXiv, n.d.);
however, not every discipline is as open. Likely as a result of disciplinary differences, some
30

fields tend to be overrepresented in Sci-Hub (Greshake, 2017a; Himmelstein, Romero,
McLaughlin, Tzovaras, & Greene, 2017); while these disciplinary differences are addressed in
the next chapter, this study did not explore differences in Sci-Hub use between disciplines.
Lastly, Sci-Hub, and Guerilla Open Access more generally, may represent a disruptive force
beyond access limitations, but that is beyond the scope of this study. For instance, the
commodification of information helps frame why Sci-Hub exists, but this study did not address
the commodification process or how Sci-Hub may change that process.

1.4.2

Summary

Studying the relationship between Sci-Hub download requests, the various components
of higher education outlined above, and advanced degree holders cannot definitively demonstrate
whether or not use of Sci-Hub is for convenience or necessity, but it can help to better
understand the phenomenon. This study was not designed to extoll the virtues of Sci-Hub, nor to
condemn its circumvention of copyright laws. The rationale for studying Sci-Hub use in the
United States is to better understand how members of the higher education community and the
general population deal with access limitations when seeking information to meet their needs.

31

2.0

CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION AND LITERATURE

This study, explored the relationship between academic literature and the people who use
it. In this chapter, the Principle of Least Effort is used as a way to understand information
seeking behavior and how that applies to academic literature. How Sci-Hub has been previously
studied, what gaps in the literature exist, and how this study helps to fill those gaps are also
explored.

2.1

CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION

Sci-Hub, at its core, is a tool. It is used as a method of obtaining access to desired
information. It is highly unlikely that someone would go to Sci-Hub without an information
need; as such, it is important to understand how people seek information. Much of the literature
on information seeking behavior centers on how people search for information, based on the
nature of their information needs, and how they decide which information sources present the
best answers to their questions (Case & Given, 2016; Choo, Detlor, & Turnbull, 2000). However,
the problem that Sci-Hub seeks to solve, or at least circumvent, is not a question of finding
information, but accessing it. From this position, the method a person uses to find an article that
will meet their information needs is immaterial; the method they use to acquire it is paramount.

32

2.1.1

Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort

Zipf’s (1949) Principle of Least Effort (PLE) posits, amongst other things, that people will
naturally choose the path of least resistance or effort.
In simple terms, the Principle of Least Effort means, for example, that a person in solving
his immediate problems will view these against the background of his probable future
problems, as estimated by himself. Moreover he will strive to solve his problems in such
a way as to minimize the total work that he must expend in solving both his immediate
problems and his probable future problems. (Zipf, 1949, p. 1).
In short, the PLE suggests that people naturally gravitate towards their desired outcome along a
path that provides the most immediate solution that does not simultaneously create long term
problems greater than the problem at hand.
PLE is frequently applied to the field of information seeking. A 2015 study of library and
information science articles published between 1949 and 2013 that cited Zipf’s Human Behavior
and the Principle of Least Effort (1949) showed that nearly a quarter of these article reference
PLE; nearly 65% of the articles reference Zipf’s Law, which refers to the frequency of word
usage and is typically applied to bibliometrics. The trend lines for referencing PLE decreased
throughout the 1970s and 80s before hitting a low point in the early 1990s; the trend started to
increase again in the mid 1990s (Chang, 2016). The positive change in the trend line occurred at
approximately the same time as the rise of the World Wide Web. Prior to the advent and
popularization of the Internet and the World Wide Web, information seeking was a process of
finding the best possible answer within the limits of what information sources were available.
Frequently, this meant using a local library and utilizing the organizational and information
finding practices of the library. Now with a glut of information at most people’s fingertips, the
33

process is more a matter of finding the best answer, or at minimum an answer that will meet their
needs, in the least amount of time.
Connaway, Dickey, and Radford (2011) studied faculty, undergraduates, and graduate
students at American colleges and universities and found convenience to be central to
information seeking behavior and especially so for the millennial participants. For their study,
convenience was broken down as finding sources that were good enough to satisfice their
information needs, ease of access to the information source, and the amount of time spent finding
the information. Based on their results, it can be inferred that information seekers in higher
education are looking for the best answer in the least amount of time and with the least effort
expended. In terms of Sci-Hub usage, the ease of access to the information source is the key
component of convenience as defined in the study.
Schwieder (2016) believes that PLE is so central to information seeking behavior for
academic library users that he developed a toolkit to assist users with low-effort information
seeking strategies. Specifically, Schwieder advocates for a heuristic information seeking
approach that uses a dual process approach that combines PLE with other simple best practices
to account for the quality of information along with the ease of access. One of Schwieder’s
recommendations is the use of Google Scholar based on the simple search box and consistency.
While Google Scholar can be configured to implement links to library resources (“Google
Scholar Support for Libraries,” n.d.), browsers can also be configured to go directly to Sci-Hub
(Marcos, 2017; “The Installation of Sci-hub Plugin,” n.d.). Each method requires approximately
the same effort level to install, but the Sci-Hub plugins provide access to more resources.
The application of PLE to Sci-Hub provides additional insight into understanding why
the system is utilized. As described in Chapter 1, the rise in popularity of Sci-Hub has seen

34

colleges and universities work with publishers to combat unauthorized access. By understanding
Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort, we can envision how some of these methods, especially twofactor authentication, can actually increase Sci-Hub usage for materials available through
institutional licenses as the prescribed methods become more laborious.
For example, a scholar reviewing literature off-campus may be unable to access their
smart phone. If the scholar’s library subscribes to the needed journals, the choice for this scholar
is now to either wait until they are on campus, wait until they have access to their phone to
complete two-factor authentication, or use an extralegal method for accessing the literature.
Based on PLE, the clear choice is to continue working, even if that means accessing the needed
articles through Sci-Hub. If the scholar’s library does not subscribe to the needed journals, the
methods for accessing these materials, such as interlibrary loan, can take days to deliver the
desired articles and part of Connaway et al.’s (2011) definition of convenience relies on
timeliness. In this second scenario, the choice to use Sci-Hub or some other method of GOA
becomes even more tantalizing. In an interview, Sci-Hub researcher Himmelstein responds to a
question about what publishers could do to stop new articles from being added to Sci-Hub:
“There are things they could do but they can really backfire terribly. The issue is the more
protective the publishers are, the more difficult they make legitimate access, and that could drive
people to use Sci-Hub.” (McKenzie, 2017).
If the purpose of academic literature is to share scientific discoveries and theories and
users seek information based on a combination of best quality with least effort, then Sci-Hub
becomes the choice that delivers the most comprehensive results with minimal effort. Again, this
perspective on why people may use Sci-Hub in the United States lends credence to the idea that
it is more a matter of convenience (Bohannon, 2016b); for Sci-Hub users affiliated with

35

academic institutions, there may be methods of acquiring needed materials (McNutt, 2016), even
though they run counter to how users seek information (Connaway et al., 2011; Zipf, 1949).
However, with the pressures to conduct research and publish (Liebowitz, 2015), circumventing
inconveniences may also be viewed as a necessity.
For the purposes of this study, convenience is defined as using Sci-Hub to download an
article that would be available for immediate download through an affiliation with an institution
that licenses that resource. This would exclude any article that would be available via interlibrary
loan as this process violates the ease of access to information and timeliness portion of
Connaway et al.’s definition of convenience. Conversely, in this study, necessity is defined as
using Sci-Hub to download an article that would be otherwise unavailable for immediate access
without paying a direct fee to the publisher.

2.2

REVIEW OF RELEVANT LITERATURE

The literature on Sci-Hub falls into two categories: how Sci-Hub is viewed and how SciHub is used. The former uses arguments based on legality, morality, and functionality. The latter
examines the data provided by Sci-Hub to better understand how Sci-Hub is used and attempts to
infer motivations based on the results of data analysis.

2.2.1

Views on Sci-Hub

Sci-Hub represents a serious and direct disruption to the current publishing model. As
such, the reactions to it tend towards the extreme. Proponents herald the increased access to
36

information, while critics decry the extralegal methods used to provide this access. In response to
Elsevier’s successful lawsuit (Association of American Publishers, 2017), John Willinsky,
founder of the Public Knowledge Project, argues that although Sci-Hub was found guilty, “the
academic community would likely view lack of access to journal articles as more serious for
higher education than Elsevier losing money.” (Elmes, 2017, para. 3). He also suggested the
lawsuit indicates Elsevier’s intention to turn research, frequently funded with public monies, into
private property and corporate assets. The implication of Willinsky’s statement is that while SciHub’s actions may be illegal, they are not immoral or they are at least less immoral than
Elsevier’s push to turn public goods into private profits.
Conversely, Maria Pallente, President and CEO of the Association of American
Publishers, stated “‘As the final judgment shows, the Court has not mistaken illegal activity for a
public good. On the contrary, it has recognized the defendants’ operation for the flagrant and
sweeping infringement that it really is and affirmed the critical role of copyright law in
furthering scientific research and the public interest’” (Association of American Publishers,
2017). Here Pallente conflates legality with morality as she attempts to frame the multi-billiondollar industry she represents as the victim in this scenario.
The American Chemical Society (ACS) is, per volume of output, one of the most
downloaded publishers in Sci-Hub (G. J. Gardner, McLaughlin, & Asher, 2017). In 2017, ACS
filed a suit in Virginia similar to Elsevier’s, demanding Sci-Hub cease distributing ACS content
and asking for $4.8 million in damages. The ACS suit also seeks to have search engines, Internet
service providers, and domain name registrars cease facilitating access to Sci-Hub (Kwon, 2017).
The ACS suit represents an attempt to use state power to censor the Internet as a way of tamping

37

down a challenge to the publishers’ dominance of the conversation surrounding access to
information.
From the publisher perspective, academic literature is a commodity, no different than any
other consumer product. This sentiment is best expressed by Alicia Wise, director of universal
access at Elsevier, in a New York Times article, “‘It’s as if somehow stealing content is
justifiable if it’s seen as expensive, and I find that surprising. It’s not as if you’d walk into a
grocery store and feel vindicated about stealing an organic chocolate bar as long as you left the
Kit Kat bar on the shelf.’” (Murphy, 2016). The insinuation is that publishers have procured the
materials for this good, then processed it for sale and consumption. One fallacy in this analogy is
that unlike the cocoa beans, sugar, and other ingredients required to produce chocolate, academic
literature is produced by scholars and given away for free for the advancement of science and the
betterment of society. The second flaw in the analogy, is that unlike an overpriced candy bar,
unaffordable academic literature still likely contains materials that are needed (J. Peters, 2016).
The unintended outcome of Wise’s analogy is a near-perfect example of the commodification of
information, divorced from its production and creators.
As for the creators of academic literature, the Chronicle of Higher Education reached out
to the authors of some of the most-downloaded works. The responses ranged from support for
access with some trepidation over the long-term ramifications for society journals to considering
it an honor (Ruff, 2016). In a survey of academics, 88% of respondents said that it was not
wrong to download pirated papers, including 84% of respondents who had not used Sci-Hub.
Additionally, 79% of respondents over age 50 had no problem with using Sci-Hub, so it is not
simply a matter of generational divide. While over 50% of respondents use Sci-Hub or another
method of guerilla open access to get articles they don’t have access to, 17% do so because it is

38

more convenient, and nearly a quarter of respondents use it because they object to the profits of
commercial publishers (Travis, 2016). While neither of these pieces utilizes a rigorous
methodology, they do provide a general insight into the views of both the creators and readers of
academic literature. The only party that seems opposed to using Sci-Hub is the middle man who
profits from the existing model, the commercial publishers.
Publishers contend that while they do not pay authors or reviewers, “they help ensure
accuracy, consistency, and clarity in scientific communication” (McNutt, 2016). They also check
quality, create visualizations, and promote content to media outlets. Publishers develop the
online platforms that host the content. Publishers establish brands and cultivate and maintain
good reputations. They manage the peer review process (Anderson, 2016; McNutt, 2016). While
many of these tasks are necessary and Sci-Hub does not provide a mechanism for most of them,
none of these tasks, or the remainder of the 96-item list of publisher actions listed by Anderson
(2016), require a profit margin.
Several opinion pieces have come out against Sci-Hub. One of these compares Sci-Hub
to mob accountant Meyer Lansky, mocks the struggles of researchers needing access to articles,
and laments that publishers haven’t found an alternative to PDFs that would make unauthorized
access more difficult (Esposito, 2016). Another piece parrots the lines about free or low-cost
access alternatives like interlibrary loan, Research4Life, and university repositories while
belittling Elbakyan, saying “She sincerely believes that she is above the law” (Cochran, 2016,
para. 2). It should also be noted that neither of the aforementioned opinion pieces were written
by faculty, but instead come from a contractor and a publishing company employee.
Not all opinion pieces on Sci-Hub are so negative or patronizing, some veer in the
complete opposite direction. Oxenham (2016) and Heathers (2016) both refer to Elbakyan as the

39

Robin Hood of science. While these pieces can be a bit over-the-top, they do highlight the praxis
behind Sci-Hub. The system, as both authors point out, is easier to use than the information silos
provided by the publishers and it matches people with the information they need.
Falling in the middle between fawning and derision, some views highlight the
problematic nature of a piracy system while highlighting the previously unmet needs that SciHub addresses. In an interview with NPR, a SPARC spokesperson asks the essential question,
“should such businesses be built around information that’s vital to the public’s good and the
public’s health?” (NPR, 2016, para. 5). She goes on to explain that researchers generally have
legal access to 50-70% of the literature they need for their work and that the current model is
untenable and forces researchers to use systems like Sci-Hub to complete their work (NPR,
2016). While SPARC still continues to advocate for legal open access (SPARC, n.d.), the
interview elucidates that access is a greater priority than legality for the group. The contradiction
inherent in access limitations and the information needs of the people is an example of how the
techno-capitalist nature of the existing system perpetuates inequalities.
The divide in how Sci-Hub is viewed seems to be based on people’s relationship to
academic literature. For those who profit from its commodification, or are associated with those
profiteers, Sci-Hub is viewed as a threat, a nuisance, and a criminally bad actor (Association of
American Publishers, 2017; Cochran, 2016; Esposito, 2016; McNutt, 2016; Murphy, 2016). For
those who create and use academic literature, Sci-Hub is viewed more as an equalizing force, at
best, and an unfortunately necessary solution to a greater problem, at worst (Elbakyan, 2015;
Elmes, 2017; NPR, 2016; Ruff, 2016; Travis, 2016).

40

2.2.2

Sci-Hub Usage

Since its founding in 2011, there have been three data releases regarding usage. The first,
in early 2014, related to LibGen, or Library Genesis, the aforementioned backend storage for the
Sci-Hub front end search and retrieval system (Cabanac, 2016). The second data release, in 2016,
is the one used in this study and contains information related to individual download requests,
specifically the date and time of the request, the digital object identifier (DOI) of the article
requested, and the geographic coordinates of the nearest city to the request (Bohannon &
Elbakyan, 2016). Lastly, the third release, in 2017, contains the list of 62 million DOI for the
content stored by Sci-Hub (Greshake, 2017b; Hahnel, 2017).
In addition to scientific articles, LibGen contains scientific books and textbooks, along
with some fiction books and comics. According to Cabanac (2016), in January 2014, LibGen
contained nearly 23 million scientific articles equaling 15 terabytes of data. In addition, it
contained over 1.1 million scientific books and textbooks equaling 13 terabytes of data.
Beginning in late October 2012, articles were collected with a median 2720 articles added each
day; however, the mean articles cached per day is nearly 53,000 due to 13 different days where
more than 100,000 articles were added. Cabanac further analyzed the data and found that LibGen
contained at least one article from 78% of journals published by DOI registrants, including 64%
of Elsevier journals, 53% of Springer, and 59% of Wiley. While these major publishers have
lower percentages of journals covered than the overall rate, they were far outpaced in terms of
the percentage of papers covered. The overall average was just 36% of articles registered with a
DOI, but the rates for these publishers were 77%, 53%, and 73% for Elsevier, Springer, and
Wiley, respectively. Lastly, clinical medicine and chemistry were the fields with the most articles
available. While not an examination of the Sci-Hub platform, this examination of the data
41

demonstrates an overrepresentation of the major publishers, which is not surprising considering
their combined share of the academic literature marketplace.
In 2016, Science correspondent John Bohannon reached out to Sci-Hub creator Alexandra
Elbakyan in hopes of getting access to Sci-Hub usage data. The resultant data (Bohannon &
Elbakyan, 2016) contains every download event from September 2015 through February 2016;
each record contains the date and time of the request, along with the nearest city and the article’s
DOI. The results of Bohannon’s (2016b) analysis show that Sci-Hub is being used all over the
world, both in developing nations without much access to academic literature and from the
wealthiest nations with, presumably, much greater access. Nearly 25% of Sci-Hub usage during
this period came from the 34 member nations of Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the world’s wealthiest nations; the United States was the 5 th largest downloader,
behind Iran, China, India, and Russia (Bohannon & Elbakyan, 2016). Bohannon’s analysis also
shows 3 million unique IPs for users; however, the real number of users is likely higher as many
university users can share a single IP and Iran has downloaded a great deal of Sci-Hub data and
created local, mirrored sites that provide Sci-Hub’s content from Iranian servers instead of going
directly to Sci-Hub’s website (2016b).
The 2016 data release also contains the DOIs of the downloaded articles. Of the
approximately 28 million download events, over 9 million came from Elsevier journals, followed
by 2.6 million from Springer, 2.1 million from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, nearly 1.9 million from the American Chemical Society, 1.3 million from Wiley, and
1.1 million from Nature (Bohannon, 2016b). The disproportionate downloads from Elsevier
journals, comprising nearly 1/3 of all downloads, makes it unsurprising that Elsevier is SciHub’s most vocal and litigious opponent.

42

Greshake (2016) examined the download request data to better understand whether
downloads were made by the general public or by academic researchers who couldn’t get
subscription-based access to the articles. Looking at the days and times of the downloads, he
found that the heaviest use times were between 9am and 5pm. He asserts the data suggests that
since most downloads occur during work hours, Sci-Hub is not simply used after work hours by
the general public or academics from home. While Greshake suggests this is likely academics
accessing journals that their institutions do not subscribe to, the analysis of the time of day
download requests are made is not divided by country. While this may be more true for
academics in developing nations, it also includes academics in wealthier nations where they are
assumed to have access to their universities subscription-based journals and could support the
publisher’s argument that Sci-Hub usage is for convenience, not necessity (Bohannon, 2016b).
The counterargument to this view, which would support Greshake’s assertions, is access to
licensed materials on-campus is frequently based on the user’s IP address, meaning there would
be no need to use a third-party service like Sci-Hub. Going through Sci-Hub on campus would
create an unnecessary extra step that runs counter to PLE.
In addition to looking at the days and times of Sci-Hub downloads, Greshake (2016) also
compared Sci-Hub usage with data from the World Bank. He found positive correlations
between Sci-Hub usage and the population, Gross Domestic Product, Internet usage and
availability, and life expectancy of countries. National unemployment was found to be a poor
predictor of Sci-Hub usage. These correlations suggest that larger, wealthier countries with
greater Internet infrastructure are more likely to use Sci-Hub.
Finally, in order to better understand academics’ Sci-Hub usage, Greshake (2016) used a
list of global college and university IP ranges to compare with Sci-Hub data. Greshake discloses

43

that this IP list is both slightly outdated, 18 months old at the time of the study, and incomplete;
these caveats, he argues, suggest that the findings be taken as low estimates. While the Sci-Hub
data was scrubbed of IPs due to privacy concerns, Greshake reached out and asked for the data
and Sci-Hub returned the data in two forms. The first dataset shows that on-campus Sci-Hub
usage tends to be between 8 and 10 percent on workdays and drops during weekends and over
holidays. The second dataset breaks down the data by country, but limits it to 10 day periods
instead of 24 hours to help preserve anonymity. The findings from this dataset were a bit more
suspect as the small number of downloads in some countries may have skewed the results and a
possible lack of academic IP ranges for other countries may underestimate academic usage.
Overall, the findings suggest little correlation between the percentage of population enrolled in
higher education and Sci-Hub usage and the relationship between national research funding and
Sci-Hub usage was also small. While interesting, Greshake’s use of global data may make
understanding any one nation’s Sci-Hub usage more difficult. The findings do suggest academic
use while on campus is relatively high and provides insight into how the global higher education
landscape uses Sci-Hub.
While admittedly meant to be a rough estimate, Bianca Kramer (2016a, 2016b) of the
Utrecht University Library built upon the work of Greshake (2016) and Bohannon (2016b) to
examine access versus convenience for the Sci-Hub download requests attributed to her
university and the Netherlands more generally. For part one of her analysis, Kramer (2016a)
limited the dataset to Sci-Hub requests to the Netherlands. The dataset was then split by cities
with 1000 or more Sci-Hub download requests; Amsterdam was removed from the list because
many Dutch internet service providers are located there and the actual user could be from
anywhere in the Netherlands. The results of the analysis showed that both in raw numbers and

44

when compared to population size, towns and cities with universities, in general, had more
downloads. However, Den Haag, the home to the Dutch parliament and many international
organizations, had more download requests than all but two other cities despite not having a
university. The author suggests looking at cities with research companies could help clarify SciHub usage, especially from non-university cities. Overall, this analysis suggests that cities with
universities may be more likely to use Sci-Hub, but it is clearly not only campus communities
who are using the site.
In the second part of the study, Kramer (2016b) found nearly 3000 unique DOIs
attributed to Utrecht University in Greshake’s (2016) study and manually checked each DOI to
see if the article was available either through library subscription or because it was available via
open access or otherwise freely available. The overall findings showed that 60% of the articles
were available through subscriptions, 15% were available for free, and 25% were not available
via the publisher. Interestingly, it is clear that the university does not subscribe to many journals
of certain publishers as 98% of articles published by IEEE were not available, nor were 78% of
De Gruyter, 55% of IOP Publishing, 65% of American Institute of Physics, and 86% of
Cambridge University Press. While the author looks at open access journal availability, she
admittedly does not attempt to examine access through pre-print servers or institutional
repositories (Kramer, 2016b). At minimum, this study implies that a quarter of the Sci-Hub
usage attributed to Utrecht University was based on need, not convenience.
To examine Sci-Hub usage in Latin America, Machin-Mastromatteo, Uribe-Tirado, and
Romero-Ortiz (2016) replicated Bohannon’s (2016b) analysis, but limited the results to Latin
America, which included 32 countries for the purpose of this study. Latin America represents
approximately 12.5% of the worldwide download requests, which surprised the authors due to

45

the limited funds most Latin American countries have to spend on journal subscriptions. Brazil
represents nearly 30% of the Latin American usage, followed by Mexico, Chile, Colombia,
Argentina, and Peru; combined these six nations represent almost 90% of all Latin American
Sci-Hub download requests. The authors added no new methods of analysis to Bohannon’s
study, nor do they compare Sci-Hub downloads to population size for the represented countries.
Gardner, McLaughlin, and Asher (2017) produced a wide-ranging study on how Sci-Hub
download requests are related to aspects of the academic literature marketplace. As outlined in
chapter one, interlibrary loan (ILL) is the method used by libraries to share books and articles
that a library has with another library without access to that material. As Sci-Hub can potentially
eliminate, or at least minimize, the access limitations that prompt ILL usage for articles, Gardner
et al. (2017) use the 2016 Sci-Hub data release to examine how ILL has been affected by SciHub in the United States and Canada and how Sci-Hub downloads compare to licit downloads.
The ILL portion of the study was conducted using multiple methods. The first method involved
selecting large higher education institutions that were the biggest institutions in their
municipality and where the municipality did not have multiple large colleges or universities; the
authors reached out to dozens of institutions that met these criteria, with ten universities agreeing
to participate. The ten universities sent ILL requests for items that were not full books or media
for the same time span as the Sci-Hub data, September 2015 through February 2016. The authors
studied the effects of Sci-Hub usage on ILL by using repeated measures analysis of variance
(rANOVA) and multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA). None of the cities showed a
significant negative correlation between ILL demand and Sci-Hub downloads.
Gardner et al. (2017) also used the Sci-Hub data to compare with data from the
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). Unfortunately, the most recent ACRL

46

dataset available at the time, from 2014-15 academic year, does not overlap with the Sci-Hub
data timeframe. The authors still performed a geographical analysis on the most recent ACRL
data and found that Sci-Hub downloads are moderately and positively correlated with the
number of academic institutions, total library expenditures, total ILL articles borrowed, full-time
instructional faculty, and full-time graduate students; total ILL articles borrowed is more
strongly correlated with each of these variables. While the findings are interesting and some of
the methodologies match the methodologies in this study, the mismatched years make it difficult
to ascertain the importance of the results.
Additionally, Gardner et al. (2017) examined whether institutional subscription price or
findability via abstracting and indexing databases made a journal more or less likely to be
downloaded via Sci-Hub. The authors limited the Sci-Hub data to requests from the United
States, then further limited it to titles classified by CrossRef as either a journal or journal article.
A random sample of 270 titles, from the 44,068 entries, was generated to allow for a 90%
confidence level with a 5% margin of error. The authors manually checked each entry against the
Ulrichsweb Global Serials Directory and noted the price and the number of abstracting and
indexing databases the entry is listed in. Subscription price was found to not be a monocausal
explanation of Sci-Hub usage, but was correlated with download count; the Spearman value
ρ=.602 led the authors to believe a power-law relationship may be in effect. Inclusion in
abstracting and indexing services was found to not be a determining factor in Sci-Hub usage (G.
J. Gardner et al., 2017). The simplicity of Sci-Hub browser extensions for Google Scholar may
explain why inclusion in indexing and abstracting services does not play a determining role in
Sci-Hub usage since Google Scholar does not rely on traditional library-centered services like
those provided by EBSCO.

47

Lastly, comparing Sci-Hub downloads to licit downloads as a way to examine lost
revenues for publishers, Gardner et al. (2017) found download estimates for four of the top ten
downloaded publishers (Bohannon, 2016b). With only six months of Sci-Hub data available, SciHub download data was doubled. Ratios of publisher to Sci-Hub downloads were generated;
however, the authors note that since Sci-Hub data was collected during the academic year
compared to the yearly totals for publisher downloads, the ratio should be considered a rough
measure. The results show that Elsevier, the most illicitly downloaded publisher, had the greatest
revenue lost, $334.21 million, when using the highest price per article purchase the publisher
lists. The Royal Society of Chemistry had the greatest proportional loss due to the lowest ratio of
licit to illicit downloads, 20:1, meaning that for every licit download, ACS had 20 illicit
downloads. While their study does not necessarily answer any of the research questions posed in
this study, the methodologies provide interesting approaches for how to study the Sci-Hub data,
specifically using large institutions that are the only large institutions in their respective cities.
With the release of 2017’s Sci-Hub data (Hahnel, 2017), there is now a dataset containing a list
of every article in the Sci-Hub/LigGen repository. The first number that draws attention is the
sharp increase in the volume of articles from the 23 million at the beginning of 2014 (Cabanac,
2016) to nearly 63 million in March 2017 (Hahnel, 2017), a difference of approximately 40
million articles. Greshake (2017a) combined this new dataset with the 2016 data (Bohannon &
Elbakyan, 2016) to match on the article DOI and provide insight into how often each article in
Sci-Hub was requested. His findings show that despite articles going back as far as 1619, 95% of
articles downloaded were published after 1982 and 35% were less than 2 years old at the time of
download.

48

While over 177,000 journals are represented within Sci-Hub, less than 10% of the
journals comprise over 50% of the total content. Furthermore, less than 1% of the journals are
getting over 50% of the total downloads. Similarly, while there are approximately 1700
publishers within Sci-Hub, the top 9 publishers comprise roughly 70% of the total articles and
80% of all downloads (Greshake, 2017a), these findings align with Zipf’s Law (1949) as it has
been applied to information seeking, where it is has been called the 80/20 or 70/30 rule (Case &
Given, 2016) and applied to article requests (Dorsch & Pifalo, 1997) and citations (White, 2001).
Of the most frequently downloaded journals, chemistry appears to be the most popular topic with
chemistry journals representing 12 of the top 20 most downloaded titles. The author posits this
could be a result of undersupplying by university libraries or that chemistry and engineering
graduates are more likely to go into private, for-profit industries than their peers in the health
sciences who tend to stay within academic institutions (Greshake, 2017a). This analysis shows
how a small number of publishers dominate the most requested articles and how different fields
use Sci-Hub in varying ways.
Himmelstein, Romero, McLaughlin, Tzovaras, and Greene (2017) offer additional
analysis of the 2017 dataset. For their study, all Sci-Hub entries are referred to as articles,
although the actual entries consist of conference proceedings articles, journal articles, book
chapters, and reference entities, amongst other things. A primary focus of their study was
assessing coverage or examining the percentage of articles in Sci-Hub versus the total number of
articles in existence. By subject area, chemistry and chemical engineering had the highest
coverage levels with both at 92% or higher; conversely, arts and humanities, multidisciplinary
subjects, and computer science had less than 78% coverage. The high coverage levels for

49

chemistry fields is not surprising based on Greshake’s (2017a) findings that chemistry was the
most popular topic.
Taken as a whole, the body of literature on Sci-Hub usage suggests that it varies widely
by field and by location and conclusive arguments cannot yet be made. The popularity and
coverage of fields such as chemistry (Greshake, 2017a; Himmelstein et al., 2017), can be
interpreted as supporting the claim that Sci-Hub is used by those outside academia since those
with advanced degrees in the field frequently go to work in the private sector (Greshake, 2017a).
Kramer’s (2016a) finding of high Sci-Hub usage in Den Haag, a city with the Dutch parliament
and international organizations, but no universities, also aligns with this idea. While, Greshake’s
(2016) finding that most Sci-Hub use comes during traditional work hours and he asserts this as
academics using the system while on campus, it could also be researchers outside of higher
education. However, Sci-Hub usage tends to be highest in cities with large universities
(Bohannon, 2016b; Kramer, 2016a), so while the existing studies provide some insight,
especially globally, there are still many unanswered questions, including whether Sci-Hub is
being used to access otherwise inaccessible materials or if it is being used because it requires the
least effort to meet information needs.

2.3

LIMTATIONS AND GAPS IN THE LITERATURE

As Sci-Hub was created in 2011 and its actions are legally questionable, it is unsurprising
to find a limited number of studies related to how and why it is used. However, the volume of
Sci-Hub related studies is growing rapidly. Most examinations of the existing Sci-Hub data focus
on global usage (Bohannon, 2016b; Cabanac, 2016; Greshake, 2016, 2017a; Hahnel, 2017;
50

Himmelstein et al., 2017); this trend makes sense as Sci-Hub was created by a researcher in a
country with limited access to academic literature and was designed to help those in similar
situations (Bohannon, 2016a). However, many of the legal troubles facing Sci-Hub stem from
the United States and focus on how the system is used within the United States (Kwon, 2017;
United States District Court Southern District Of New York, 2015).
Global disparities in access to academic literature are well-recognized and acknowledged
even by publishers. To address some of these gaps, the United Nations has worked with
publishers on a number of programs through the Research4Life initiative (“Research4Life
home,” n.d.). Beyond problems such as withdrawing access to journals in certain countries (K.
Kmietowicz et al., 2011; Z. Kmietowicz, 2011), these programs also only cover a limited range
of fields. Considering the great variation in access between countries in the developing world
and those in more industrialized nations, global overviews of Sci-Hub usage are limited in how
they can explain usage in any one country.
With the exception of Greshake’s (2016) study comparing Sci-Hub usage with World
Bank indicators and known college and university IP ranges and Gardner, McLaughlin, and
Asher’s (2017) study of Sci-Hub’s effect on ILL, previous studies primarily report on descriptive
statistics and do not delve into any relationships that might provide a greater depth of
understanding. As Greshake notes in his work, there are numerous possible problems with his
study, but it does provide a good first step toward understanding how Sci-Hub usage is related to
other factors. The other studies (Bohannon, 2016b; Cabanac, 2016; Greshake, 2017a; Hahnel,
2017; Himmelstein et al., 2017) help provide context for what is used on Sci-Hub overall and
how frequently it used, but there is still a need for greater depth even at the expense of breadth.

51

This study was intended to help fill some of the existing gaps in literature. By focusing on only
the United States and forgoing a larger global context, the hope is to provide a greater granularity
of understanding. Bohannon (2016b) notes that many Sci-Hub download requests came from
New York City, home to many universities and scientific institutions, and also smaller cities like
Columbus, Ohio and East Lansing, Michigan with large universities. The implication is that it is
members of these campus communities that are using Sci-Hub, which would support publisher
claims of convenience over necessity. However, neither Ohio State University or Michigan State
University, located in Columbus and East Lansing, respectively, subscribe to all academic
journals; even resource-rich Harvard has had to make cuts to their journal collection (Sample,
2012). There has previously been no study showing whether the download requests are for
journals these institutions subscribe to or not. One of the goals of this study was to help provide a
better understanding of that for the United States, similarly to what Kramer (2016b) did on a
smaller scale for Utrecht University, albeit without using IPs specifically tied to higher education
institutions.
Additionally, where Greshake (2016) compared Sci-Hub download request data with
known college and university IPs to try to understand how many people are using Sci-Hub while
on campuses, this study looked at how download requests on or near a research university
campus are related to the academic journal expenditures and other characteristics of that
institution. Greshake drew on his own experiences of not having access to all pertinent literature
at the University of Frankfurt to develop his line of inquiry and this study did something similar
but limits the scope of the study to the United States instead of using global data.
Greshake (2016) also correlated the Sci-Hub download request data with World Bank
indicators, including enrollment in higher education and research expenditures. This study took a

52

similar approach for the United States by breaking the country down to smaller geographic
regions and looking at the percentage of residents with advanced degrees while accounting for
the higher education institutions in the region as well as the number of faculty and graduate
students. The first part of the study also used research funding by institution as a predictor
variable for Sci-Hub usage. The second part of the study looked at how the presence of colleges
and universities in a region, along with the concentration of faculty, graduate students, and
advance degree holders, are related to Sci-Hub usage, similar to Kramer’s (2016a) comparison of
cities with universities versus non-university cities in the Netherlands.
The relative newness of Sci-Hub and the even newer releases of data creates an
environment ripe for exploration. This study helps to provide a greater understanding of who in
the United States is using Sci-Hub and the possible motivations. While this study cannot
definitively ascribe motivations to Sci-Hub users, looking at the relationship between the number
of Sci-Hub download requests and the characteristics of the academic institutions and the people
near those requests provides some much-needed insight into this phenomenon.

53

3.0

METHODOLOGY

The purpose of this study was to examine how Sci-Hub usage, as measured by the
number and location of download requests, relates to the environment surrounding the download
requests. Sci-Hub critics, especially those with connections to the for-profit academic publishing
industry, suggest that Sci-Hub usage in the United States is based on convenience, not necessity,
as there are alternative methods in place to provide access to paywalled content for those without
subscriptions (Bohannon, 2016b; McNutt, 2016). The primary subscribers to academic journals
are academic libraries and the clusters of Sci-Hub requests near higher education institutions
lends some credence to this theory (Bohannon, 2016b); however, there has been no previous
analysis that examines the relationship between Sci-Hub usage in the United States and other
possible contributing factors. This study is broken down in two parts: 1) how Sci-Hub download
requests are related to the institutional characteristics of research-intensive universities and 2)
how Sci-Hub download requests are related to the population of their geographic location.

54

3.1

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

3.1.1

Sci-Hub and Academic Libraries

1.

How do the academic journal expenditures of research institutions relate to the number of

Sci-Hub article requests within a 10-mile radius of the institution?
1.1.

For Sci-Hub article requests within a 10-mile radius of a research institution, are

the requests for articles that appear in journals for which the institution has a
subscription?

3.1.2

Sci-Hub and Population

2.

What is the relationship between the percentage of residents over 25 with an advanced

degree in a core-based statistical area (CBSA) and the number of Sci-Hub requests?
2.1.

How does the number and type of higher education institutions and the total

number of graduate students within a CBSA change the above relationship?
3.

What is the relationship between the percentage of residents over 25 (minus the total

faculty within the region) with an advanced degree in a CBSA and the number of Sci-Hub
requests?
3.1.

How does the number and type of higher education institutions and the total

number of graduate students within a CBSA change the above relationship?

55

3.2

3.2.1

DATA SOURCES

Sci-Hub

In 2016, John Bohannon (2016), a contributor at Science, noticed that despite several
opinion pieces on Sci-Hub, there was very little information about who uses the system, where
the users are located, and what articles are being downloaded. To help rectify the situation,
Bohannon reached out to Sci-Hub creator Alexandra Elbakyan. Over the course of several
weeks, the two collaborated to create a public dataset that would provide the DOI of every article
requested, along with non-identifying location information. The Sci-Hub data comes from the
Sci-Hub server logs for request events from September 1, 2015 through February 29, 2016
(Bohannon, 2016b; Bohannon & Elbakyan, 2016). Every download event is included in the
original dataset, including the date and time of the request, with the exception of eight days in
November when Sci-Hub underwent a domain change due to a lawsuit by Elsevier. Using data
from Google Maps, users’ geographic locations were aggregated to the nearest city to protect
their privacy (Bohannon, 2016b); the fields for the geographic locations consist of the city name,
country, and geographic coordinates. Additionally, the dataset contains the date and time of the
request. This study included only results in the United States; the full set of Sci-Hub requests
from within the United States has 1,150,963 document download requests.

3.2.2

IPEDS

Institutional data comes from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System’s
(IPEDS); all institutions that participate in any federal student financial aid program are required
56

to complete all IPEDS surveys. The 2015 IPEDS dataset was selected to match the timeframe of
the Sci-Hub data. Specifically, this study includes data from the Institutional Characteristics File,
the Academic Libraries File, the Employees by Assigned Position File, and the Fall Enrollment
File. Eliminating institutions whose Carnegie classification did not include offering at least an
Associate’s degree (see Appendix A) left 3,183 higher education institutions in the United States.
The Institutional Characteristics File contains the directory information of every institution
contained in IPEDS. Generally, this data source contains information on if an institution is
degree-granting and, if so what the highest degree offered is, the Carnegie Classification,
whether the institution is public or private, and other basic categorical information. Specifically,
the Institutional Characteristics File includes information on institutional type, size, geographic
location (including coordinates and CBSA), and whether the institution has a medical school or a
hospital (see Table 1).
The Academic Libraries File includes characteristics of the library, such as the number of
books and other materials, circulation data, number of branches, staff size, interlibrary loan data,
and expenditures. For the purpose of this study, the most important field in the Academic
Libraries File is yearly academic journal expenditures (see Table 1).
The Employees by Assigned Position File contains the number of staff, classified by fulltime and part-time status. Included in this file is whether an employee is part of a medical school,
tenure status, and occupational category. For the purpose of this study, the most important field
in the Employees by Assigned Position File is the number of faculty at an institution (see Table
1).
Lastly, the Fall Enrollment File contains the total number of enrolled undergraduate and
graduate students; these fields are further broken down by race, gender, and nonresident alien

57

status. For the purpose of this study, the most important field in the Fall Enrollment File is the
number of graduate students (see Table 1).

3.2.3

Census

The Educational Attainment data comes from the U.S. Census Bureau, American
Community Survey 1-Year Estimates (US Census Bureau, n.d.-b). The American Community
Survey (ACS) uses core based statistical areas (CBSAs) to group together geographic regions
that contain at least one urbanized area or urban cluster of at least 10,000 people plus the
surrounding areas that have a high degree of economic and social integration (US Census
Bureau, n.d.-a). There are 546 CBSAs in the dataset. This dataset includes the education level,
by total number and percentage, of a CBSA’s population. The education levels are less than high
school graduate, high school graduate, some college or associate’s degree, Bachelor’s degree or
higher, and graduate or professional degree. The data is further dissected by age ranges: 18 to 24
years, 25 to 34 years, 35 to 44 years, 45 to 64 years, and 65 years and older.

58

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

Variable
Journal Expenditures (R1 & R2)
Graduate Students (R1 & R2)
Faculty (R1 & R2)
Medical School (R1 & R2)
Hospital (R1 & R2)
NIH (R1 & R2)
NSF (R1 & R2)
CBSA Population
CBSA Population w/ Adv Degree
Faculty in CBSA
Graduate Students in CBSA
Associate’s in CBSA
Bachelor’s in CBSA
Master’s in CBSA
Doctorate in CBSA

Source
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
NIH
NSF
Census
Census
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS
IPEDS

Mean
6419360
7246.46
2019.60
1.52
1.81
27,600,000
150,118.60
379,020.90
46,415.49
2415.61
6757.56
1.96
1.32
1.28
0.63

59

Min
347601
210
84
1
-1
0
0
36777
1483
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
20,400,000
27569
9362
2
2
453,000,000
1,369,278
13,900,000
2,197,544
86,665
234,513
37
25
44
20

STD
3883662
4816.61
1443.34
0.50
0.43
70,300,000
248,647.20
987,025.30
145,055.50
6067.29
19,414.76
3.50
2.53
2.99
1.63

For the purpose of this study, this dataset provides the population over 25-years-of-age in
a CBSA and the population over 25-years-of-age with advanced degrees in a CBSA; advanced
degree holders are defined as having a graduate or professional degree. The 2015 estimates were
used to match the timeframe of the Sci-Hub data. The 2010 ZIP Code Tabulation Area to
Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Relationship File (US Census Bureau, n.d.) was
used to match the computed ZIP codes of Sci-Hub requests with their corresponding CBSAs.
The CBSAs are calculated prior to each census; the 2010 calculations are the most current and
applicable to the 2015 American Community Survey.

3.2.4

NIH and NSF

As two of the largest funders of research at higher education institutions, the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) grant expenditures were
selected as representatives of research performed at an institution. The 2015 NIH awards data
(NIH, n.d.-a) was selected to match the timeframe of the Sci-Hub data and matched against all
222 Research I and Research II universities. The dataset includes the total grant expenditures per
institution, the city and state of the institution, and the total number of awards that institution
received; the total grant expenditures per institution (see Table 1) is the field used in this study.
Additionally, the NSF research and development expenditures (NSF, n.d.) was selected
as a second representative of research at an institution. The 2015 NSF data was selected to match
the timeframe of the Sci-Hub data and matched against all 222 Research I and Research II
universities. The NSF dataset provides the total expenditures per institution and the rank and
percentile of each institution; the total expenditures per institution (see Table 1) is the field used

60

in this study. Both datasets are publicly available as part of institutional reporting requirements
for transparency.

3.2.5

Data Summary

As outlined above, this study is broken into two parts, the relationship between Sci-Hub
download requests and the characteristics of nearby research institutions and the relationship
between Sci-Hub download requests and the population and characteristics of the geographic
area where the requests are generated from. In the first section, this study isolated Sci-Hub
download requests near research institutions and examined how journal expenditures and other
institutional characteristics are related to the number of Sci-Hub download requests. In the
second section, this study examined the relationship between Sci-Hub download requests and the
percentage of the nearby population with advanced degrees. This section further explored how
that relationship changes when the number and type of higher education institutions, along with
the graduate students and faculty of these institutions, were accounted for.

3.2.6

Sci-Hub and Academic Libraries: Q1

3.2.6.1 Sample
Use of academic journal articles is typically highest amongst those conducting research,
so the list of higher education institutions has been limited to the Carnegie classifications of
“Doctoral Universities – Highest research activity” and “Doctoral Universities – Higher research
activity,” known respectively as R1 and R2 institutions (“Basic Classification,” n.d.). Doctoral
universities are divided between three categories: “highest research activity,” “higher research
61

activity,” and “moderate research activity” (“Basic Classification,” n.d.). The categories are
determined by research and development (R&D) expenditures in science and engineering, nonscience and engineering R&D expenditures, and doctoral conferrals. Research activity is placed
on two indices: an aggregate level of research activity and per-capita research activity.
Institutions are evaluated based on a distance from a common reference point. Institutions that
place very high on either index are assigned to the “highest research activity” group, institutions
high on at least one, but not very high on either, are assigned to the “higher research activity”
group, and the remainder are placed in the “moderate research activity” group (“Basic
Classification Methodology,” n.d.). The “moderate research activity” group, also known as R3
institutions, were omitted from the study due to their comparatively lower level levels of
research and doctoral degree conferrals. Institutions that did not have a Carnegie classification of
15 or 16 (see Appendix A) were dropped from the dataset.
The total number of R1 and R2 institutions, based on IPEDS data, is 222. The sample for
this section was further limited by geographic proximity to other R1 and R2 universities. Isolated
research institutions (IRI) were determined by using the geonear (Picard, n.d.) command in Stata
that measures the shortest distance between one set of geographic coordinates and another set of
coordinates. Using this procedure, the distance to the closest R1 and R2 institutions for each of
the 222 universities was calculated. The distance of 20 miles was chosen to provide the most
inclusive number of institutions while attempting to avoid possible overlaps; any R1 or R2
institution with a calculated distance of 20 miles or less was dropped from the dataset. This
proces lowered the number of institutions in this part of the study to 136. The 20-mile distance
ensured that, for the purpose of this study, all Sci-Hub requests within a 10-mile radius of an
institution were associated with that institution and could not be associated with any other IRI.

62

The Sci-Hub download requests were narrowed by limiting the Sci-Hub download
requests to only those within 10 miles of an IRI. Using the geonear (Picard, n.d.) command in
Stata again, the coordinates of IRIs were compared to the coordinates of the Sci-Hub requests.
All requests within 10 miles of an IRI were tallied using the contract command in Stata and
associated with that institution. Any Sci-Hub download request made at a distance greater than
10 miles from an IRI was dropped from the dataset, resulting in the number of observations
dropping from 1,150,963 to 419,934. For Q1, there are 136 Isolated Research Institutions and
419,934 Sci-Hub download requests. Figure 4 provides a visual representation of the IRI by the
number of associated Sci-Hub download requests.

Figure 4. Isolated Research Institutions
This figure shows the 136 Isolated Research Institutions with the size representing the number of Sci-Hub download
requests within 10 miles of campus.

The unique identifiers and institution names from the IPEDS dataset, limited to IRIs, was
exported to a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and research expenditures from NIH (NIH, n.d.-a) and
NSF (NSF, n.d.) were manually added to the spreadsheet. The new research data was imported
63

into the dataset using the unique identifiers as the matching variable. The NIH and NSF research
funds were combined to form a new research variable; one institution did not receive money
from either source. Additionally, the number of graduate students and faculty were combined to
form a new graduate/faculty variable to represent institution size. Lastly, a new medical/hospital
binary variable was created to represent if an institution had either a medical school or a hospital.
To compensate for skewedness, the following variables were transformed using a base-2
logarithm: journal expenditures, Sci-Hub requests, research, and graduate/faculty.
Variables
Dependent Variable
The dependent variable for Q1, the number of Sci-Hub download requests, was
determined by the number of Sci-Hub download request events within a 10-mile radius of an IRI.
The distribution of the Sci-Hub requests is right-skewed as 90 IRIs have fewer than 1000
requests, but 7 IRIs have more than 10,000. As stated above, the number of Sci-Hub download
requests has been transformed using a log base-2 algorithm to account for this skewedness. The
resultant mean of the transformed number of Sci-Hub download requests is 9.26, with a
minimum of 0 and a maximum of 16.69 (see Table 2).
Independent Variables
To better understand the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub download requests
and academic institutions, several possible contributing factors were included as representatives
of the need for access to academic literature and its availability: the size of an institution’s
faculty and graduate student population, the prevalence of research funding, and the presence of
medical training or practice. The independent variables for Q1 included academic library journal

64

expenditures, the combined number of faculty and graduate students, research funds from NIH
and NSF, and whether an institution has a medical school or associated hospital.
Academic library journal expenditures were used to represent the amount of academic
literature that a campus community has access to (Tenopir, Volentine, & King, 2012). While
subscription-based journals vary widely in costs, academic journal expenditures are the best
available variable to represent access to paywalled academic literature. The distribution of
academic journal expenditures is right-skewed; while 98 institutions spend less than $8,000,000
on academic journals, 22 spend more than $10,000,000 and 6 spend more than $15,000,000. The
skewedness of the distribution required a log base-2 transformation. While the resultant
distribution of the transformed variable is left-skewed, the skewness and kurtosis are closer to
normal. The resultant mean of the transformed journal expenditures is 22.31, with a minimum of
18.41 and a maximum of 24.29 (see Table 2).
As academic journals are used for research purposes, along with graduate student
instruction, graduate students and faculty are the most likely user base of academic literature
(Abbott, 2016). The total number of graduate students and faculty at an institution were totaled
to provide a representation of the academic journal user base. The distribution of graduate
students and faculty is right-skewed; while the mean is approximately 8800 and the median is
7784, 6 institutions have more than 20,000. The skewedness of the distribution required a log
base-2 transformation to achieve a more normal distribution. The resultant mean of the
transformed total number of graduate students and faculty is 12.85, with a minimum of 9.58 and
a maximum of 14.81 (see Table 2).
Performing literature reviews is a vital step in the research process. Institutions that
perform more research may have a greater need for access to academic literature to pursue that

65

research (Tenopir et al., 2012). The National Institutes of Health and the National Science
Foundation are two of the largest funders of research; the 2015 funding data for both
organizations were combined to create a general research funding variable to represent the
amount of research performed at an institution. Like the previous variables in this model,
research dollars have a right-skewed distribution; the skewedness is demonstrated by a $3.5
million difference between the mean and median values. The skewedness of the research funding
distribution required a log base-2 transformation to provide a more normal distribution. The
resultant mean of the transformed total research dollars from NIH and NSF is 23.61, with a
minimum of 16.13 and a maximum of 28.76 (see Table 2).
Medical schools and hospitals have unique information requirements. In addition to the
normal information needs of researchers, medical practitioners also require clinical information
for the immediate diagnosis and treatment of patients. As such, institutions with either a medical
school or an associated hospital may have increased expenditures on licensed information
resources and a higher number of information requests. The presence of either a medical school
or associated hospital was transformed into a binary variable to account for their uniqueness; 70
institutions have a medical school and/or an associated hospital while 66 do not.

66

Table 2. Q1 Variable Definitions and Descriptive Statistics, 136 Observations

Variable
Dependent Variable
log2(Sci-Hub Requests)
Independent Variables
log2(Journals)
log2(Grad/Faculty)

Mean

Min

Max

STD

Measurement

9.26

0

16.69

2.49

Log base-2 of Sci-Hub requests within 10 miles of IRI

22.31
12.85

18.41 24.29
9.58 14.81

1.01
0.89

Medical/Hospital

.51

0

0.50

log2(Research)

23.61

16.13 28.76

Log base-2 of academic journal expenditures by an IRI
Log base-2 of the total number of graduate students and faculty
at an IRI
0=No medical school or hospital; 1=IRI has medical school
and/or hospital
Log base-2 of combined research funds from NIH and NSF

1

2.58

67

Interaction Effects and Collinearity
The correlation matrix (Table 3) shows that each independent variable has a statistically
significant correlation with the other independent variables. The high levels of correlation
between independent variables is understandable as they seem to work in concert. A higher
number of graduate students and faculty would suggest more individuals performing research
and a wider range of disciplines which would require a wider range of journal subscriptions. Part
of conducting research is performing literature reviews; greater research funding suggests a
greater need for academic journals. The high correlation between the independent variables
suggested the possibility of multicollinearity. Stata was used to determine the variance inflation
factor (VIF). No VIF values greater than 10 were found, so there is likely no problem with
multicollinearity (Acock, 2014). For the remaining variables, interaction tests were conducted on
each pair of predictors. Interaction variables were generated by creating cross-products of the
variables and inserting them into the model to determine interaction effects.

68

Table 3. Correlation Matrix

Log2(Sci-Hub) Log2(Journal) Log2(Grad/ Faculty) Med School/ Hospital Log2(Research)
log2(Sci-Hub)
1
log2(Journal)
0.39***
1
log2(Grad/ Faculty)
0.40***
0.71***
1
Med School/ Hospital
-0.30***
-0.51**
-0.57**
1
log2(Research)
0.47***
0.65***
0.55***
-0.59***
1

69

3.2.7

Sci-Hub and Population: Q2 & Q3

3.2.7.1 Sample
The American Community Survey data consists of 546 entries; however, some of the
CBSAs within the data are duplicated. For example, CBSA 10580 is listed twice, once as Troy,
NY and once as Albany, NY; the population data for both city labels are the same. CBSA 14460
is listed five times for Chestnut Hill, Cambridge, Boston, Waltham, and Medford, MA. Duplicate
entries have been dropped from the dataset; 508 CBSAs remained after deduplication removed
38 entries. Figure 5 shows a map of the United States with the CBSAs drawn; the Sci-Hub
document download requests are overlaid on this map.
The IPEDS Institutional Characteristics File contains the CBSA and the Carnegie
classification of each institution. The Employees by Assigned Position File was used to gather
the total number of faculty at each institution and the Fall Enrollment File was used to gather the
number of graduate students at each institution. The three IPEDS data files were merged on their
shared unique identifier. Using the contract command in Stata, the total number of graduate
students in each CBSA was obtained; the total number of faculty per CBSA was also obtained in
this manner.

70

Figure 5. Sci-Hub Download Requests by CBSA
This figure shows Sci-Hub download requests overlaid on a U.S. map divided by CBSAs.

Variables
Dependent Variable
The dependent variable in Q2 and Q3, the number of Sci-Hub download requests, was
determined by the number of article download requests made within a CBSA. The Sci-Hub
dataset provides the geographic coordinates of the nearest town or city of each article download
request. Using the opencagegeo command (Zeigermann, n.d.) in Stata, the coordinates of the
download request underwent reverse geocoding through OpenCage Geocoder (OpenCage Data,
n.d.) to obtain an address. Reverse geocoding takes the latitude and longitude of a point and
translates them into a readable address. The 2015 HUD USPS ZIP Code Crosswalk file (U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, n.d.) is a table containing the ZIP codes within
each CBSA. The resultant ZIP code after reverse geocoding was matched against the HUD
Crosswalk file to obtain the CBSA. Using the contract command in Stata, the total number of

71

Sci-Hub requests per CBSA was tallied; this process counted the number of Sci-Hub download
request entries for each CBSA code to create a total number per CBSA.
The HUD Crosswalk file uses a slightly different list of CBSAs than IPEDS, breaking up
larger metropolitan areas into smaller subsections. This difference resulted in 0 requests for large
cities like New York City, Los Angeles, and Washington; a manual examination of the data was
performed to join the divided sections together to match the CBSAs in the IPEDS and Census
data. This allowed for including major metropolises, which have already been shown to have
large numbers of Sci-Hub download requests (Bohannon, 2016b). The distribution of Sci-Hub
download requests is extremely right-skewed, with the mean of nearly 6000 and a median of
only 83. A log base-2 transformation was performed to generate a more normal distribution. The
resultant mean for the transformed number of Sci-Hub download requests in a CBSA 7.83, with
a minimum of 2.81 and a maximum of 17.16 (see Table 4).

72

Table 4. Q2 and Q3 Variable Definitions and Descriptive Statistics, 508 Observations

Variable
Dependent Variable
log2(Sci-Hub
Requests)
Independent Variables
log2(Population 25+)
log2(PctAdv Degree)

Mean

Min

Max

STD

Measurement

7.23

2.81

17.16

2.75

Log base-2 transformation of Sci-Hub requests within CBSA

17.23
3.15

15.17
1.67

23.73
4.91

1.59
0.58

log2(Population 25+ Faculty)
log2(PctAdv DegreeFaculty)
log2(Graduate
Students)
log2(HEI)

13.68

10.48

21.01

1.94

3.05

1.38

4.65

0.58

11.16

0

17.84

2.69

Log base-2 transformation of total population age 25 and older within CBSA
Log base-2 transformation of percentage of population age 25 and older with
an advanced degree within CBSA
Log base-2 transformation of total population age 25 and older minus total
faculty within CBSA
Log base-2 transformation of percentage of population age 25 and older with
an advanced degree minus total faculty within CBSA
Log base-2 transformation of total number of graduate students within CBSA

2.45

0

8.18

1.63

Log base-2 transformation of total weighted higher education institutions in
CBSA; weights: Associate’s *1, Bachelor’s *2, Master’s*3, Doctorate*4

73

Independent Variables
Sci-Hub download requests are made by individuals. Those most likely to use the
academic literature contained within Sci-Hub are members of the higher education community.
Secondly, the technical nature of academic literature suggests the need for advanced subject
knowledge to understand the content. To better understand who these people are, this study
examined the populations based on the size of the population, the proportion of the population
with an advanced degree, how many faculty and graduate students are in the area, and the
number and type of higher education institutions in the area.
Using the ACS from the U.S. Census Bureau, the population over 25 in a CBSA was
used as the base population who could make Sci-Hub download requests. While the minimum
requirement to qualify as a CBSA is a population center of 10,000 people and 228 CBSAs have
fewer than 100,000 residents over 25 years of age, some CBSAs like those representing large
cities like New York City and Los Angeles are vastly bigger, with populations of 13,918,552 and
8,999,070 respectively. As a result, the distribution for populations is highly right-skewed. The
skewedness of the population distribution required a log base-2 transformation to provide a more
normal distribution. The resultant mean of the transformed population over 25 is 17.23, with a
minimum of 15.17 and a maximum of 23.73 (see Table 4).
As stated above, the technical nature of academic literature tends to require a deeper level
of domain knowledge. This type of domain knowledge is frequently conferred with the
acquisition of an advanced degree, such as a Master’s degree or doctorate. The total population
within a CBSA with an advanced degree, defined in the ACS as having a graduate or
professional degree, was divided by the total population to generate a percentage of the
population with an advanced degree. The distribution of these percentages is slightly right-

74

skewed with 315 CBSAs having less than 10% of the population with an advanced degree, but 3
areas having more than 25%. A log base-2 transformation provided a more normal distribution.
The resultant mean of the transformed percentage of the population over 25 with an advanced
degree is 3.15, with a minimum of 1.67 and a maximum of 4.91 (see Table 4).
Faculty, by definition, are possessors of advanced degrees. The total number of faculty in
a CBSA, as determined by the IPEDS Institutional Characteristics File and the Employees by
Assigned Position File, were subtracted from the ACS population over 25 with an advanced
degree. This new total was divided by the total population over 25 to generate the percentage of
the population with an advanced degree outside of academia. Based on assertions from
publishers (McNutt, 2016), faculty should have access to the academic literature they need
through their institutional licenses, this new figure helps to understand how non-academics are
using Sci-Hub. As with the percentage of the population with an advanced degree, the percentage
of the population with an advanced degree not including faculty is slightly right-skewed. A log
base-2 transformation provided a more normal distribution. The resultant mean of the
transformed population over 25 minus faculty is 13.68, with a minimum of 10.48 and a
maximum of 21.01 (see Table 4).
To better account for how the presence of HEIs are related to Sci-Hub download requests
in a region, a weighted total of HEIs was assigned to each CBSA. HEIs are divided into four
categories based on the primary degree conferred: Associate, Baccalaureate, Master, and
Doctorate (see Appendix A). Associate degree granting institutions, or community colleges, were
assigned a multiplier of one; Baccalaureate degree granting institutions, typically liberal arts and
comprehensive colleges, were assigned a multiplier of two; Master degree granting institutions
were assigned a multiplier of three; Doctoral degree granting institutions, or R1, R2, and R3

75

universities, were assigned a multiplier of four. The total number of each type of institution was
weighted by their multiplier and totaled to generate an HEI variable.
HEI = (Associate*1) + (Baccalaureate*2) + (Master*3) + (Doctorate*4)
The weighted values reflect the differences in resource expenditures by institution type.
While the differences in library resource expenditures does not break down where research
universities outspend, on average, community colleges at 4:1 ratio, resource expenditures also
vary by FTE enrollment. (Phan, Hardesty, & Hug, 2014). The formula used here was created as
an estimate to account for the differences between institution types. The HEIs are highly rightskewed with 24 CBSAs having a score of zero and 292 having a score of 5 or less; 5 CBSAs
have a score of more than 100. A log base-2 transformation was required to achieve a more
normal distribution. The resultant mean of the transformed HEI variable is 2.45, with a minimum
of 0 and a maximum of 8.18 (see Table 4).
As previously stated, graduate students are also likely users of academic literature to
write papers and perform research (Abbott, 2016). Some graduate students may already have an
advanced degree; however, many graduate students working on their first Master’s degree or
going directly into a doctoral program will not have an advanced degree. With this variation, a
simple subtraction from the total population with an advanced degree would not work. The total
number of graduate students in a CBSA, as determined by the IPEDS Institutional
Characteristics File and the Fall Enrollment File, was generated using the Stata contract
command. The distribution of graduate students is highly right-skewed with 116 CBSAs having
zero graduate students and 254 having fewer than 1500; 31 CBSAs have more than 100,000
graduate students. A log base-2 transformation was required to achieve a more normal

76

distribution. The resultant mean of the transformed total number of graduate students is 11.16,
with a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 17.84 (see Table 4).
Interaction Effects and Collinearity
The correlation matrices (3.5, 3.6) show the correlation between the dependent variables
for Q2 and Q3, respectively. The high significance level of the correlations is likely, in part, due
to the large sample size. However, the high levels of correlation required testing to determine
multicollinearity. A higher density of HEIs in highly populated areas is expected as research
institutions are frequently located in cities. Similarly, CBSAs with higher HEI scores are also
likely to have more graduate students, especially when accounting for the institution types with
the highest weights, Master’s and Doctoral granting institutions, are also the institutions which
have nearly all of the graduate students. Stata was used to determine the variance inflation factor
(VIF); no VIF value greater than 10 was found, so there is likely no problem with
multicollinearity (Acock, 2014).

77

Table 5. Q2 and Q2.1 Correlation Matrix

Log2(Sci-Hub
Requests)
Log2(Population 25+)
Log2(PctAdv Degree)
Log2(Graduate
Students)
Log2(HEI)

Log2(Sci-Hub
Requests)
1

Log2(Population
25+)

Log2(PctAdv
Degree)

Log2(Graduate
Students)

0.81***
0.58***
0.68***

1
0.40***
0.65***

1
0.55***

1

0.78***

0.83***

0.50***

0.73***

Log2(HEI)

1

Table 6. Q3 and Q3.1 Correlation Matrix

Log2(Sci-Hub Requests)
Log2(Population 25+)
Log2(PctAdv
DegreeFaculty)
Log2(Graduate Students)
Log2(HEI)

Log2(Sci-Hub
Requests)
1
0.81***
0.60***

Log2(Population
25+)

Log2(PctAdv DegreeFaculty)

1
0.44***

1

0.68***
0.78***

0.65***
0.83***

0.52***
0.50***

78

Log2(Graduate
Students)

1
0.73***

Log2(HEI)

1

3.3

DATA ANALYSIS

To address the questions outlined at the beginning of this chapter, with the exception of
Q1.1, this study used multiple regression (MR). MR allows for multiple independent variables to
be incorporated into an equation as a way of understanding the relationships between the
variables. The increased number of variables allows for greater explanation of the dependent
variable and reduces the possibility of distorting influences of other independent variables
(Lewis-Beck, 1980). MR allows for the control of many factors that affect the dependent variable
simultaneously, which can be important when relying on nonexperimental data (Wooldridge,
2013), such as the datasets in this study. Specifically, the MR in this study relied on ordinary
least squares (OLS) to estimate the model parameters. In MR, OLS regression coefficients
“minimize the sum of squared deviations between the model implied scores […] and the
observed scores” (Kelley & Maxwell, 2010, p. 286), meaning that the model provides the best fit
line between observed values and can be used to predict where other values would fall.
The value of this method is that, when done properly, the relationship between the
dependent variable and any one independent variable can be examined by holding the remaining
independent variables constant. For example, the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub
download requests in a region and the percentage of the population in the region with advanced
degrees could be examined by holding the other predictor variables constant.
Variable selection for Question 1 used an exploratory technique described by Kelley and
Maxwell (2010). This method was chosen because there was a primary independent variable,
academic journal expenditures, and the subsequent independent variables were added to increase
the explanatory value of the model. Academic journal expenditures were examined to explore the
belief that Sci-Hub requests in the United States are done primarily for convenience instead of
79

need (Bohannon, 2016b; McNutt, 2016). Convenience here is understood through Zipf’s
Principle of Least Effort (1949); while interlibrary loan may be available to some Sci-Hub users
if they are associated with a higher education institution, the delays caused by having to request
articles in this way may violate the Principle of Least Effort. Each predictor variable is related to
either the perceived access to academic literature (based on journal expenditures) or the
perceived need for access to academic literature (based on the size of population of graduate
students and faculty, the amount of research conducted, and the presence of a medical school or
affiliated hospital). The additional predictors were added one at a time to the basic model to
ascertain the improvement of the model with the additional variables; variables accounting for
interaction effects were added as needed.
Similarly, Questions 2 and 3 looked at the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub
download requests, population size, and the percentage of the population with advanced degrees.
Those in possession of advanced degrees are potential users of Sci-Hub based on having the
domain knowledge necessary for understanding academic literature, so determining the
relationship between the percentage of advanced degree holders, including and excluding
faculty, in a CBSA provides insight to how Sci-Hub is used. However, unlike the method used in
Question 1, the additional predictors added in Questions 2.1 and 3.1 were added simultaneously
to determine the improvement of the model when these variables were accounted for; for
instance, the number of graduate students and the number and type of higher education
institutions in a region were used as predictors of Sci-Hub usage.
To address Question 1.1, this study employed a simple proportion estimate. Using the
sample size calculator from Australia’s National Statistical Service (n.d.), a sample of 1065 SciHub requests from the 419,934 total download requests in Q1 was used to obtain a confidence

80

level of 95%. Each Sci-Hub download request contains a DOI that links to a specific journal
article. The journal title was extracted from the DOI by performing a search in CrossRef
(Crossref, n.d.). A subsequent search of the Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC) of the
associated institution’s library was performed; a new binary variable that reflected whether that
institution subscribes to that journal was then entered into an Excel file and imported into Stata.
The results helped shed light on the percentage of Sci-Hub download requests that were for
materials that could be accessed through the institutional license of the nearest research
university.

3.4

3.4.1

METHOD OF ANALYSIS

Sci-Hub and Academic Libraries

Q1.

Y = B0 + B1Log2(Journals) + B2Log2(Graduate/Faculty) + B3Log2(Research) +
B4Medical/Hospital + ε

As noted above, multiple regression analysis, specifically OLS, was conducted to
understand the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub download requests and institutional
journal expenditures, size of graduate student and faculty populations, research funding, and the
presence or absence of a medical school or associated hospital. The interrelatedness of the
predictor variables could suggest interaction effects between the predictor variables. Each pair of
predictor variables was multiplied together to create a byproduct. Models consisting of the
independent variable, Sci-Hub requests, the pair of predictor variables, and the byproduct of the
81

predictor variables were run to ascertain if the byproduct was statistically significant. Significant
byproducts were analyzed before creating the final model.
Additional predictor variables were added one at a time to gauge what additional
explanatory value, if any, the predictor provides. Independent variables that added little
explanatory value to the model were dropped. The first independent variable modeled was
academic journal expenditures (Log2(Journals)), as this is the primary relationship described in
the research question. The constant (B0) affords the ability to calculate predicted values. If, as
publishers suggest (Bohannon, 2016b), Sci-Hub requests in the United States are a matter of
convenience, not necessity, the relationship (B1) between journal expenditures and Sci-Hub
download requests (Y) should be very weak.
After exploring the relationship between Sci-Hub download requests and academic
journal expenditures, the additional independent variables were added to the model one at a time.
The

second

variable

added

was

the

number

of

graduate

students

and

faculty

(Log2(Graduate/Faculty)). A larger population of potential users would suggest higher levels of
Sci-Hub usage; although, if journal subscriptions are meeting user needs, the number of users
should not have a strong effect (B2) on the number of Sci-Hub download requests. The amount
of research (Log2(Research)) conducted at an institution, as measured by NIH and NSF grant
funding, was added to the model next. More research suggests a need for more access to
academic literature, which could mean a greater number of Sci-Hub download requests if
researchers’ information needs are not met through journal subscriptions. Lastly, the presence or
absence of a medical school or affiliated hospital Medical/Hospital was added to the model.
Health professionals have unique clinical information needs and the presence or absence of a

82

medical school or affiliated hospital could have additional explanatory value (B 4). The included
variables were then examined for interaction effects by creating cross-products and modeling.
In the final model, a significant relationship between journal expenditures and Sci-Hub
use could provide insight into the convenience versus necessity debate. A negative relationship
would suggest necessity is a determining factor; for two otherwise identical institutions, the
institution that spends less on journals would expect to have more associated Sci-Hub download
requests. Conversely, a positive, significant relationship could suggest convenience as spending
more would appear to not deter people from using Sci-Hub. A positive, significant relationship
between the number of graduate students and faculty and Sci-Hub use could suggest necessity as
a library trying to meet the information needs of more people with the same resources would be
likely to fall short of meeting those needs. Similarly, a positive, significant relationship between
the amount of research funding received and Sci-Hub use would suggest that identical levels of
journal expenditures would not equally suffice two institutions with different levels of research
funding. A positive, significant relationship between the medical school or hospital variable and
Sci-Hub use could suggest that universities with these affiliations are unable to meet both the
academic and clinical information needs of their patrons. However, many universities are located
in urban areas with hospitals, regardless of if those hospitals are associated with the university; a
negative relationship could suggest that independent hospitals have greater unmet information
needs than their counterparts and may be using Sci-Hub to meet those needs. Lastly, the presence
of an interaction effect would suggest that how these variables work in concert is more important
than how they operate individually.
After the final OLS model was completed, a further examination was performed using a
proportion estimate. By limiting the Sci-Hub requests to those in proximity to IRIs, this study

83

determined the percentage of requested documents that were available through the institutions’
licenses or if these were for journals outside the collection.

3.4.2

Sci-Hub and Population

Q2.
Q2.1

Y = B0 + B1Log2(Pop 25+) + B2Log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree) + ε

Y = B0 + B1Log2(Pop 25+) + B2Log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree) + B3Log2(Graduate
Students) + B4Log2(HEI) + ε

Q3.
Q3.1

Y = B0 + B1Log2(Pop 25+) + B2Log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty) + ε
Y = B0 + B1Log2(Pop 25+) + B2Log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty) +
B3Log2(Graduate Students) + B4Log2(HEI) + ε

Question 2 examined the relationship between the percentage of residents in a CBSA
with an advanced degree and the number of Sci-Hub requests (Y). The total population
(Log2(Pop 25+)) was included to account for the size of the potential user base; the more people
in a CBSA, the more potential Sci-Hub users. The coefficient B1 demonstrates the magnitude of
that relationship. The percentage of residents with an advanced degree (Log 2(Pct Pop 25+ w/
Adv Degree)) was included as the primary relationship that was being explored. A larger,
positive coefficient (B2) would suggest that a more educated populace is related with more SciHub download requests. The constant (B0) provides the ability to calculate predicted variables.
Question 2.1 examined the same relationship as Q2, but added additional independent
variables to explore how higher education changed the relationship. Graduate students use
academic literature in their classwork and research, so accounting for how many graduate
students are in a CBSA (Log2(Graduate Students)) provided greater explanatory value.
84

Additionally, the number and type of higher education institutions in a CBSA (Log 2(HEI))
provide additional explanatory value. Positive coefficients for these additional variables (B 3, B4)
would suggest that Sci-Hub download requests have a relationship with the higher education
community.
The method of analysis for Q3/3.1 was identical to Q2/2.1, with the exception of
subtracting the number of faculty in a CBSA from the population over 25 prior to determining
the percentage. If faculty are accessing the information they need through their institutions, the
relationships in Q2/2.1 and Q3/3.1 should mirror each other.
In this part of the study, a positive, significant relationship between population size and
Sci-Hub use is expected; with all other predictors accounted for, a larger number of people
provides more potential Sci-Hub users. A positive, significant relationship between the
percentage of the population with an advanced degree and Sci-Hub use could suggest necessity,
especially in the models accounting for graduate students and higher education institutions. This
finding would suggest that those outside of higher education may be using Sci-Hub to meet their
information needs. A positive, significant relationship for this variable when not accounting for
higher education institutions and graduate students that changes to negative, or even ceases to be
significant, could suggest that most Sci-Hub users come from higher education and the problems
of access are primarily associated with colleges and universities.

3.5

STUDY LIMITATIONS

A general limitation of this study was the nature of MR. MR cannot infer causality when
the research design is not experimental (Kelley & Maxwell, 2010); as all of the data sources
85

stemmed from existing data sources, this study could only demonstrate that there were
relationships between the number of Sci-Hub download requests and any of the independent
variables examined. While, the addition of multiple regressors thought to be correlated with the
independent variable could increase the explanatory effect of the model, there was no way to
control for all potential influencers (Kelley & Maxwell, 2010).
OLS depends on four statistical assumptions: errors have a normal distribution,
homogeneity across all regressor values (homoscedasticity), observations are independent of
each other, and the relation between the regressors is linear (Kelley & Maxwell, 2010). Despite
the transformations performed on the variables to achieve a more normal distribution, none of
the distributions is perfectly normal.
Beyond the basic limitations of the method of analysis, each set of research questions in
the study has limitations that are specific to it. In the following sections, the specific limitations
of each set of research questions are examined.

3.5.1

Sci-Hub and Academic Libraries

The model in Q1 made assumptions about the Sci-Hub download request, specifically
that the person who made that request was associated with the nearest R1 or R2 institution.
However, not all research is performed at R1 & R2 institutions; Sci-Hub requests associated with
one of these institutions could also have come from someone at a non-R1 or R2 institution or
someone not in higher education at all.
Limiting Sci-Hub requests to within 10 miles of isolated institutions removed many of
the largest research institutions from the study, including nearly 2/3 of all Sci-Hub requests in the
U.S. The rationale for this decision was an attempt at avoiding areas such as Pittsburgh where a
86

Sci-Hub request could reasonably have been associated with the University of Pittsburgh,
Carnegie Mellon University, or Duquesne University. However, the sharp drop in the sample
size of Sci-Hub download requests should be noted.
Another limitation is the sources for the variable representing research activity. While
NIH and NSF are two of the largest funders of research, they are not the only funders and not all
research is externally funded. In addition to NIH and NSF, the federal government also funds
research through other departments; state governments also supply some external funding. Also,
some research funding comes from private non-profit organizations and corporations. None of
these other funding sources were included in this study.
Lastly, the 10-mile radius for Sci-Hub download requests provided another limitation.
Students in online programs may not live near their institutions and students and faculty may live
outside the 10-mile radius used for this study.

3.5.2

Sci-Hub and Population

Using CBSAs as the geographic region presented a limitation since they do not cover the
entirety of the United States. Additionally, 3720 of the Sci-Hub download requests coordinates
did not return a zip code during the reverse geocoding procedure. The result of these two issues
was a total number of included Sci-Hub download requests of 1,100,159, compared to the initial
1,150,963 in the initial dataset. These 50,000 download requests were not accounted for in the
study.
Another limitation is how graduate students are counted. Graduate students with an
advanced degree may be double counted. For example, a graduate student with a Master’s degree
who then enrolled in a doctoral program would be counted in the graduate student variable and
87

the percentage of the population with an advanced degree. As there was no way to ascertain the
difference, the assumption was made that they are separate; however, that is not the case for
some students.

88

4.0

RESULTS

This chapter begins the discussion of the multiple regression models that were conducted
to answer the research questions posed in this study. The model creation process, interaction
effect, and final model for Question 1 are examined first. Next is Question 1.1 which checks a
sample of the Sci-Hub download requests to see if the nearby research institutions subscribe to
the journal where the article is published. This is followed by an examination of the findings for
Questions 2 and 3 and their sub-questions regarding Sci-Hub use and regional characteristics.

4.1

QUESTION 1

How do the academic journal expenditures of research institutions relate to the number
of Sci-Hub article requests within a 10-mile radius of the institution?

4.1.1

Model Building and Variable Reduction

In building towards the final model, a series of multiple regressions were run. First each
of the variables – journal expenditures, the size of the graduate student and faculty population,
the amount of research funding, and the presence of a medical school or hospital – were run one

89

by one as the sole predictor in a regression model (Appendix C.1, Models A, B, C, D). In each of
these models, the predictor variable had a significant relationship with Sci-Hub use.
Next each predictor variable was added to the model one by one in building toward the
final model. In the modeling journal expenditures on its own had a significant relationship with
Sci-Hub usage (Table 7, Model A; Appendix C.1, Model A). When the next model was run
adding the size of the graduate student and faculty population, journal expenditures was no
longer significant, but the size of the graduate student and faculty population was significant
(Table 7, Model B; Appendix C.1, Model E). Next, research funding was added to the model
(Table 7, Model C; Appendix C.1, Model F). In this model, research funding was significant,
while journal expenditures and the size of the graduate student and faculty population were not.
Lastly, the binary variable that represents the presence or absence of a medical school or hospital
at an institution was added to the model (Appendix C.1, Model G). While research funding
continued to be significant, the addition of the binary variable only added one tenth of one
percent to the variance of Sci-Hub download requests explained by the previous model. Due to
the low explanatory value of the medical school or hospital variable, it was dropped from the
model. The predictor variables used in the final main effects model are journal expenditures, the
size of the graduate student and faculty population, and the amount of research funding received
(Table 7, Model C; Appendix C.1, Model F).

90

4.1.1.1 Final Model with Main Effects
Table 7. Coefficients for Q1 Main Effects Regression Models

log2(Journals)
log2(Grad/Faculty)
log2(Research)
Intercept
R2
N

Model A
0.962 ***

-12.202 **
0.152
136

Model B
0.519
0.703*
-11.357**
0.184
136

Model C
0.123
0.544
0.242**
-6.091
0.231
135

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.1 for full results

Before examining the final main effects model, a brief explanation of the models building
up to it can help provide a better understanding of the relationships between the predictor
variables and Sci-Hub use. The model with only journal expenditures as a predictor (Table 7,
Model A; Appendix C.1, Model A) shows a positive, significant relationship between journal
expenditures and Sci-Hub use. This model provides an R2 of .152, meaning that this model
accounts for approximately 15% of the variation in Sci-Hub use. Journal expenditures were
selected as the first predictor variable to examine as they provide the most direct method
available for determining the academic literature available to a campus community. In this
model, an institution with the mean log2 journal expenditures (22.31) would have an expected
9.26 log2 Sci-Hub download requests; in raw numbers this means that for an institution with
$5,214,473 in yearly journal expenditures, we would expect 612 Sci-Hub download requests
over the six-month period that Sci-Hub data is available for. However, for an isolated research
institution one standard deviation above the mean for journal expenditures, $10,499,061, there
are an expected 1199 Sci-Hub download requests.
The number of graduate students and faculty at an institution was chosen as the second
predictor variable as it accounts for the number of likely Sci-Hub users. Adding it to the model
91

with only journal expenditures as a predictor (Table 7, Model B; Appendix C.1, Model E)
increases the variance accounted for by approximately 3%, to 18.4%. For this new model,
holding yearly journal expenditures constant at their mean, a research university with the mean
number of graduate students and faculty, 7367, would expect to have 612 Sci-Hub download
requests. An isolated research institution with a graduate student and faculty population of
13,691, one standard deviation above the mean, spending the same amount on journal
expenditures would expect to have 945 Sci-Hub download requests.
Research funding from NIH and NSF was added to the previous model to account for the
perceived need for access to academic literature to perform the literature reviews vital to
research. In this final model using only the main effects (Table 7, Model C; Appendix C.1,
Model F), only the log2 transformation of research funding is significant; while the relationships
between journal expenditures and the size of the graduate student and faculty population are
positive, they are not significant. This model explains 23.1% of the variance in Sci-Hub
download requests, a nearly 5% increase from the previous model. The positive relationship
between research funding and the number of Sci-Hub download requests suggests that
institutions that conduct more research can expect to have more Sci-Hub download requests
emanating from near their campus.
To better illustrate the relationship between research funding and Sci-Hub download
requests, it is helpful to compare the expected numbers of Sci-Hub download requests at varying
levels of research funding. Holding yearly journal expenditures and the size of the graduate
student and faculty populations at their respective means, an institution with the mean research
funding level, $9,537,039, would expect to have 612 Sci-Hub download requests. For an
institution with research funding one standard deviation above the mean, $81,174,204, there are

92

an expected 1028 Sci-Hub download requests. In this example, while research funding rises
approximately 8.5 times, the number of Sci-Hub download requests only doubles. As this model
only accounts for approximately 23% of the variance in Sci-Hub usage near isolated research
institutions, there are clearly additional factors beyond the predictor variables in this model that
are contributing to Sci-Hub use.

4.1.2

Interaction

While the final main effects model provides some insight into the relationship between
higher education institutions and nearby Sci-Hub download requests, there is a need to examine
the relationships further to test for multicollinearity and interaction effects. VIF tests were
conducted on the final model of main effects and no multicollinearity was found.
As academic literature is heavily used by graduate students and faculty, especially as part
of the research process, there were possibilities of interactions between any and all of the
predictors. To further explore the relationship between the predictor variables and Sci-Hub use, a
series of interaction effects were tested (Appendix C.1, Models H, I, J); each interaction effect
was found to be significant on its own. Since each interaction effect model is significant,
regression models were created that included one interaction effect along with the three predictor
variables (Appendix C.1, Models K, L, M). The next step was to test a model that included all
three interactions (Appendix C.1, Model N); none of the interaction effects variables were
significant in this model. The next step was to explore if there was a model where more than one
interaction effect was significant, so a series of pair-wise combinations were run (Appendix C.1,
Models O, P, Q); none of these models had significant interaction effects. The interaction model
chosen was the interaction between the size of the graduate student and faculty population and
93

research funding; this model accounts for the greatest variance of Sci-Hub download requests of
all models with a significant interaction, 27%, and the variance accounted for is higher than the
model without an interaction.

4.1.3

Final Model with Interaction

Table 8. Coefficients for Q1 Main Effects Regression Models

Model A
log2(Journals)
0.14
log2(Grad/Faculty)
-3.789*
log2(Research)
-2.100*
Grad/Faculty X Research
0.184**
Intercept
48.279*
R2
0.270
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.1, Model M for full results

The final model selected uses the interaction between the size of the graduate student and
faculty population and research funding (Table 8, Model A; Appendix C.1, Model M). While
examining the main effects provides some understanding of how institutional characteristics are
related to the number of Sci-Hub download requests near that institution, an exploration of the
interaction between research funding and the size of the graduate student and faculty population
provides more insight. In Figure 6, the blue line represents isolated research institutions at the
10th percentile of graduate student and faculty population size, the orange line represents
institutions at the mean population size, and the gray line represents institutions at the 90 th
percentile of size. Holding institutions at the mean for journal expenditures, isolated research
institutions at 10th percentile of research funding are at the far left, while institutions at the 90th
percentile are on the far right. The number of Sci-Hub download requests are not very different

94

for institutions with low levels of research funding, regardless of the size of their graduate
student and faculty populations. However, for institutions with high levels of research funding,
the number of Sci-Hub download requests vary greatly based on the number of graduate students
and faculty at that institution.

Figure 6. Interaction of Graduate Student/Faculty Population Size and Research Funding on Sci-Hub Use
This figure illustrates the relationship between Sci-Hub use and research funding when comparing universities at the
10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of graduate student and faculty population size.

The interaction effect is the key predictor of Sci-Hub download requests in this model.
The sharp differences in the slopes between isolated research institutions with a small number of
graduate students and faculty compared to their counterparts at the high end of that spectrum
means that the relationship between Sci-Hub use and higher education institutions differs when
these predictor variables are understood together. Table 9 provides a comparison of expected
Sci-Hub download requests for institutions at the 10th and 90th percentiles of graduate student
95

and faculty population size and research funding, along with institutions at mean levels for these
predictors, while holding journal expenditures at their mean level.

Table 9. Expected Sci-Hub Download Requests by Research Level and Graduate Student/Faculty
Population Size

Low Grad/Faculty
Med Grad/Faculty
High Grad/Faculty

Low Research
290
226
181

High Research
379
1017
2433

For institutions with small populations of graduate students and faculty, the difference in
expected Sci-Hub download requests is relatively small even when looking at research funding at
the 10th and 90th percentiles where there are less than 100 more Sci-Hub download requests for
the high research institutions. However, for institutions with the mean number of graduate
students and faculty, there is an expected difference of nearly 800 Sci-Hub download requests
between low research and high research institutions. That difference grows even greater when
looking at institutions in the 90th percentile of graduate student and faculty population size,
where there is an expected difference of over 2200 Sci-Hub download requests compared to their
counterparts at the 10th percentile in size.
The University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB) provide a good example of this interaction effect. These universities received nearly
identical amounts of funding from NIH and NSF, $242 million and $232 million respectively,
but the University of Minnesota had 23,389 graduate students and faculty compared to 10,880 at
the UAB. There were 2,463 Sci-Hub download requests near the University of Minnesota
campus compared to 1,271 near the Birmingham campus. For universities at the lower end of
funding from NIH and NSF, Central Michigan University and Baylor University provide a good
96

example. Central Michigan received $1.475 million in research funding, compared to Baylor’s
$1.124; Central Michigan had 9,767 graduate students and faculty while Baylor had 4,226.
Central Michigan had 83 Sci-Hub requests near their campus while Baylor had 93. Central
Michigan and UAB also provide a good example of this interaction effect as they have
approximately the same number of graduate students and faculty, but vastly different levels of
research funding and Sci-Hub downloads near their respective campuses.
Based on this interaction it appears that institutions with low levels of research funding
may have lower levels of information needs regardless of the number of graduate students and
faculty; without a great need for access to academic literature, there may be less of an impetus to
use Sci-Hub. Conversely, with high levels of research funding, there is a greater need for access
to academic literature, especially for institutions with a large number of graduate students and
faculty. For institutions with small populations of graduate students and faculty, there are fewer
potential Sci-Hub users. Additionally, these institutions with smaller populations may have fewer
disciplines; a smaller number of disciplines may require a smaller number of journal
subscriptions needed to meet users’ information needs. However, for institutions with high levels
of research funding and large graduate student and faculty populations, there are both more
potential Sci-Hub users and more potential disciplines to cover. The journal expenditures for
these large, research-intensive universities likely have to cover a wider variety of disciplines and
this breadth may come at the expense of depth of coverage. This likely inability to provide the
needed depth of coverage for some, or all, disciplines could explain why these institutions are
related to higher Sci-Hub use than their peers with less research funding and fewer graduate
students and faculty.

97

4.2

QUESTION 1.1

For Sci-Hub article requests within a 10-mile radius of a research institution, are the requests
for articles that appear in journals for which the institution has a subscription?
A random sample of 1065 records from the 419,934 total Sci-Hub download requests
within 10 miles of an isolated research institution was created to answer the research question.
This sample size provided a 95% margin of error. Each of the DOIs in the sample was searched
within CrossRef (Crossref, n.d.) to obtain the journal title for the article. These journal titles were
then checked against the library holdings of the isolated research institution associated with that
download request. The result is a binary variable for whether that journal was in the library’s
collection, meaning that members of that campus community would have access to the article in
question.
During the course of checking the DOIs of Sci-Hub download requests against library
holdings, two problems were encountered. The first issue is that 7 DOIs in the sampled Sci-Hub
data did resolve to a record. The second issue is that 4 universities (Louisiana State University,
Mississippi State University, Northern Illinois University, and Texas A&M University) do not
allow outside users to access their holdings; this affected 14 records. 21 additional records were
randomly selected and added to the sample data to get to the total of 1065 records.

Table 10. Percentage of Sci-Hub Requests for Journals with Subscriptions by Nearest IRI

Frequency
No Subscription
96
Subscription
969

98

Percent
9.01
90.99

As shown in Table 10, of the sample of Sci-Hub download requests, 969 of the 1065
records were for items in the holdings of the nearest isolated research institution. This tabulation
shows that nearly 91% of Sci-Hub download requests near these 136 research institutions were
for articles in the library’s collection. This figure is predictive for the nearly 420,000 Sci-Hub
download requests near isolated research institutions. While this high percentage suggests
convenience plays a large role in Sci-Hub use near universities, there is no way to demonstrate
conclusively that these download requests were from members of the campus communities.
Questions 2 and 3 can help provide insight into Sci-Hub use beyond university campuses.

4.3

QUESTION 2

What is the relationship between the percentage of residents over 25 with an advanced degree in
a core-based statistical area (CBSA) and the number of Sci-Hub requests?

Table 11. Q2 Regression Model and Coefficients, N=508

Model A
1.191***
1.431***
-17.804***
0.732

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.2 for full results

Questions 2 and 3, and their sub-questions, expand the geographic areas examined from
the 10-mile radii around isolated research institutions to the 508 CBSAs across the United States.
Prior to running the regression model, a VIF test was run and found no multicollinearity.
Running the regression model to examine the relationship between the number of Sci-Hub
download requests within a CBSA and the population size and educational attainment of that
99

population shows positive, significant relationships between both predictor variables (Table 11;
Appendix C.2). This means that, when holding the percentage of a CBSA’s population with an
advanced degree constant, there is an expected increase in Sci-Hub use with larger populations.
Similarly, holding population size constant, there is an expected increase in Sci-Hub use with a
higher percentage of the population holding advanced degrees. Both of these relationships make
sense when examining them; the former says that when there are more people, there tend to be
more Sci-Hub download requests, while the latter says that more Sci-Hub use is expected when
there are more people with advanced degrees, the target audience for academic literature.
Together, these two predictor variables account for over 73% of the variance in Sci-Hub
download requests in the United States.
The mean CBSA population is log2(17.23) or approximately 153,800 people; for CBSAs
with the mean population, there are an expected 150 Sci-Hub download requests when that
CBSA also has the mean percent of its population with an advanced degree, 8.87%. However,
for a CBSA of the same size, but with a percentage of advanced degree attainment one standard
deviation above the mean, 13.31%, there are an expected 268 Sci-Hub download requests. This
increase of less than 4.5% in the percentage of the population with an advanced degree raises the
number of Sci-Hub download requests from one for every 1025 people to one for every 574
people. The results suggest that people with advanced degrees may have greater needs for access
to academic literature than their counterparts without advanced degrees and these information
needs may not being met through traditional measures, so they turn to Sci-Hub instead.

100

4.4

QUESTION 2.1

How does the number and type of higher education institutions, and the total number of graduate
students within a CBSA change the above relationship?

Table 12. Q2.1 Regression Model and Coefficients, N=368

Model A
0.863***
1.343***
0.106*
0.258
-13.573***
0.722

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree)
log2(Graduate Students)
log2(HEI)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.3 for full results

While the previous model helps to explain the relationship between Sci-Hub download
requests and the size and educational attainment of the population, it does not account for the
presence of higher education institutions, the primary producers and consumers of academic
literature. While this regression model reduces the number of CBSAs from 508 to 368 as some
regions do not have higher education institutions or graduate students, it provides needed
additional insight on how the presence of higher education changes the relationship between
educational attainment and Sci-Hub use. Prior to running the regression model, a VIF test was
run and found no multicollinearity.
The relationship between all four predictor variables and Sci-Hub use is positive.
However, unlike the other three predictor variables, the variable representing the number and
type of higher education institutions is not significant (Table 12; Appendix C.3). For the three
significant predictors, the positive relationship makes sense logically and a higher level of any of
these predictors is associated with more Sci-Hub download requests in the region. The positive

101

relationships for population size and percentage of population with an advanced degree were
explained in the Question 2 section; the positive relationship between the number of graduate
students in a CBSA and the number of Sci-Hub download requests makes sense as graduate
students are users of academic literature. This model accounts for over 72% of the variance in
Sci-Hub download requests in CBSAs with higher education institutions and graduate students.
While holding all other predictors at their respective means, a CBSA with a total number
of graduate students one standard deviation above the mean, an increase from 2290 to 14,737
students, would have an expected 197 Sci-Hub download requests compared to the 162 when all
predictors are held to their respective means. In this example, an increase of over 12,000 students
is only associated with 35 more Sci-Hub download requests. This suggests that while graduate
students do play a role in Sci-Hub use, they are not the primary drivers.
Holding population size, the higher education institution variable, and the number of
graduate students at their respective means (153,805 people, 5.47, 2290 graduate students), there
are an expected 162 Sci-Hub download requests for a region with the mean percentage of the
population with an advanced degree. For CBSAs with the percentage of the population with an
advanced degree one standard deviation above the mean, from 8.87% to 13.31%, there are an
expected 279 Sci-Hub download requests. This 4.4 percentage point increase in the percentage of
the population with an advanced degree is associated with more than a 50% increase in Sci-Hub
use. This supports the idea that people outside of higher education play an important role in SciHub use.
A regression model of the 140 CBSAs without graduate students (Table 13; Appendix
C.6) provides an opportunity to examine the relationship between Sci-Hub use, population size,
and advanced degree holders in regions that do not have the large higher education institutions

102

that graduate students are part of. In this model, the population size and the percent of the
population with advanced degrees continue to have significant relationships with the number of
Sci-Hub download requests. This model accounts for 32% of the variance in Sci-Hub use; the
positive relationships reinforces the idea that the presence of a highly educated populace is a
driver of Sci-Hub use. The lower variance accounted for suggests other factors in addition to
population size and the percentage of the population with an advanced degree are driving SciHub use in these regions. Examining these 140 CBSAs provides a method for confirming the
relationships between Sci-Hub use and population size and the percentage of the population with
an advanced degree for areas without the academic research associated with graduate students.

Table 13. Regression Model and Coefficients for CBSAs without Graduate Students, N=140

Model A
0.932***
0.425*
-11.127***
0.320

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.6 for full results

4.5

QUESTION 3

What is the relationship between the percentage of residents over 25 (minus the total faculty
within the region) with an advanced degree in a CBSA and the number of Sci-Hub requests?

Table 14. Q3 Regression Model and Coefficients, N=508

Model A
1.186***
1.331***
-17.259***
0.719

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty)
Intercept
R2
103

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.4 for full results

The model in Question 3 subtracts the total number of faculty in a CBSA from the
number of people with advanced degrees before calculating the percentage of the population
with an advanced degree. This change allows for better control of the population with an
advanced degree variable to compare with the model in Question 2, providing a mechanism for
narrowing advanced degree holders to those not associated with a higher education institution.
Prior to running the regression model, a VIF test was run and found no multicollinearity. This
model accounts for nearly 72% of the variance in Sci-Hub download requests in CBSAs (Table
14; Appendix C.4).
When holding population size at the mean, 153,800 people aged 25 and over, the
expected number of Sci-Hub download requests is 150 for a CBSA with the mean percentage of
the population with an advanced degree who are not faculty (3.04%). The mean percentage of
residents with an advanced degree is 8.87% when faculty are included and 3.04% when faculty
are removed; for a CBSA with the mean population size and percentage with an advanced
degree, the expected Sci-Hub download requests is 150 regardless of whether faculty are
included or not. For a CBSA with the mean population with a percentage of residents with an
advanced degree who are not faculty one standard deviation above the mean, 12.33%, there are
an expected 257 Sci-Hub download requests.
The total expected Sci-Hub requests for a CBSA with the percentage of residents with an
advanced degree one standard deviation above the mean, 257, is nearly the same as the 268
expected Sci-Hub download requests in a CBSA with advanced educational attainment at one
standard deviation above the mean where faculty have not been subtracted. The difference is that

104

in Question 2, the difference between the mean percentage of residents with advanced degrees
and one standard deviation above that was less than 4.4%; whereas, in the model for Question 3,
the difference is over 9%. This difference suggests that while people who have advanced
degrees, but are not faculty, are using Sci-Hub, faculty are still likely contributing to Sci-Hub
use.

4.6

QUESTION 3.1

How does the number and type of higher education institutions, and the total number of graduate
students within a CBSA change the above relationship?

Table 15. Q3.1 Regression Model and Coefficients, N=368

Model A
0.781***
1.245***
0.143**
0.292*
-12.171***
0.718

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty)
log2(Graduate Students)
log2(HEI)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.5 for full results

The model for Question 3.1 is likely the most complete for examining the relationship
between regional educational attainment and regional Sci-Hub use because it includes graduate
students and the higher education variable while keeping faculty members from being double
counted as both possessors of advanced degrees and being part of higher education institutions.
Prior to running the regression model, a VIF test was run and found no multicollinearity. This

105

model shows a positive, significant relationship for all predictor variables and accounts for
nearly 72% of the variance in the Sci-Hub download requests in the 368 CBSAs with higher
education institutions and graduate students (Table 15; Appendix C.5).
Unlike the model in Question 2.1, the variable representing the number and type of
higher education institutions is significant in this model. HEI scores are the total number of
higher education institutions in a CBSA, weighted by institution type. For example, a community
college has a value of one, while a university has a value of 4. For CBSAs with the mean levels
of the three other predictor variables, a CBSA with a mean HEI score of 2.45 would expect to
have 167 Sci-Hub download requests. For CBSAs with an HEI score of 4.08, one standard
deviation above the mean, there are an expected 232 Sci-Hub download requests. This suggests
that while there are forces beyond higher education that are related to Sci-Hub use, the presence
of colleges and universities also factor into Sci-Hub use.
For CBSAs at the mean level of all predictor variables, there are an expected 167 SciHub download requests. For CBSAs where 12.33% of non-faculty residents have advanced
degrees, one standard deviation above the mean of 3.04%, there are an expected 277 Sci-Hub
download requests. When accounting for faculty, graduate students, and higher education
institutions, the percentage of the population with an advanced degree is still positively and
significantly related to Sci-Hub use; this suggests a need for academic literature beyond campus
communities. For these users, Sci-Hub use may be necessary if they want to retrieve the
information they are seeking.
As in Question 2.1, a regression model of the 140 CBSAs without graduate students was
run to examine the relationship between Sci-Hub use, population size, and the percentage of
residents with an advanced degree in regions that do not have the type of higher education

106

institutions that enroll graduate students. This time faculty have been removed from the residents
with advanced degrees. This model shows that both population size and the percentage of the
population with an advanced degree are both positively and significantly related to Sci-Hub
download requests (Table 16; Appendix C.7). This model accounts for 39% of the variance in
Sci-Hub downloads and further supports that there are drivers of Sci-Hub use beyond the higher
education community. Again, this additional analysis provides a more complete picture of how
Sci-Hub is used in the United States by providing a comparison between regions with the higher
levels of research associated with institutions that have graduate students and regions that do not.
Table 16. Regression Model and Coefficients for CBSAs without Graduate Students, N=140

Model A
1.032***
0.570*
-13.045***
0.390

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.7 for full results

Lastly, as noted above, not all higher education institutions have graduate students. There
are 116 CBSAs without graduate students that have at least one higher education institution. A
regression model of these CBSAs that accounts for the presence of higher education institutions
(Table 17; Appendix C.8) accounts for over 43% of the variance in Sci-Hub use. The mean HEI
score for these 116 CBSAs is 1.66 which is between one community college and either one 4year college or two community colleges. The positive, significant relationship between the HEI
variable and Sci-Hub use shows that even community colleges and 4-year colleges, institutions
without graduate students, are related to Sci-Hub use. As with the rest of the models for
Questions 2 and 3 and their sub-questions, population size and the percentage of the population
with an advanced degree are positive and significant. These relationships suggest that when

107

accounting for population size and smaller, less research-intensive higher education institutions,
the percentage of the population with an advanced degree is still associated with Sci-Hub use.
Table 17. Regression Model and Coefficients for CBSAs without Graduate Students, N=116

Model A
0.952***
0.575**
0.356**
-11.954***
0.433

log2(Pop 25+)
log2(Pct Pop 25+ w/ Adv Degree - Faculty)
log2(HEI)
Intercept
R2
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
See Appendix C.8 for full results

The regression models in this study demonstrate how Sci-Hub download requests relate
to nearby research institutions and their geographic regions more generally. While the sample of
Sci-Hub requests that were checked against the holdings of the nearby research institutions show
that an overwhelming number of requests could have been met using the institution’s library if
the user was a member of that campus community, the regression models suggest a more
complex relationship. The following chapter will synthesize the results from both parts of the
study and how these results relate to previous research, as well as discuss the implications for
research and practice.

108

5.0

CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS

The purpose of this study was to examine Sci-Hub usage in the United States to explore
the validity of publisher claims of convenience over necessity. Scholarly journals serve as the
primary method for disseminating the findings and theories generated by researchers, especially
those at higher education institutions. The current for-profit academic publishing industry limits
access to journals based on subscriptions paid by individuals and institutions or through
purchasing individual articles. These limitations are imposed by creating paywalls to block
unauthorized access to the materials (Estok, 2011). With approximately three-quarters of
academic literature residing behind these paywalls (Khabsa & Giles, 2014), potential readers not
affiliated with an organization that has subscribed to a desired journal can be stymied as they
seek to meet their information needs. Sci-Hub is a repository designed to circumvent paywalls
and offer free copies of academic articles, books, and conference proceedings that might
otherwise be unavailable. Publishers point to site licenses, open access, and interlibrary loan as
alternative mechanisms for accessing academic literature; they contend that, especially in more
developed nations, Sci-Hub use is based on convenience, not necessity (McNutt, 2016).
However, these claims have not been tested.
Convenience, for the purpose of this study, is based on Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort
(1949), which posits that people will naturally choose the path of least resistance or effort that
does not simultaneously create long term problems greater than the issue at hand. Convenience,
109

specifically for information seeking amongst the higher education community, is further broken
down as finding sources that satisfice information needs, ease of access to the information
source, and time spent finding the information (Connaway et al., 2011).
For Sci-Hub use to be based on convenience, the ease of access to the information source
and the timeliness of the immediate delivery must be the driving forces. This means a user would
have access to the article either through institutional subscription or via their library’s
interlibrary loan program, but chooses to use Sci-Hub because the institution’s authentication
system may be perceived to be too cumbersome or the turnaround time for interlibrary loan is
deemed too long. Conversely, necessity would require the user to not be affiliated with an
organization that subscribes to the journal in question and would otherwise be faced with paying
upwards of $40 for each article needed. However, with the pressures to conduct research and
publish (Liebowitz, 2015), circumventing inconveniences such as multi-factor authentication and
interlibrary loan might also be viewed as a necessity. Additionally, for graduate students,
deadlines for papers can eliminate interlibrary loan as an option if the information need arises too
late. For the purposes of this study, convenience is defined as any Sci-Hub download request for
an article that the user could also obtain immediately through an association with an institution
that has a site license; conversely, necessity is defined as any Sci-Hub download request for an
article that would be inaccessible without either a delay or paying a fee directly to the publisher.
In this study, six months of Sci-Hub server logs released in 2016 by Sci-Hub’s creator
(Bohannon & Elbakyan, 2016) were combined with data from the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS) (“The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System,” n.d.),
the National Institutes of Health (NIH, n.d.-a), the National Science Foundation (NSF, n.d.), and
the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (US Census Bureau, n.d.-b) to explore

110

the relationship between Sci-Hub use in the United States and the characteristics of the areas
surrounding the download requests. Specifically, this study examined how Sci-Hub usage, as
measured by the number and location of article download requests, is related to the area
surrounding the download requests. This study was broken down into two parts: 1) how Sci-Hub
download requests are related to the institutional characteristics of research-intensive universities
and 2) how Sci-Hub download requests are related to the population of their geographic location.
In the first part of this study, research-intensive universities were associated with Sci-Hub
download requests within a 10-mile radius of the institution. To prevent any overlaps in
coverage, any qualifying university within 20 miles of another qualifying institution was
removed from the analysis. Multiple regression models were then run to explore the relationship
between the number of Sci-Hub download requests associated with an institution and the
institution’s journal expenditures, the size of the faculty and graduate student population, and
amount of research funding from NIH and NSF. Additionally, interaction effects were tested; the
final model included an interaction between the size of an institution’s faculty and graduate
student population and the amount research funding.
In the second part of the study, Sci-Hub download requests were split up by the corebased statistical areas (CBSAs) used by the U.S. Census Bureau. Multiple regression models
were run to examine the relationship between Sci-Hub use and the size of the CBSA’s
population and the percentage of residents with an advanced degree. This initial model was
refined by adding variables to represent the presence of higher education institutions in the
CBSA. This process was then repeated after subtracting the number of faculty members in a
region from the residents with an advanced degree. This additional analysis provided the ability
to compare the models, and to better account for the presence of higher education institutions.

111

Taken together, these regression models provide the data-driven analysis needed to begin to
examine the debate between convenience and necessity.

5.1

SUMMARY AND SYNTHESIS OF RESULTS

Based on the results of this study, higher education plays a major role in driving Sci-Hub
use in the United States. This same conclusion was reached in past research (Bohannon, 2016b;
Greshake, 2016; Kramer, 2016a). This finding is unsurprising as academic journals are marketed
specifically for campus communities. At the outset of this study, the relationship between journal
expenditures and Sci-Hub use was expected to be the key explanatory variable. The rationale for
this expectation was that institutions with similar numbers of graduate students and faculty and
similar levels of research funding would require similar access to academic literature. Therefore,
institutions with smaller journal expenditures would expect to see more Sci-Hub use nearby than
their otherwise identical peers with greater journal expenditures. However, this study found that
only when journal expenditures were the sole predictor variable was the relationship significant.
In addition, the relationship between journal expenditures and Sci-Hub use was positively
related, not negative as had been expected. In this study, the forces driving Sci-Hub usage proved
to be more complex than this direct correlation. Specifically, the amount of research funding at
an institution was much more important in explaining Sci-Hub use.
In the main effects model for Question 1, the amount of research funding from NIH and
NSF was the only significant predictor. The positive relationship showed that institutions with
higher levels of research funding were associated with higher levels of Sci-Hub use than their
peers with similar levels of journal expenditures and number of graduate students and faculty.
112

Adding the interaction between research funding and the number of graduate students and
faculty provides an even clearer picture of the relationship between Sci-Hub and research
institutions. Specifically, the interaction shows that for universities with a small number of
graduate students and faculty, the difference in expected Sci-Hub use is fairly small when
comparing institutions with low levels of research funding with to those with high levels of
research funding. However, for institutions with a large number of graduate students and faculty,
the amount of research funding received makes a huge difference. For institutions with high
levels of research funding and a large number of graduate students and faculty, there is an
expectation of greater Sci-Hub use than that found at institutions with the same level of research
funding, but a small number of graduate students and faculty. This means that academic libraries
may be able to come close to meeting the needs of a small number of users conducting high
levels of research, but as those populations grow, the library likely cannot keep up with demand
due to the growing number of journal titles needed (Broad, 1988) and escalating subscription
prices (Larivière et al., 2015).
This interaction effect suggests that necessity may be more of a driver of Sci-Hub use
than convenience, especially for institutions with higher levels of research funding and a larger
number of graduate students and faculty. Bohannon’s (2016b) interactive map of the geographic
coordinates of all Sci-Hub download requests shows that many of the requests clustered near
higher education institutions. Specifically, Bohannon cites the high number of downloads from
Columbus, Ohio and East Lansing, Michigan, smaller cities that are the respective homes of
Ohio State University and Michigan State University. His conclusion was that the requests are
likely coming from members of these higher education communities and their information needs
could be met by their respective institutional libraries. In this current study over 90% of the

113

articles requested via Sci-Hub could have been obtained through the nearby university’s license
to the journal if the requestor was a member of the campus community which could support
Bohannon’s conclusion. However, for the isolated research institutions in this study, Ohio State
is in the 90th percentile in research funding and the 95th percentile in size of the graduate student
and faculty populations and Michigan State is in the 75th percentile in research funding and the
90th percentile in the number of graduate students and faculty. The results of this study suggest
that these two institutions are prime examples of the necessity over convenience, as they are both
at the high ends of the predictor variables that constitute the interaction effect, which would
contradict Bohannon’s conclusion that the high number of Sci-Hub download requests near
Columbus and East Lansing supports the convenience argument. Additionally, neither this study
or Bohannon’s analysis can guarantee that these requests came from members of the respective
campus communities, a point that Kramer (2016b) makes regarding her findings about the
percentage of articles related to Utretcht and how many would have been available through the
University of Utretcht’s site license.
The relationship between the amount of research funding at an institution and Sci-Hub
use, especially when accounting for the interaction between research funding and the number of
graduate students and faculty, suggests that institutions cannot adequately supply their users with
the number of journal subscriptions needed to meet all of their needs and users may turn to
alternative methods such as Sci-Hub. Looking at the wider geographic areas where higher
education institutions are located, this study found that for CBSAs with graduate students, both
the number of graduate students and the weighted higher education variable were positively and
significantly related to Sci-Hub use when holding the size of the population and the percentage
of the population with advanced degrees who are not faculty constant. This means that CBSAs

114

that have either more colleges and universities or more graduate students would expect to have
more Sci-Hub use than their otherwise equal counterparts. For the CBSAs without graduate
students that have at least one higher education institution, the higher education institution
predictor variable is positively and significantly related to Sci-Hub use. This means that even the
presence of more community colleges or 4-year colleges is associated with greater Sci-Hub use,
even though these institutions conduct less research. These positive relationships provide
additional evidence that Sci-Hub use is connected with higher education; even at less researchintensive institutions users need literature for which may not have access. While the relationship
between the weighted higher education variable and the number of graduate students in a region
does not directly suggest necessity, Greshake (2016) found the heaviest use times for Sci-Hub
were between 9am and 5pm. Since most paywalls are based on IP addresses, if these download
requests are coming from academics, they would likely only be using Sci-Hub to access journals
their institutions do not subscribe to since using Sci-Hub on campus would create an unnecessary
extra step that runs counter to the Principle of Least Effort. Following the Principle of Least
Effort, researchers on campus would go directly to the desired article in the simplest manner
possible; visiting the Sci-Hub site would create an additional, avoidable task.
While the relationship between higher education and Sci-Hub use was expected, what
may be more important is the relationship found between the percentage of the population with
an advanced degree and Sci-Hub. A series of multiple regression models were run that included
the percentage of the population with an advanced degree in a CBSA. In each of these models,
regardless of whether faculty were included or not, the percentage of advanced degree holders
was positively and significantly related to Sci-Hub use when accounting for the other predictor
variables. This means that even when accounting for the presence of higher education institutions

115

in myriad ways, there appears to be a demand for academic literature outside of the academy.
One possible explanation for this is the presence of professions that require access to the highlyspecified, technical information found in academic literature. Kramer’s (2016a) analysis of SciHub use in the Netherlands, found that Den Haag, the home of the Dutch parliament and many
international organizations, had more download requests than all but two other cities despite not
having a university. The findings of this study and Kramer’s suggest that while members of the
higher education community utilize academic literature, they are not the only ones who want
access.
The current publishing model alienates the producers of academic literature from the
product they have created. From this market-driven perspective, academic literature is a
commodity like any other product and its readers are not scholars and scientists, but merely
customers. As customers, readers are expected to pay for the product like they would in any
other commercial transaction, even though the authors who created these products give it away
for free as a means to share their findings with the greater academic and scientific community.
This study found that the paywalls that separate potential readers from academic literature have
created the conditions where Sci-Hub use may be a necessity for some of the people who wish to
stay up to date with trends in their fields. Specifically, the interaction between research funding
and the number of graduate students and faculty suggests these barriers may keep members of
campus communities from the information they need, while the relationship between advanced
degree holders and Sci-Hub suggests a similar problem for people outside of higher education.
Overall, the findings of this study align with the limited research previously available:
Sci-Hub use in the United States is driven by a combination of necessity and convenience. While
publishers may claim that convenience is the driving force, the results of this study suggest that

116

necessity plays a significant role. Members of the higher education community are still likely the
largest user base for Sci-Hub in the United States, but the results of this study suggest they are
not the only users. The relationship between the percentage of advanced degree holders in a
region and the number of Sci-Hub download requests shows unmet information needs outside of
higher education. Additionally, for universities with higher levels of research funding that also
have a large number of faculty and graduate students, academic libraries may be unable to meet
the information needs of their users. Taken together, these findings show the current academic
publishing model is inadequate for meeting the information needs of the people.

5.2

IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH

While the findings of this study provide new insight into the relationship between higher
education, people with advanced degrees, and Sci-Hub use in the United States, there is still a
great deal more to learn about who the typical Sci-Hub user is and why they choose to use SciHub. Specifically, my findings and the findings of Kramer (2016a) show a need to better
understand the relationship between advanced degree holders and Sci-Hub use, especially for
those outside of higher education. Additional research is needed to understand the information
needs of these people. Kramer’s (2016a) suggestion of examining the presence of research
organizations in cities to help clarify Sci-Hub use is one possible method as it may help explain
Sci-Hub use from researchers and practitioners who are not affiliated with a college or
university. The relationship between research funding and Sci-Hub use found in this study
suggests that reading relevant literature is a necessary part of the research process and access to
that literature is required to accomplish it. A strong relationship between the number and size of
117

non-academic research institutions and Sci-Hub could help explain Sci-Hub use outside of higher
education.
Another possible method to better understand the relationship advanced degree holders
and Sci-Hub usage found in this study is to examine the prominent industries in a region and the
Sci-Hub download requests for articles in those fields. This study did not examine the
differences between disciplines. The fields of physics and mathematics have a long history of
hosting articles in the pre-print repository arXiv (arXiv, n.d.) which would reduce the need for a
service like Sci-Hub. However, multiple studies show chemistry is one of the most popular
topics in Sci-Hub (Cabanac, 2016; Greshake, 2017a; Himmelstein et al., 2017). A study
examining CBSAs or a smaller geographic region could be done that would split the Sci-Hub
download requests by field of study and then compared to the industries in that area could help
better understand the relationship between advanced degree holders and Sci-Hub use.
Additionally, using a similar model to this study, the DOIs of the Sci-Hub download requests
could be broken down by discipline and compared to the academic programs of nearby research
institutions to examine the relationship between Sci-Hub use and graduate-level programs.
The high percentage of articles requested via Sci-Hub that would be available through
institutional licenses found in this study suggests convenience; however, the relationship
between advanced degree holders and Sci-Hub suggests necessity. As previously stated, there is
no way to ensure that those Sci-Hub requests were made by members of the nearby campus
communities and could be coming from residents who are not a part of the institution. A study to
comparing the percentage of people with advanced degrees who live near universities to those
who do not live near universities could help provide insight into this possible contradiction.

118

This study showed relationships between Sci-Hub use, higher education, and people with
advanced degrees; however, it cannot assert why people are using Sci-Hub. Recently, Travis
(2016) conducted a survey that was admittedly skewed towards Sci-Hub users, but also included
people who did not use Sci-Hub. Over 50% of respondents cited lack of journal access as the
primary reason for Sci-Hub use; 17% of respondents chose convenience as the primary motive
and 23% used Sci-Hub because they object to publisher profits. A more thorough survey of only
Sci-Hub users could provide additional insight into the drivers behind Sci-Hub use and the
percentage of Sci-Hub users that are affiliated with higher education institutions. These could be
compared with the findings in this study to further clarify the convenience versus necessity
debate.
Lastly, since Sci-Hub has been forced to continually change their domain name (Silver,
2017), the plugins developed for it (Marcos, 2017; “The Installation of Sci-hub Plugin,” n.d.)
have become less stable. Additionally, users now often have to search for the current URL before
accessing Sci-Hub. With these developments, the convenience of Sci-Hub may be lower than
when the Sci-Hub dataset used in this study was collected. Repeating this study if and when a
newer dataset is released could provide further insight into the role of convenience. Comparing
the results of this study with data from a less convenient Sci-Hub could lead to further
clarification of the whether Sci-Hub is use in the United States is driven by convenience or
necessity.

119

5.3

IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE

For the higher education community, the findings in this study confirm the existence of a
known problem: the current academic publishing industry is not meeting the needs of users. In
the short term, there is a need to educate faculty and students on the available methods of
obtaining articles from journals for which the library does not have a subscription. Advocating
for Sci-Hub comes with potential retribution from publishers (Jaschik, 2016; Masnick, 2016;
Peet, 2016). However, there are legal means of accessing articles such as interlibrary loan. While
interlibrary loan can be less convenient than Sci-Hub, creating greater awareness of it may help
users meet their information needs, especially at institutions with larger numbers of graduate
students and faculty and higher levels of research funding where this study shows the greatest
amount of Sci-Hub use. Additionally, libraries should continue to hone their collection
development policies, advocate for open access, and create consortia to have better negotiating
positions (A. Pyati, 2007b).
A portion of library funding comes from the indirect costs that colleges and universities
set as a negotiated rate with funding agencies. Indirect costs are designed to offset the
administrative support, facilities, and equipment that go into supporting research. Library
funding is included in these indirect costs (Ledford, 2014). The results of this study suggest that
for institutions that conduct high levels of research, especially those with large graduate student
and faculty populations, the library is unable to meet their users’ information needs. Increasing
the share of indirect costs earmarked for libraries could help shrink this gap. While this would
not address the long-term trend of skyrocketing costs in journal expenditures, it could provide
some short-term relief as libraries work toward better, long-term solutions.

120

For the Sci-Hub download requests that are based on convenience, where the delays
associated with interlibrary loans are deemed by the user to be too long, there is a need for a
faster turnaround time to make the existing system more convenient. A new interlibrary loan
system, Tipasa, was recently launched and offers libraries the option of creating delivery streams
from the lending library directly to the user without any manual interaction required (OCLC,
2017). While a study by Gardner, McLaughlin, and Asher (2017) found no significant correlation
between interlibrary loan demand and nearby Sci-Hub download requests, that could mean that
users who could not find their desired article may have searched for a different article that would
meet their need instead of turning to interlibrary loan. Their study did find that Sci-Hub
downloads are moderately correlated with total interlibrary loan articles borrowed, which
suggests these institutions have greater unmet journal subscription needs and that users may be
filling those gaps with both interlibrary loan and Sci-Hub. Innovative delivery systems like
Tipasa, if widely adopted, have the ability to mitigate some of the rationales for Sci-Hub use;
however, each interlibrary loan request made by a library comes with a fee paid to the lending
library and library budgets are already stretched thin.
Greater interlibrary loan use may help mitigate some of the hindrances users face when
searching for academic literature, but it is not a panacea that will fix the larger issue. The
academic publishing industry has developed a model that provides them with large profits
(DBW, 2014; Larivière et al., 2015), but leaves libraries in a position where they have to
continually perform triage on their collections to best meet the needs of their users and stay
within their budgets (Fletcher, 2017; Sample, 2012). The current trend of publishers bundling
journals to offer better prices per journal has become a common practice; unfortunately, some of
the journals in the bundles may not be what an institution needs to meet their users’ needs

121

(Frazier, 2001; Wellcome Trust, 2003; Wellen, 2004). While the greater number of journals may
increase overall access, it does not ensure that the access is for the most appropriate journals for
that particular library’s patrons. Additionally, none of these measures provides any mechanism
for reconnecting scholars to their work. The underlying alienation and reification inherent in the
current knowledge production and dissemination process would continue unabated even if these
stopgap solutions were more widely implemented.
For people outside of higher education who have a need or desire to read academic
literature, this study suggests a need for new and innovative ways to deliver needed content. The
relationship between people with advanced degrees and Sci-Hub use found in this study suggests
that academic literature readers exist beyond higher education campuses and their information
needs are not being met. While the open access policies of some federal funding agencies (NIH,
n.d.-b; “NSF public access initiative,” n.d.) can provide relief for accessing articles funded by
public monies, these funding agencies only cover a portion of the disciplines within the realm of
academic literature. The results of this study can also be used to expand the conversation around
access to information beyond just the higher education community. Critical theory, as has been
discussed, calls for action in addition to analysis. From this critical theory perspective, Sci-Hub
can be viewed as a direct action in response to the inequities created through the current
paywalled content system. The information that people want exists, but the ability to access it is
limited by publishers’ paywalls. This creates the conditions necessary for people to try to
circumvent the system, and they will likely continue to do so until better solutions become
available to access academic literature.

122

5.4

CONCLUSION

While Sci-Hub does not offer a long-term solution to the problem of limitations on access
to academic literature, based on the findings of this study, it does demonstrate the need for a
larger conversation on restructuring the academic publishing industry so that it meets the needs
of all people. To truly fix this problem, there likely needs to be a paradigm shift in how we think
of journals and academic publishing. The academic community may need to be willing to
distance itself from the traditional mechanics of journal publishing and focus on the purpose: a
means of disseminating new theories and research to further the advancement of science and
knowledge (Regazzi, 2015). Journals began as a way to compile and share the findings of
academic societies; subscription fees went to cover production costs and overhead for the society
(Regazzi, 2015). Today, most of the subscription fees go to the profit margins of large publishing
companies (Larivière et al., 2015) and the system can actually work against the purpose of
sharing knowledge.
Creating mechanisms for sharing ideas should be the starting point for discussing how to
reform access to academic literature, even if that means dismantling the current for-profit
publishing industry. This study has shown that necessity, both within higher education and
outside of it, is likely driving people to use Sci-Hub. Sci-Hub, however, is simply circumventing
the barriers created by publishers, it does not offer an alternative method for publishing and
sharing. Open access offers an alternative method for equalizing access to the end user.
However, there are limits to open access as currently constituted, including the large article
processing fees that many publishers charge to keep their profit-margins intact. The current
mechanics of publishing still require costs such as copy editors and a robust technological
infrastructure. One idea to meet those needs is for colleges and universities to create a
123

consortium to bear these costs together and bypass the publishing industry altogether. A new
system built around those who create academic literature would help to connect the scholar with
their work and could create a more collaborative environment. While this study does not directly
address how to fix the academic publishing market, it does provide additional evidence that
something must be done.