INFLUENCE OF COMPUTER SELF-EFFICACY AND INFORMATION LITERACY
SKILLS ON USE OF ELECTRONIC RESOURCES BY UNDERGRADUATES IN
KWARA STATE

ABSTRACT
This study examined the influence of computer self-efficacy and information literacy
skills on the use of electronic information resources among the undergraduate students in
University of Ilorin and Kwara State University. The study research objectives include:
(i)determine the influence of computer self-efficacy on the use of Electronic Resources by
undergraduates at University of Ilorin and Kwara University, Malete, Kwara state Nigeria;
(ii)find whether information literacy influence use of electronic resources by undergraduates at
the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete, Kwara State Nigeria; (ii) investigate
whether computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influence the use of electronic
resources by undergraduates at the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete,
Kwara State Nigeria; (ii) identify the purposes of using electronic information resources by
undergraduate students at University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete Kwara State,
Nigeria; and ways to improve the use of electronic resources in the university. Also, the study
adopted descriptive survey design and used a sample of 376 undergraduate students. Data for the
study was collected using a questionnaire and were analyzed using frequency count and
percentage while the two hypotheses were tested using Pearson Product Moment Correlation
(PPMC). The study found that majority of the undergraduate students had a high level of
computer self-efficacy which influence their use of electronic information resources. In the same
vein, the study found that majority of the undergraduate students found that information literacy
skills influence their use of electronic information resources. Furthermore, the study found that
the combination of computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influence the use of
electronic information resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University. Similarly, the study found that majority of the undergraduate students use
electronic information resources to do their assignment and also use electronic information
vi

resources to get relevant academic materials through personal searches. On the other hand, the
study found that that management should provide good facilities (e.g., good computer hardware
and software and good communication network) to support usage and also improve internet
connectivity to improve the use of electronic resources among the undergraduate students.
Finally, the study found that both computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills have a
significant relationship with the use of electronic information resources.

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background to the Study
In this 21st century, acquisition of knowledge is necessary for greater understanding and
participation in community affairs and to prepare one for future contribution to the world.
Therefore, one of the institutions to acquire this knowledge is a university which is known as a
custodian of knowledge where students from different disciplines acquire knowledge and skills
for self-development. It means a preparatory ground for creativity, critical and independent
thinking. In support of this statement, Oketunji (2005) postulated that university contributes
towards the solution to problems and the gathering, analysis, and interpretation of facts.
Therefore, the university environment is a place where the transfer of knowledge and
information takes place.
In higher institutions of learning, the library is one of the factors that support learning,
teaching, and research with different types of information resources both print and non-print
materials. Most importantly, in this technological era where library acquires majorly acquire
electronic information resources. Alberto Sharma (2009) confirmed that electronic resources are
increasingly available in Nigerian universities thereby making it possible for students and school
staff to access and use current and relevant materials for studies, research, learning, and job.
Over the last decade, a significant improvement noticed in acquisition policies and practices of
the library. Increasingly, the monograph is giving way to the electronic form of materials
(Sharma, 2009). With the explosion of electronic information resources, Lukasiewicz (2007)
observed that undergraduates are looking for a convenient, time saving and fast response as they
move from using physical collections to the digital library on the various university campuses.

1

The term electronic information resources are used interchangeably in this work with
―electronic resources.‖Therefore, electronic information resources are information materials in
the library that can only be accessed electronically, with the use of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) facilities. Examples of the electronic information resources
often consulted by students include the Internet, CD-ROM databases, online databases, Online
Public Access Catalogues (OPAC), electronic journals, electronic books and digitized materials.
In contemporary library practice, information needs of learners and knowledge seekers are
through a plethora of information sources especially with electronic information resources
(EIRs) dominating as a result of their ability to be accessed even remotely. University libraries
specifically provide these resources to cater for the academic needs of the community.
Undergraduate Students, as part of the community, are allowed unrestricted access to these
resources. Because these resources serve as motivating factor to students as they provide them
the opportunity to transmit, acquire or download process and disseminate information on any
subject of interest (Sharma, 2009). These resources can be used by any user through online
access via networks or authentication methods at any time by comfortably sitting at home or
office (Sharma, 2009). Popoola (2008) affirmed that the information resources and services
available in institutional information systems must be capable of supporting research among the
students and faculty members.
Consequently, the awareness of electronic information resources (EIRs) is necessary for
students. It mainly provides better, easier access to electronic sources which depend on computer
self-efficacy and information literacy skills of each student to locate knowledge element
(Negahban & Talawar, 2009). Furthermore, use of electronic resources aid in keeping the
students abreast with current developments in their respective subject fields, in contrast with
2

print media which are not regularly updated. Ugah (2008) quoted Osundina (1974), who noted
that the problem of Nigerian students is not the question of wanting to use the library recourses,
whether or not the university library can provide for their needs, and whether there is online
access. It is inlight of this that this, the study was designed to examine the influence of computer
self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of information literacy skills of
undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete.
One of the important factors that this study considered would influence the use of
electronic information resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University, Malete, Kwara State is their computer self-efficacy. The utilization of selfefficacy in a variety of fields since its introduction in 1997 by Bandura. According to Bandura
(1997), self-efficacy is an exercise of influence over one‘s motivation and through one‘s process,
emotional states,and behavioral patterns. Therefore, self-efficacy is used to determine the kind
of goals that people set for themselves and how hard they will try to reach the goals (Bandura,
1997). It means that high self-efficacy leads to higher aspirations and future success. Therefore,
for effective use of electronic information one need to hold positive self-competence about
his/her self on the use of a computer, that is to say, that, the degree of computer self-efficacy
appears to influence the use of the electronic resources in the library.
Another important variable that appears to influence the use of electronic information
resources in the library is information literacy skills. Information literacy skill is the ability to
search, locate, assess and critically evaluate information found on the web (Eshet-Alkalai, 2012).
In the same vein, Lau (2006) defined information literacy as information competencies that
involve the capacity to identify when information is needed, and the competence and skill to
locate, evaluate and use Information effectively. Lau (2006) further stated that information
3

literacy skills are key factors in lifelong learning. It points that Information literacy skill is a
relevant skill which enables one to easily navigate the vast information available as a result of
information explosion presently being experienced (Wesleyan University, 2016). However,
research had shown that low usage of e-resources is mainly contributed by the limited
information literacy skills among scientists or researchers in Africa (Pejowa, 2002). It is inlight
of this that, Pejowa (2002) concluded that without adequate information literacy skills, users of
information resources in developing countries (Nigeria) might continue to underutilize
technology related resources that are provided for their use due to low information literacy skills,
thus resulting in a waste of resources.
Based on the above submission, without a high level of self-efficacy coupled with
information literacy skills, it could be difficult for the users to access and use electronic
information resources effectively. It is in light of this that this study intends to investigate the
influence of computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of electronic
resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete.
1.2 Statement of the Problem
Nigerian university education system is developing and proliferating in number and
adoption of technologies into its teaching, learning and research processes is increasing.
Therefore, undergraduate students need to be motivated to see the real worth of different
electronic resources to enhance their studies. Previous researchers had examined the influence of
computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of electronic resources by
undergraduates in Nigeria Universities. Studies had revealed that undergraduates underutilize
most electronic resources in Nigeria Universities. For instance, (Okello and Ikoja 2010; Obuh,
2009; Micheal, 2003 and Kenneth2012) reported that electronic information resources are

4

grossly underutilized by undergraduates in Nigeria Universities despite the potentials they hold
for effective learning and research. However, The researcher want to examined the influence of
computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of electronic information
resources by undergraduate students in the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University,
Malate. The present study intends to fill the gaps identified in the previous works. It is against
this background that this study was set out to investigate the influence of computer self-efficacy
and information literacy skills on the use of electronic information resources by undergraduate
students in the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University.
1.3 Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to investigate the influence of computer self-efficacy and
information literacy skills on the use of electronic information resources by undergraduate
students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete Kwara State, Nigeria.
1.4 Objectives of the Study
The specific objectives of the study are to:
i.

Determine the influence of computer self-efficacy on the use of Electronic Resources by
undergraduates at University of Ilorin and Kwara University, Malete, Kwara state Nigeria.

ii.

Find whether information literacy influence use of electronic resources by undergraduates at
the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete, Kwara State Nigeria

iii. Investigate whether computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influence the use
of electronic resources by undergraduates at the University of Ilorin and Kwara State
University, Malete, Kwara State Nigeria.
iv. Identify the purposes of using electronic information resources by undergraduate students at
the University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete Kwara State, Nigeria;

5

v.

Ways to improve the use of electronic resources in the university.

1.5 Research Questions
The following research questions are expected to guide this study:
i.

What influence does computer self-efficacy has on the use of the electronic resource by
undergraduates at University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete, Kwara State
Nigeria?

ii.

What is the influence of information literacy skills on the use of electronic resources by
undergraduates at University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete, Kwara State
Nigeria?

iii.

How do computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influence the use of
electronic resources by undergraduates at the University of Ilorin and Kwara State
University, Malete, Kwara State, Nigeria?

iv.

What are the purposes of using electronic information resources by undergraduate
students at University of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete, Kwara State,
Nigeria?

v.

What are the ways to improve the use of electronic resources in the university?

1.6 Hypotheses
The study tested the following null hypotheses at 0.05 level of significance:
H01

There is no significant relationship between computer self-efficacy and use of electronic
information resources among undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University.

6

H02

There is no significant relationship between information literacy skills and use of
electronic information resources among undergraduate students in University of Ilorin
and Kwara State University.

1.7 Significance of the Study
The findings of this study would be a benefit to universities students, the library
Management and librarians in the universities and other academic libraries, librarians working in
the Electronic Information Resources (EIRs) sections of libraries, the university management,
educational planners and administrators, the general public, and researchers. The findings would
also sensitize students on the need to acquire the relevant skills necessary for the use of EIRs.
The outcome of this study is expected to bring about enhanced utilization of the libraries‘
EIRs by the students thereby leading to improved academic performances and research output as
well as the ability to favorably compete with counterparts from other developed parts of the
world. Library management and the librarians in universities and other academic libraries would
find this study very relevant as it would reveal students‘ limitations in using the EIRs available in
the libraries. The expected findings of the study would enable library management to correct the
problem areas thereby enhancing students‘ use of the resources.
It is also cogent that the outcome of this study would equally widen the knowledge of the
University management in the overall implementation of the EIRs available. Other researchers,
especially in the field of Library and Information Science who will want to carry out further
researches in this area of study, will also find this study very relevant as it will contribute to
solving the problem of the dearth of literature and also enhance discipline-specific curriculum
resources.

7

1.8 Scope of the Study
This study investigates the influence of computer self-efficacy and information literacy
skills on the use of electronic information resources by undergraduate students. This study was
limited to two Universities in Kwara State, Nigeria namely; the University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University, Malete. The study focused mainly on the influence of computer self-efficacy
and information literacy skills on the use of electronic resources by undergraduate‘s students in
Kwara State. It excludes the use of a book, monographs, and other collections. The work was
limited to four faculties at the University of Ilorin, and four Colleges at Kwara State University,
Malete. Faculties in the University of Ilorin includes faculty of agricultural sciences, faculty of
communication and information sciences, faculty of sciences, and faculty of engineering and
technology while colleges that includes in Kwara State University are the college of agricultural
sciences, college of information and communication science, college of sciences and
engineering. The questionnaire was used to collect data from the respondents.
1.9 Operational Definition of Terms
The following terms are operationally defined as used in the study:
Computer Self- efficacy: refers to students beliefs about their capabilities to attain designated
levels of performance that exercises influence over events that affect their lives.
Electronic information resources: refers to various online resources such e-books and ejournals.
Information literacy skills: refers to the ability to identify the problem, solve, access, evaluate
and use information.
Internet Information Resources: refers to information in electronic formats that are required to
be available and accessible for the benefit of users.
KWASU: is an abbreviation of Kwara State University, Malete, Nigeria.
8

Undergraduates: Undergraduates can be operationally defined to mean Students of University
of Ilorin and Kwara State University, Malete
UNILORIN: is an abbreviation of University of Ilorin, Nigeria

9

CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter reviews literature relevant to the study. The review of the related literature is
under the following sub-headings:
2.1 Concept of Electronic Information Resources
2.2 Students‘ Use of Electronic Information Resources
2.3 Information Literacy and Use of Electronic Information Resources
2.4 Computer Self-Efficacy and Use of Electronic Information Resources
2.5 Theoretical Framework
2.5.1 Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)
2.6 Empirical Studies on Self – efficacy, and use of electronic resources
2.7 Empirical Studies in information Literacy and use of electronic resources
2.8 Appraisal of Literature Review
2.9 Conceptual Model on Computer self-efficacy and Information Literacy skills
2.1 Concept of Electronic Information Resources
Electronic information resources have been useful to university community both in the
developed and the developing nations of the world. The University of Kansas Information
Service (2005) defines electronic information resources (EIRs) to include any hardware/software
intended for the storage, transmission,and use of information as well as the digital content files
10

that may be stored, transmitted, or used with hardware/software. These include e-mail, voice
systems, local databases, and externally accessed databases, CD-ROM, Digital Versatile Disc
(DVD), video, recorded magnetic media, digital movie, graphics files or other digitized
information. With the introduction of information and communication technology facilities in the
universities, information dissemination among the university communities has been
tremendously enhanced (Oyewusi & Oyeboade, 2009). Kyrillidou (2008) believes that libraries
are the crucible of genius and they are fundamental to the intellectual experience and natural
activity of the mind. Indeed, there are no great universities without great libraries.
In this Internet-dominated age and information-rich culture, information literacy skills are
of great value. There is a mass of user-created content and collaborative work embedded in the
digital technology that aids students to achieve their academic relevance and pursuit. The rapid
growth recorded with ICT is changing the way universities libraries operate today. Adewale,
Obadare, Akunniyi,and Iweha (2006) argued that ―the library is the heart of an academic
institution and its objectives revolve around the mother institution‘s objectives.‖ In other words,
apart from the fact that university libraries provide needed information sources and services, they
also promote teaching, learning and research in the universities. According to Aniebiet (2009),
university libraries assist the universities in the discharge of their functions by acquiring all the
relevant electronic information resources necessary for sustaining the teaching, learning, research
and the public service functions of their university. Reid (2000) submitted that emerging
information and communication technology allow for the virtualization of teaching and learning.
The use of information and communication technology in universities makes it possible for
courses, modules, art-training programmes that are interactive and multimedia-based to be
delivered at anytime and anywhere, to enable the institutions‘ to achieve the objectives.
11

Electronic resources, according to Ku,Lun-Wei,Li Wan Lu and Chang (2013) refer to
electronic resources like e-books, e-journals and databases as those materials that require
computer access, whether through microcomputer, mainframe, or other types of computers. The
study added that the computer might either be locally mounted or accessed remotely via the
Internet.‗Electronic information resources,' as a term, is usually interchangeably used with such
other terms as ―Electronic resources,‖ ―Virtual resources,‖ ―Online resources,‖ and ―Digital
resources.‖The study also noted that electronic information resources have become essential for
the university studies and are very popular with most of the students because they can provide
some advantages over traditional print-based sources. Brophy(2000) as cited by Tella, Ayeni and
Omoba, (2007) highlighted the benefits of networking and use of electronic resources as follows:
―the information needed can be delivered from the most appropriate Source to the user and can
re-specify his or her needs dynamically; the information is obtained when it is wanted, so
becomes "just in time."rather than "just in case"; the user selects only the information needed to
answer the specific question and, finally, the information is stored only if the user wishes, and
very often by the user, not the library.”
Ray and Day (1998) in their study on student‘s attitudes towards electronic resources
revealed that a large number of students leave universities without necessary skills to cope with
the information-based society. Electronic information resources offer today‘s student new
opportunities that were not available to previous generations. Liew, Foo, and Chennupati,
(2000) argued that while reading e-journals not the same as reading a printed issue; many
students now acknowledge that electronic documents offer users advanced features and novel
forms of functionality beyond those possible in print. As argued by Swain and Panda (2009), the
library users‘ attitude to information is gradually shifting from the printed document to e12

resources. Singh (2009) argues that ICTs have brought a tremendous change in nature,
boundaries and structure of information. Many factors do influence attitudes were also noted.
Brophy (1993) Okello-Obura 2010) point that the advantages of electronic resources over printed
ones include: speed, ease of use, the ability to search multiple files at the same time and ability to
access documents from outside the library among others. According to Dadzie (2005), electronic
resources are invaluable research tools that complement the printed ones based on the traditional
library. These advantages include access to information restricted to the user due to geographical
location or finances and provision of extensive links to additional resources correlated content.
However, knowledge of computers and retrieval techniques is needed to search these resources
and this has a bearing towards their attitude towards e-resources.
Waldman (2003) stated that students with high self-efficacy regarding computers would
be more likely to explore new technologies, software or databases. Tella (2003) reported that
self-efficacy as a significant relationship with academic achievement. In a related study of library
instructions and self-efficacy, Ren (2005) also showed a positive correlation between students‘
self-efficacy and the frequency in the use of electronic resources. This study intends to
investigate the influence of computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of
electronic resources by undergraduates in Kwara State and various issues; it also aims at
unraveling the benefits students feel they derive from electronic information resources
utilization.
2.2 Students’ Use of Electronic Information Resources
The use of e-resources though, highly embraced by users generally but for some
infrastructural skills challenges. For example, a study by Issa, Amusan and Daura (2009) show
that most students are aware of the e-library resources but are not utilizing itdue to lack of

13

computer skills. Oluwaseye and Abraham (2013) reported low patronage of e-resources in
institutions in Oyo state due to the challenges observed by Issa et al. (2009). Ojo and Akande
(2005) in a survey of 350 respondents examined undergraduate‘s access, usage and awareness of
online information resources at the University College Hospital (UCH) Ibadan, Nigeria, also
revealed that the level of usage of the electronic information resources by undergraduates is not
high. The low level of usage was attributed to lack of information retrieval skills for exploiting
electronic resources, thus making the level of usage of resources by medical students very low.
Students especially, those in the universities in Nigeria use the electronic information resources
for various academic reasons. These reasons range from; doing class assignments, writing term
papers, class works, retrieving current literature for studies, following blog discussions in the
subject area of interest, searching for scholarship opportunities, searching for internship
placement and research purposes. Similarly, electronic resources are increasingly available in
Nigerian universities thereby making it possible for students to access and use current and
relevant literature for studies and research. Over the last decade, a significant transformation
noticed in collection development policies and practices. The print medium is increasingly
giving way to the electronic form of materials (Sharma, 2009). Electronic resources were found
to be very valuable for research and scholarly communication. They are more up-to-date, can be
accessed anywhere across all geographical boundaries and add values to research and
development activities (Haridasan and Khan 2009). Mwirigi (2012) studied the use of resources
in Kenya school of law and found that the patrons are not adequately using the resources because
the awareness levels of the resources available are not adequate. Awareness of existing eresources and their ease of use are factors that could influence the adoption and use of these
resources.

14

Many countries have made significant investments in equipping universities with ICT,
but so far little is known about the effectiveness and use of these technologies. In some countries,
students are required to use ICT in learning, and there is a common assumption that students are
familiar with using ICT, which is not necessarily true. The International Computer and
Information Literacy Study (ICILS) 2013 sheds some light on students‘ knowledge and abilities
in the key areas of information and technology literacy. The study was carried out by the
International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA), an independent,
international cooperative of national research agencies. For over 50 years, IEA has conducted
large-scale comparative studies of educational achievement and reported on specific aspects of
education systems and processes in some curriculum areas, including literacy, mathematics, and
science, and also civic and citizenship education. The research and various academic activities
that are carried out in the universities comprise collating and processing of data. A sound
research depends greatly on a student‘s information skill competence in retrieving up-to-date and
relevant information.
With the availability of electronic information resources, research is no longer
complicated. The fact remains that most of the documents for research are now available in
electronic formats like the Internet, online database, OPACs, electronic journals and electronic
books. (Fakolujo 2005). The use of these electronic information resources encourages
consortium among students and researchers. Magara (2002) opined that the emergence of the
World Wide Web (www) enhance scholarly communication and a rise in computational science.
Presently, many university students rely on the internet for their assignments, term papers,
research and communication with their teachers. Students through the internet also exchange
ideas and information which can be of help to their academic activities. Fakolujo (2005) reported
15

that ―Electronic mail (E-mail) over the Internet enables one to overcome many obstacles to
communicate due to a geographic distance such as time, costs and language.‖
Likewise, (Manda, 2005;Smith, Hasifa, Oscar, Paul, Sylvester, Selemani, Masanja,
Bright and Paul 2007) list factors affecting the utilization of e-resources to include lack of
competence of the e-resources by students, lack of knowledge, negative attitudes, poor practices
and in adequate infrastructure. In the study of Alison, and Ruth (2012) found that utilization of eresources was affected by human and institutional factors including information literacy, low
bandwidth and a limited number of resources available to users.
2.3 Information Literacy Skills and Use of Electronic Sources
Students with research information needs will most likely use the electronic resource if
they have the skills required for its use. Skill is the ability to bring about some result with
maximum certainty and minimum outlay of time and energy. Computer literacy which
sometimes supposed by some students to mean information literacy only refers to the comfort
level someone has with using a computer and other its associated applications.(American Library
Association (ALA), 1989). Case (2007) refers to Julien (2001) in defining information literacy as
the ability to make efficient and effective use of information sources. Information literacy
includes having the skills to not only access information, but also to ascertain its veracity,
reliability, bias, timeliness, and context. IL is important in the contemporary environment of
rapid technological change and proliferation of information resources. Information and
communication technology (ICT) advancements and the use of electronic resources, especially
the internet promises to improve the flow of information to research and academic communities
(Manda, 2005).

16

According to Theo Bothman, Cosijin, Fourieand Penzhourin (2014) Information Literacy
can be the ability to know when information is needed, to evaluate the information and to use the
information found. These include having technological skills that allow users to use and access
the information sources. Information literacy has the following core features: specific skills,
ability to recognize a need for information, ability to found information and ability to evaluate,
awareness of the law of information online. To be successful students in research and
studies,they need a high level of information literacy. Back in 1998.Breivik and Senn (1998) in
their book information literacy: educating children for the 21st century stated that ―an educated
graduate student will not refer to as one who has absorbed a certain body of factual information,
but as one who knows how to find, evaluated and apply needed information.‖
Information literacy forms the basis for lifelong learning. Association of College and
Research Librarian (2009) opine that it is not possible to learn everything you need to know in
your field of study in a few years at University. However, being information literate enable users
to have skills to be applied to many other areas of learning and research. According to Lowe and
McCauley (2002), computer skills are literacy and abilities that will enable information resource
users to meet personal, educational and labour market goods.
The use of computer and online information resources has a growing presence in all
levels of education and occupation. Awoleye, Siyanbolaand Oladapo (2008), pointed out that for
students to be successful in their coursework, they need a certain level of expertise in computer
and they stated that students need computer skills such as word processing, programming and
data management skills to be able to use online information resources. According to the
University of Idaho Information Literacy Portal (2011),information literacy is the ability to
identify what information is needed, understand how organized the information, identify the best
17

sources of information for a given need, locate those sources, evaluate the sources critically, and
share that information. Because of the ongoing proliferation of information and information
sources as well as the numerous methods of access these skills required. It is essential because
we are surrounded by a growing ocean of information in all formats.
According to Ojedokun, and Owolabi, (2003) an information literate person must be
able to: recognize the need for information, formulate questions based on information needs,
recognize that accurate, relevant and complete information. It is the basis for intelligent decision
making, identify potential sources of information, develop successful search strategies, access
sources of information from all media. It also assists in evaluating information, organizes
information for the practical application, integrates new information into an existing body of
knowledge, and use information in critical thinking and problem-solving. All listed skills are
essential for any user; most especially students in their quest to make a productive impacton
academic and research output. Akintola and Olayinwola (2014) observed that online information
resources are beneficial for teaching, learning, and research, but the lack of computer skills
would probably inhibit its use by students. Bristol (2014) opined that computer skills are needed
by students to be able to retrieve information from online resources. Becker (2003) reiterated that
students acquire adequate computer skills to be able to use online information resources
effectively. Majid and Abazova (2009) asserted that online information resources could not be
effectively utilized by students if they cannot operate the computer. Various information literacy
standards such as ALA, (1989); SCONUL, (1999); Association of College Research Libraries
ACRL, (2000) require that participants who have completed certain levels of education be
expected to have a high information literacy skills. In other words, individuals with higher
education levels are to have different information literacy skill levels. In support of this view,
18

Brand-Gruwel, Wopereisand Vermetten (2005) classified participants with higher educational
levels as experts and those with lower educational levels as novices in examining their
experiences in information problem-solving process and they found differences in their skills.
Access without skills is not useful; so the acquisition of information literacy skills becomes a
basic need of every citizen.
2.4 Computer Self-Efficacy and Use of Electronic Resources
The degree of self-efficacy is another variable that appears to influence the use of
electronic resources. The applauded study of Alberto Bandurain 1977 is for the use of selfefficacy in a variety of fields since its introduction. According to Bandura, self-efficacy is part of
an individual's "beliefs in one's capability to organize and execute the courses of action required
to manage prospective situations." (Bandura, 1997). Individuals get their self-efficacy beliefs in
several ways. The first and most significant way is by interpreting what they did; self-efficacy is
not a static concept, it is actualized continually in an individual's mind, through what Bandura
called "mastery experiences": "Outcomes interpreted as successful raise self-efficacy; those
interpreted as failures lower it.‖ Therefore, students with high self-efficacy as stated by Tella,
Tella, Ayeni and Omoba (2007) will be more likely to take advantage of what is around them.
For example, electronic information facilities and resources like the Internet, electronic journals
and CD-ROM database. If they are familiar and feel comfortable with them, they will use them,
and if they feel that learning through these electronic information resources will enhance their
academic performance, they will learn about them. Justifiably, in their study of self-efficacy and
use of electronic information as predictors of academic performance, Tella et al. (2007) found
that, self-efficacy and use of electronic information jointly predict and contribute significantly to
the academic performance of students. Through a survey administered to a class of freshmen by
Waldman (2003) on their use of library electronic resources and self-efficacy was found that age
19

and gender were not related to use of electronic resources. However, the study found that selfefficacy influenced the use electronic resources.
Individuals also develop self-efficacy beliefs through "vicarious experiences," by
observing how peers have dealt with certain experiences, and from there inferring how they
would handle a similar experience. However, this is a less significant way of establishing selfefficacy. A still weaker way self-efficacy beliefs develop is through "verbal persuasions,"when
someone gives verbal encouragement or communicates their confidence that someone else will
be able to succeed .Interestingly, ―it is usually easier to weaken self-efficacy beliefs through
negative appraisals than to strengthen such beliefs through positive encouragement" (Pajares and
Valiante 1997). Individuals form their self-efficacy beliefs by incorporating and weighing these
factors.
Technology is challenging the boundaries of the educational structures that have
traditionally facilitated learning. Recent advances in computertechnology, the use of EIRs, and
the diffusion of personal computers, productivity software, and multimedia and network
resources over the last decade heralded the development and implementation of new and
innovative teaching strategies. Educators who advocate technology integration in the learning
process believe it will improve learning and better prepare students to participate in the 21st
Century workplace.Okello and Ikoja-Odongo (2010) classified computer skills as a prerequisite
for the usage of online information resources into various categories. Such categories include
basic micro computing skills understanding of computer and its components, using commandoriented windows base, and LAN operating environments to accomplish basic tasks. Also,
formatting floppy disks, to create and to navigate through the directory and sub-directing
structures, to create and to delete files, to copy and rename files using available help screens
20

when needed. Basic micro- computing spreadsheet skills this involve the ability to create,
organize and navigate through spreadsheets or a specific block of cells entering and editing
formulas, values and text copying, moving and protecting cells; inserting and deleting columns
and rows, saving and retrieving files, and printing relevant materials.
2.5 Theoretical Framework
According to Osuala (1987), the theory is an attempt at synthesizing and integrating empirical
data for maximum clarification, and unification. The study defined a theoretical framework as
for how the researcher of the report not only questions but ponders and develops thoughts or
theories on what the possible answers could be, then this thoughts and theories grouped into
themes that frame the subject. It is the process of identifying a core set of connections within a
topic and showing how they fit together. Therefore, this study adapted Technology Acceptance
Model (TAM).

Figure 1 Technology Acceptance Model (Davies et al., 1989

Perceived

Usefulness

External

Attitude
towards

Variables

Behavioural
intention to
use

Perceived ease
of use

21

Actual use

Technology Acceptance Model is one of the well-known models which was first proposed by
Davis in 1986. TAM has proven to be a theoretical model in helping to explain and predict user
behavior of information technology (Legris, Ingham, & Collerette, 2003). TAM is considered an
important extension of Theory of reasoned action (TRA), according to Ajzen and Fishbein
(1980). Davis (1989) Davis, Bagozzi, and Warshaw (1989) proposed TAM to explain why a user
accepts or rejects information technology by adapting TRA. TAM provides a basis with which
one traces how external variables influence belief, attitude, and intention to use. Two cognitive
beliefs by TAM: perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. According to TAM, one‘s
actual use of a technology system is influenced directly or indirectly by the user‘s behavioral
intentions, attitude and perceived ease of use. TAM also proposes that external factors affected
intention and actual use through mediated effects on perceived usefulness and perceived ease of
use.
Davis developed TAM in 1989; it explains the determinants of technology acceptance
that is capable of explaining user‘s behavior. It explains the attitudinal, social, and control factors
that affect Information Technology (IT) usage. The theory stated the perceived usage of an
information system by users‘ intention to use the system, which in turn is determined by users‘
beliefs about the system. Two kinds of salient beliefs are involved in TAM: perceived usefulness
and perceived ease of use of the technology. Perceived usefulness is the extent to which a person
believes that using the system will enhance his job performance.
Although perceived usefulness has a direct effect on adoption intention, perceived ease of
use which as a resultant effect of the student's computer self-efficacy or attitude towards the
usage of the system has both a direct effect and an indirect effect on intention. This theory also
explained that usefulness and perceived ease of use would have a significant impact on a user‘s
22

attitude towards the usage of the system with feelings of favorably believing that using the
system will enhance his job performance. Perceived ease of use is the extent to which a person
believes that using the system will be free of effort.
2.6 Empirical Studies on Self – efficacy and use of electronic resources
Several studies conducted on self-efficacy and use of electronic resources. Tella, Ayeni,
Omoba(2007) examined self-efficacy and the use of electronic information as predictors of
academic performance. Participants in the study comprised of 700 students (undergraduate and
postgraduate) randomly drawn from seven departments in the faculty of education, University of
Ibadan, Nigeria. Collected data on the study was through the Morgan-Jinks (1999) academic
self-efficacy scale and the use of the electronic information scale (UEIS) with r = 0.75. Three
research questions were raised to guide the study. The results indicate that self-efficacy and the
use of electronic information jointly predict and contribute to academic performance; that
respondents with high self-efficacy make better use of electronic information and have better
academic performance. It continues that a correlation exists among self-efficacy, use of
electronic information and academic performance; and that the use of electronic information
influenced respondents' performance in General Education subjects more than other subjects.
Finally, the results reveal that the Internet is the electronic information source student‘s access to
information most often.
Tella, Orim, Ibrahim, and Memudu (2017) assessed the use of electronic resources by
academic staff at the University of Ilorin. Simple random sampling technique was used to select
the respondents that took part in the study. The questionnaire was used to gather data.
Descriptive analyses including percentage and frequency count were used to analyze the data.
Out of the 847 academic staff at the University of Ilorin, 184 academic staff was taken to

23

represent the sample for the study. Five research questions were developed and answered by the
study. The results demonstrate that majority of the academic staff use e-resource for research,
curriculum development andself-educational development. The study also revealed that search
engines and private subscription are the most avenue use to access electronic information.
Hindrance to use of e-resources by academic staff to by slow Internet service, lack of constant
power supply, low availability of e-resources, and inadequate online access. The study concluded
that electronic resources usually provide the opportunity for getting current and up-to-date
data/information, but these academic staff has not fully utilized these invaluable information
sources. The study recommends that the Internet facilities at the university should be improved
to facilitate easy access to the e-resources in other to encourage more usage; and that, the
University should re-orientate academic staff on how to access the electronic resources/databases
subscribed to by the University for effective and efficient usage.
Ibrahim (2014) investigated the availability, accessibility and use of electronic
information resources and services in Nigerian Universities. Six research questions and four null
hypotheses were formulated and tested concerning the type of electronic information resources
and services; the extent of use of electronic information resources and services and purpose of
use of electronic information resources and services in MTN Universities Connect in Nigerian
Universities. Adopted for this study was the survey research design. Drawn from a total number
of 273 were the registered library customers using the 4 MTN Net libraries in Nigerian
Universities as sample size. The study found that Sabinet online reference database; EBSCOhost
reference database, Nation Academic press databases, Also, it was found that Email Services,
WWW Services, Databases Services and Printing Services were the electronic information
services available in the 2 MTN libraries studied. SABINET online reference database,
24

EBSCOhost, JSTOR, Nation Academic press database, Virtual Libraries Online, Free Library
Online, Google Search Engine and E-newspapers were the type of electronic information
resources that are highly accessible with the highest frequencies of over 60% response scores in
the two MTN Universities Connect Libraries studied. The study concluded that electronic
information resources are vital and are the backbone of any dynamic collection.Most of the
electronic information resources such are full-text databases, electronic books are not publicly
available free of charge and they are expensive, and they offer creative possibilities for
expanding access as well as changing learning behavior and academic research in Universities.
2.7Empirical Studies in information Literacy and use of electronic resources
Many studies on information Literacy skills and use of electronic resources were
accessed. Ahmet Nacicoklar (2017),in their work, Information literacy and digital nativity as
determinants of online information search strategies. The purpose of the study was to investigate
the hypothesis that information literacy and digital nativity are determinants of online
information search competency. The participants of the study were 398 undergraduate students.
The data collection instruments were the Online Information Search Strategies Inventory
(OISSI), the Information Literacy Scale, and the Digital Nativity Assessment Scale. Structural
regression analysis, a branch of structural equation modeling, was employed in the analysis. Also
examined were the correlations between the model variables. The results showed that
information search competencies had a high-level correlation with information literacy and a
low-level correlation with digital nativity. Thus, information literacy had more influence on
online information search than digital nativity.
Ross, Perkinsand Bodey (2013) researched information literacy self-efficacy: The effect
of juggling work and study Information literacy self-efficacy and academic motivation. The

25

former is considered to be a predictor of student academic achievement while the latter is
considered a key factor in developing information literacy self-efficacy. Data were collected via
a questionnaire, comprised of existing scales, administered to undergraduate business students in
an Australian higher education (HE) institution. A response rate of 58% resulted in 585
completed questionnaires. Their findings suggest that whether or not students were engaged in
paid employment did not appear to influence information literacy self-efficacy, although students
in paid employment did exhibit significantly lower intrinsic motivation than students not in paid
employment. Additionally, for students not in paid employment, a significant relationship was
found between the amount of time spent on study and information literacy self-efficacy.
However, a few time students reported spending in academic pursuits outside of scheduled
classes raises issues regarding the placement of information literacy instruction. Ross, Perkins
and Bodey. Ross, Perkin and Bodey (2016) in another study focused on academic motivation
and information literacy self-efficacy: The importanceof a simple desire to know Lifelong
learning, information literacy skills and self-efficacy associated with higher levels of the student
academic motivation. Data was collected using a questionnaire comprising existing scales. The
questionnaire was administered to undergraduate students in an Australian higher education
institution with a response rate of 58%, resulting in 585 completed questionnaires. Both
intrinsicand extrinsic academic motivation found to be positively related to information literacy
self-efficacy, while a motivation was negatively related. The most important predictor of
information literacy self-efficacy was intrinsic motivation to know. Overall, all academic
motivation types increased over time, including, unexpectedly, motivation while differences
were apparent by gender. The study also dwelled on the need for higher education institutions to

26

actively identify academically motivated students and facilitate intrinsic academic motivation
(Ross, Perkin and Bodey 2016).
Maria Pinto,Rosaura Fermandez and Susana Puertas (2016) study undergraduates'
information literacy competency through a pilot study of assessment tools based on a latent trait
model. The study focused on information literacy on opinions, evidence, reviews, and data
analysis from a sample of Spanish university students from three major fields of study
(information/documentation, psychology, and translation/interpretation). The results tabulated
from the subject area of documentation alone and the shared subject in the students' curricular
planning. The study highlights students' attitudes, motivation, and evidence about information
literacy (IL) competencies. The standardized statistical model for evaluating latent traits was
used to capture the structure of such capabilities. Data collection was performed using the ILHUMASS (subjective) and the EVALCI-K (objective) questionnaires.
The purpose is to achieve a better understanding of how IL competencies—approached
from both objective and subjective perspectives, and grouped into the categories of searching,
evaluation, processing, and communication/dissemination of information—are interrelated. In
this way, by combining objective (knowledge and skills) and subjective (belief-in importance
and self-efficacy) values about IL competencies, the processes of teaching and learning may be
better understood and therefore better integrated within the curriculum framework. Additionally,
it explored the patterns of correlation and causality between observed and latent competencies. In
the work of Yu-Huichen (2015) Tested the impact of an information literacy course:
Undergraduates' perceptions and use of the university libraries' web portal. A mixed methods
approach was employed collecting data through three rounds of the survey (pre-course, postcourse, and follow-up) as well as one-on-one interviews. Results from the quantitative analysis
27

indicated a variance in participants' perceptions and use of the libraries' portal from the shortterm to a longer term. It also validated the positive influence of the course through a
manipulation check. The outcome of interviews also confirmed the findings derived from the
quantitative data.
Xiaoronge Shao and Geraldine Purpur (2016)

examined the effects of Information

Literacy skills on Student Writing and Course Performance.The study examines the association
between students' information literacy skills and their writing abilities as well as their overall
performance in class. A major finding of the study was the correlated information literacy skills
with both students writing scores and final course grades. The findings of their study call for
well-integrated library instruction programs and services to improve student information literacy
skills. Rae-Anne Diehm and Mandy Lupton (2016 ) In their research work approach to Learning
Information Literacy: A Phenomenographic Study. The study report on an empirical study that
explores the ways students approach learning to find and use information. Based on interviews
with 15 education students in an Australian university, this study uses phenomenography as its
methodological and theoretical basis. The study reveals that students use three main strategies for
learning information literacy: 1) learning by doing; 2) learning by trial and error; and 3) learning
by interacting with other people. Understanding the different ways that students approach
learning information literacy will assist librarians and faculty to design and provide more
effective information literacy education.
The study of use and impact of e-resources in University of Lagos by Egberongbe (2011)
showed that the uses of e-resources are very common among the lecturers and research scholars
of University of Lagos. Contrarily, Sharma (2009) revealed that practical usage of e-resources is
not up to the worth in comparison to investments made in acquiring these resources.The study
28

showed that infrastructure and training programmes required are for the better use of electronic
resources campus-wide. It is evident from the analysis that the availability of e-resources on the
campus is almost sufficient for all the existing disciplines but that the infrastructure to use the
resources is not adequate and its hindrance to the ability to meet the requirements of users.
Similarly, Isah (2010) studied the use of e-resources by academic staff of University of Ilorin and
found that, all academic staffs are aware of the existence of electronic library and e-resources in
the University have not been fully utilized despite their invaluable information sources. It may be
due to the one or more challenges enumerated above.
Issa, Amusan, and Daura (2009) in their study of effects of information literacy skills on
the use of e-library resources among students of the University of Ilorin, Nigeria, found that only
slightly more than one-third of respondents are aware of and use the e-library facilities. They
also found that more than half the respondents avoid using the e-library due to their inability to
use e-resources. Although, this study was carried out before the university policy on onestudent- one laptop so it will not be out of place to find the low utilization of e-library by
students in the university

29

Dependent variable
Independent variables

Comupter Self-efficacy
Confidence
Self-training
Use
Computer experience

of

Electronic

Resources

Computer phobia
OPAC

Fear of Computer
Information Literacy Skills

E-Journal

Searching Skills

E-book

Location & sources

Databases

Retrieval skills etc.

Figure 2. Conceptual Model on Computer self-efficacy and Information
Literacy skills
Conceptual model on how Computer self-efficacy and Information literacy skills influence the
use of Electronic Resources by Undergraduates Students (Source: Self-constructed, 2017)

30

Conceptual models are used to describe the intention or purpose of something in abstract and
generalized manner. Conceptual models are the blueprints of information management. A
conceptual model is a guiding theoretical model to the proper execution of a research work.
The model explained the relationship between the independent variable that is self-efficacy and
information literacy skills and a dependent variable that is the use of library resources. Also
predicted is that each of the independent variables will influence the dependent variable.

31

2.8 Appraisal of Literature Review
The reason for literature review in research is to highlight writings made by scholars in
areas related to this study. The literature reviewed have more of information to offer in respect of
this study whose focus is on student‘s variables and their use of electronic information resources
in a university environment .The major areas this study intends to look at were under the
conceptual and theoretical framework. There view included an overview of the variables in the
study, the influence of computer self-efficacy, information literacy skills, and the use of
electronic information resources by Undergraduates Students in the university using UNILORIN
and KWASU as a focus point. The researcher constructs a conceptual model for the study. The
theoretical framework centered on Technology Acceptance Model as discussed in relationship
with the present study.
The review of the various literature showed an appreciation and acceptance of EIRs as
important sources that enhance academic and research output of students through the provision
of timely, up-to-date and, easy access to the information resources. There is a strong indication
of awareness and availability of these EIRs, but they were underutilized by students. Some of the
related studies on the use of EIRs by university students focused on one electronic information
resource and also concentrates more on the impacts of it on students academic and research
performances such as those by Bao (2002) and Okello-Obura and Magara (2008). The identified
factor constituting constraints to the use of the electronic resources by the studies include;
inadequate search skills, information literacy skill, lack of appreciation and ignorance shown by
students, lack of awareness, power failureand machine breakdown. Some other studies which
tried to relate the use of electronic resources with the students‘ variables limited them to either
one or two of the variables in this present work (King,Bond and Blandford 2002; Oladejo, Ige,
Fanunwa and Arewa 2010).Most of the literature reviewed specifically dealt with University
32

students ‗variables information literacy, attitude towards the use of EIRs, computer self-efficacy
and, their use of EIRs.
However, this work takes up from where other researchers stop and want to improve on it
by focusing on two Universities in Kwara State, Nigeria. As a result, there is a need for research
aimed at exploring the relationship between students‘ level of information literacy skills, the use
of EIRs, and computerself-efficacyand availability of the resources that relate to the study areas
of Undergraduates students. It is the gap in knowledge observed which this study is meant to fill.

33

CHAPTER THREE
METHODOLOGY
3.1 Introduction
Chapter three described the procedures adopted in the conduct of this study to include the
following sub-headings: design, scope, the population of the study, sampling and sample
technique, an instrument for data collection, validation and reliability of the instrument, and data
analysis.
3.2 Research Design
The study adopted a descriptive survey design a purely quantitative method to examining the
influence of self-efficacy and information literacy skills on the use of electronic information
resources by undergraduate‘s students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University in
Kwara State, Nigeria. Aina and Ajiferuke (2002) described survey research as mainly an
examination of current practices or approaches relating to an aspect of the social system to and
an attempt to relate certain results to a particular cause, to make a future improvement. Nwizu
(2010) also stated that a survey design is an aim at collecting data to interpret better and
explained a phenomenon.
3.3 Population of the study
According to Association of College and Research Libraries (2017), research population
is a collection of individuals or objects that are the main focus of a scientific query. The
population of this study consists of the undergraduate students of the faculties that use electronic
resources. Therefore, the target population would consist of students from Agricultural Science,
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) or Communication and Information Sciences
as the case maybe, Engineering & Technology, and Sciences who constitute a group of
individual that have one or more common characteristics which are of interest to this study.

34

3.4 Sample Size and Sampling Techniques
This study adopted stratified sampling technique where the whole population grouped
into strata, that is, faculty. Therefore, the study purposely selected four faculties that use
electronic resources most. From the records obtained from the academic planning unit of the two
universities; the University of Ilorin has the following population for the four selected faculties.
Table 3.1 Population Distribution of the Respondents

Faculties

Population

Agricultural Science

3,214

Communication and Information Science (CIS)

1,342

Engineering and Technology

2,959

Science

7,496

Total

15,011

Kwara State University
Colleges

Population

Agricultural Science

321

Information and Communication Technology (ICT)

668

Science

814

Engineering and Technology

522

Total

2325

Source: Academic Planning Unit, 2017
Table 3.1 gives the total number of undergraduate students from each of the selected faculty in
University of Ilorin and Kwara State University whichis 17,336. In determining the sample size,
the study uses Israel (2003) model by taken 5% precision from each of the institution.

35

Therefore, the proportionate sample size of the undergraduate students in University of Ilorin
325 while the sample size of the undergraduate students at Kwara State University is 51. It gives
a total of 376 samples.
3.5 Data Collection Instrument
A self-designed questionnaire was used to collect data from the respondents. The questionnaire
titled as ―Questionnaire on Influence of Self-efficacy and Information Literacy Skills on the Use
of Electronic Information Resources by Undergraduate Students‖ with the acronym of
―QISILSUEIRUS.‖ The questionnaire has five sections divided into A-E. Section A contains
information of the bio-data of the respondents such as age, gender, facultiesand level of study
while section B-E contains items to capture information for the four research questions of the
study.
3.6Validity of the Instrument
Three copies of the instrument were given to four research experts in the Department of
Library and Information Science Department at the University of Ilorin to determine content and
face validity of the instrument. Also a copy eachto lecturer in the Department of Agricultural
Science at Kwara State University Malete. The experts were requested to check the items of the
instrument if they are in line with the research questions of the study. The study incorporated the
comments and corrections of the experts in producing the final instrument for collection of data.
3.7 Reliability of the Instrument
Questionnaire administered Twenty (20) copies to twenty (20) respondents at Landmark
University, Omu-Aran in Kwara State which is outside the area of study of this research to
determine the level of reliability of the instrument that was validated. The respondents were
given the questionnaire at once, and the scores split into two equal parts. The two parts were

36

correlated using the split-half method to determine the internal consistency index of items of the
questionnaire and the reliability value calculated give 0.71; 0.63; 0.72; 081; 0.74; and 0.83.
3.8 Procedure for Data Collection
The researcher personally administered the questionnaire with one recruited research
assistant in each institution under study. Three hundred and twenty-five copies of the
questionnaire were administered in the University of Ilorin while 51 copies administered in
Kwara State University. It brings it to a total of 376 copies of the questionnaire. The researcher
asked the respondents to fill the questionnaire and return it immediately to the researcher. This
help the researcher to retrieve the entire administered questionnaire back which gives 100%
response rate.
3.9 Data Analysis
This research work used quantitative method for data collection in tackling the research
question; the quantitative data collected from the field were analyzed using descriptive statistics
of frequency and percentages presented in tables. The statistical tool based on its simplicity and
ease of understanding for any level of the researcher that may be willing to use the findings of
this study. Furthermore, Pearson Product Moment Correlation (PPMC)was used to test the
hypotheses of the study at 0.05 level of significance.

37

CHAPTER FOUR
DATA PRESENTATION, ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS
4.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the data collected from the field. A total of 376 questionnaires
distributed to the two universities in Kwara State with376 Copies representing (100%) returned.
The distribution and return of questionnaires shown in the table below. The findings of the study
and the analyses presented according to the research questions, which guided the study.

4.2 Data Presentation and Analysis

4.2.1 Bio-data of the respondents
Table 4.1 Bio-data of the respondents
Gender

Frequency

Percent

Male

210

55.9

Female

166

44.1

Total

376

100.0

Kwara State University

51

13.6

University of Ilorin

325

86.4

Total

376

100.0

100 level

73

19.4

200 level

99

26.3

300 level

108

28.7

400 level

65

17.3

500 level

31

8.2

Total

376

100.0

Institutions

Level

38

Age

Frequency

Percentage

16-20

169

44.9

21-25

143

38.1

26-30

46

12.2

31 above

18

4.8

Total

376

100.0

73

19.4

Agricultural Science

64

17.0

Engineering and Technology

111

29.5

Science

128

34.0

Total

376

100.0

Faculty
Communication

and

Information
Science/Technology

The table 4.1 shows that 210 (55.9%) of the participants are male while the remaining
166 (44.1%) were female. It shows that the majority of the respondents are male. Furthermore,
the table above shows that 51 (13.6%) respondent are from Kwara state university while the
remaining 325 (86.4%) are from University of Ilorin. Also, themajority of the respondents are
from the University of Ilorin. The table also shows that 73 (19.4%), 90 (26.3%), 108 (28.7%), 65
(17.3%), and 31 (8.2%) respondents are in 100 level, 200 level, 300 level, 400 hundred level and
500 level respectively. The result shows that majority of the respondents are in 300 level. The
age distribution of the respondents, the table shows that 169 (44.9%) are between the age of 1639

20. Next to it were respondents between the age 21-25 representing 143 (38.1%), followed by
respondents between the age of 26-30 representing 46 (12.2%) and the least respondents fall
between the age of 31 and above representing 18 (4.8%).It shows that majority of the
respondents fall between the age of 16-20. Furthermore, the Table also shows that out of 376
respondents, 128 (34.0%) are in the faculty of Science, next to this are the respondents in the
faculty of Engineering and Technology representing 111 (29.5%).The result is followed by the
respondents in the faculty of Communication and Information Science/Technology 73 (19.4%)
while the least respondents are in the faculty of Agricultural Science 64 (17.0%) This shows that
majority of the respondents are in the faculty of Sciences.

40

4.2.2 Research Question 1: Computer self-efficacy of undergraduate students on the use of
electronic resources?
Table 4.2 Computer self-efficacy of undergraduate students on the use of E-resources

S/N

Item

SA f(%)

1

I find it difficult to use the computers to 32(8.5)

A f(%)

D f(%)

SD f(%)

87(23.1) 83(22.1) 174(46.3)

utilise electronic information resources
except someone help me
2

I always feel I need someone to assist me 30(8.0)

87(23.1) 77(20.5) 182(48.4)

when I am using the computer
3

Whenever I attempt using the computer, I 30(8.0)

48(12.8) 91(24.2) 207(55.1)

rarely succeed
4

I give up when using computer even 54(14.4)

50(13.3) 80(21.3) 51(51.1)

before I encounter problem
5

I avoid using computer because Ido not 56(14.9)

32(8.5)

55(14.8) 233(61.7)

-

want to face any difficulty
6

7

I trust my ability to use computers

232(61.7)

-

I effectively operate the computer system

269(71.1)

66(17.6) 13(3.5)

I can become very good in the use of 280(74.5.) -

144(38.2)
28(7.5)

68(18.1) 28(7.4)

computers by continually using it
Note SA+A=Agree while D+SD=Disagree
The table 4.2 shows that 119 (31.6%) respondents agree that they find it difficult to use
the computer except someone helps them while 257 (68.4%) disagree with this. Furthermore, the
table also reveals that 117 (31.1%) agree that they always feel they need someone to assist them
41

when they are using the computer while 259 (68.9%) disagree with the statement. On the other
hand, the table also shows that 78 (20.8%) agree that whenever they attempt to use the computer,
they rarely succeed while 298 (73.3%) disagree with the statement. In the same vein, the table
also shows that 104 (27.7%) agree that they give up when using the computer even before they
encounter a problem while 131 (72.4%) disagree with the statement. Similarly, the table also
reveals that 88 (23.4%) agree that they avoid using a computer because they do not want to face
any difficulty while 288 (76.5%) disagree with this statement. Furthermore, the table also shows
that 232 (61.7%) agree that they trust their ability to use computers while 144 (38.2%) disagree
with this statement. The result from the table also shows that 335 (89.0%) agree that they
effectively operate the computer while 41 (11.0%) disagree with the statement. Lastly, the table
also shows that 280 (74.5%) agree that they can become very good in the use of computers by
continually using it while 96 (25.5%) disagree with this statement. It shows that majority of the
respondents are highly self-efficacy.

42

4.2.3 Research Question 2: Does information literacy skills influence the Use of Electronic
Information Resources of Undergraduate Students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State
University?

Table 4.3: Information Literacy Skills and Use of Electronic Information
Resources
S/N

Does information literacy skills influence Frequency

Percentage

the use of E-resources
1

Yes

252

67.0%

2

No

124

32.9%

Table 4.3 shows that out of 376 respondents, 252 (67.0%) claim that information literacy skills
influence their use of electronic information resources while 124 (32.9%) claim that information
literacy skills do notinfluence their use of electronic information resource. It shows that
information literacy skills influence the use of electronic information resources of undergraduate
students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University.

43

4.2.3 Research Question 3: Does computer self-efficacy and Information Literacy Skills
influence the Use of Electronic Resources while searching online materials?

Table 4.4: Self-efficacy and Information Literacy Skills
S/N

Items

SAf(%)

1

Ican define my specific information needs before 299(60.9)

A f(%)

D f(%)

SDf(%)

70 (18.6)

7(1.8)

-

178(47.3)

6(1.5)

-

the search
2

I can use some search engines when sourcing 192(51.1)
Information

3

I can select online materials for my use

265(70.5)

98(26.1)

13(3.5)

-

4

I can store information from electronic sources

218(58)

143(38.0)

5(1.3)

10(2.6)

by printing or
saving to disk/flash drive
5

I can effectively use Boolean search techniques

203(54.0)

147(39.1)

26(6.9)

-

6

I can select materials on topics accurately

211(56.1)

150(39.9)

2(.5)

13(3.5)

7

I can limit online search by fields

269(71.5)

84(22.3)

21(5.6)

2(.5)

8

I can use mailing list to exchange information

233(62.0)

109(29.0)

21(5.6)

13(3.5)

9

I can access blogs for needed information

277(73.7)

97(25.8)

2(.5)

-

10

I can conveniently access needed information 222(59.0)

154(41.0)

--

-

118(31.4)

--

13(3.5)

from electronic information sources for problemsolving independently
11

I know the appropriate search tools to use when 245(65.2)
searching for
Information

Note SA+A=Agree while D+SD=Disagree

44

Table 4.4 shows that 369 (98.1%) agree that they can able to define specific information
needs before the search while 7(1.8) disagree with this.Similarly,370 (98.4%) agree they can use
some search engines when sourcing for information while 6(1.5%) disagree with this. The table
also shows that 363(96.5%) believe they can select online materials for use while 13(3.5%)
disagree. Also, 361(96.0%) agree they can store information from electronic sources by printing
or saving to disk/flash drive while 15(3.9%) disagree with the statement. Furthermore,
350(93.8%) agree they can effectively use Boolean search techniques while 26(6.9%) disagree
with it.361 (96.0%) can select materials on topic accurately while 15(3.9%) disagree with
this.353 (93.8%) can limit the online search by fields while 23(6.1%) disagree with this.
342(90.9%) can use the mailing list to exchange information while 34(9.0%) disagree with the
statement. 374(99.4%) can access blogs for needed information while 2 (5%) disagree they
cannot 376 (100%) believe they can conveniently access needed information from electronic
information sources for problem-solving independently and none disagree with the statement.
Finally, 363(96.5%) know the appropriate search tools to use when searching for information
while 13(3.5%) disagree with this.

45

4.2.5. Research Question 4: What are the purposes of using electronic information
resources by undergraduate students at University of Ilorin and Kwara State University,
Malete, Kwara State, Nigeria?

Table 4.5: Purpose of using Electronic Resources
S/N

Statement

SA f(%)

1

I use electronic information resources for 178(47.3)

A f(%)

D f(%)

SDf (%)

196(52.1)

2(.5)

--

207(55.1)

15(4.0)

---

213(56.6)

13(3.5)

--

209(55.)

--

--

173(46.0)

2(0.5)

---

101(26.9)

--

--

research purpose due to my ability to navigate on
the web.
2

I use electronic information resources for 154(40.9)
personal reading using searches engines

3

I use electronic information resources for 150(39.9)
preparing personal notes bymy personal ability
to use the web.

4

I use electronic information resources to do 167(44.4)
assignment on personal knowledge

5

I use electronic information resources to add up 201(53.5)
to my academic knowledge through strategic
searches.

6

I use electronic information resources to get 275(73.1)
relevant academic materials through personal
searches

Note SA+A=Agree while D+SD=Disagree

46

Table 4.5 shows that 374 (99.5%) agree that they use electronic information resources for
research purpose due to their ability to navigate on the web while 2 (0.5%) disagree with this.
Similarly, the table also shows that 361 (96.0%) agree that they use electronic information
resources for personal reading using searches engines while 15 (4.0%) disagree with the
statement. In the same vein, the table also shows that 363 (96.5%) agree that they use electronic
information resources for preparing personal notes by my personal ability to use the web while
13(3.5%) disagree with the statement. Furthermore, the table also shows that 376 (100%) agree
that the electronic information resources do an assignment on personal knowledge. On the other
hand, the table also shows that 374 (99.5%) agree that they use electronic information resources
to add up to my academic knowledge through strategic searches while 2 (0.5%) disagree with
this statement. Lastly, the table also shows that 376 (100%) respondents agree that they use
electronic information resources to get relevant academic materials through personal searches.

47

4.2.6 Research Question 5: What do you think should be done to improve the use of
electronic resources in your university?

Table 4.6: Ways of improving use of Electronic resources
S/N
1

Statement

SA

Management should provide good facilities 284(75.5)

A

D

SD

92(24.5)

----

---

(e.g., good computer hardware and software
and good communication network) to
support usage
2

Improve internet connectivity

3

Adequate training on

238(63.3)

the use of search 225(59.8)

138(36.7) --

-

138(36.7) 13(3.5) --

engines
4

Provision of alternative power supply

5

Embracing

self-development

and

232(61.7)

131(34.8) --

13(3.5)

self- 225(59.8)

138(36.7) --

13(3.5)

training on Internet and computer-related
skills
Note: SA+A= Agree; Disagree +Strongly Disagree=Disagree
Table 4.6 shows that out of 376 respondents, 376 (100%) agree that management should
provide good facilities (e.g., good computer hardware and software and good communication
network) to support usage. Furthermore, the table also shows that 376 (100%) agree that
management should improve internet connectivity. On the other hand, the table also shows that
363 (96.5%) agree that there should be adequate training on the use of search engine while
13(3.5%) disagree with this statement. In the same vein, 363 (96.5%) respondents agree that
there should be the provision of the alternative power supply while 13(3.5%) disagree with this
48

statement. Lastly, the table also shows that 363 (96.5%) agree that embracing self-development
and self-training on the Internet and computer-related skills will improve the use of electronic
information resources while 13(3.5%) disagree with this statement.
4.2.6 Testing of Hypotheses
4.2.6.1 There is no significant relationship between computer self-efficacy and use of
electronic resources among undergraduate’s students in University of Ilorin and
Kwara State University.

Table 4.7: Relationship between Computer Self-efficacy and Use of Electronic
Resources
Variable

Mean

SD

N

Df

Computer Self-efficacy

18.724

3.38239 376 374

Use of Electronic resources

21.5585

2.49945

R-cal

P-value

Remark

.492

.001**

Sig...

** Correlation is significant at .001 level (2-tailed)
Table 4.7 shows the summary of the test of the hypothesis which therefore revealed that
there is a significant relationship between the computer self-efficacy and use of electronic
information resources. This is shown in the table where r-cal= 0.492; df = 374 and P = 0.001
which is less than the level of significant (0.05).It implies that there is a significant relationship
between computer self-efficacy and use of electronic information resources. Therefore, the null
hypothesis is rejected. Hence, there is a relationship between computer self-efficacy and use of
electronic information resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University.

49

4.2.6.2 There is no significant relationship between information literacy skills and use of
electronic resources among undergraduates students in University of Ilorin and
Kwara State University.

Table 4.8: Relationship between Information Literacy Skills and Use of
Electronic Resources
Variable

Mean

SD

N

Df

Information literacy skills

16.2322

2.31353 376 374

Use of Electronic resources

19.5645

2.48341

R-cal

P-value

Remark

.269

.000**

Sig...

** Correlation is significant at .001 level (2-tailed)
Table 4.7 shows the summary of the test of the hypothesis which therefore revealed that
there is a significant relationship between the information literacy skills and use of electronic
information resources. This is shown in the table where r-cal= 0.269; df = 374 and P = 0.00
which is less than the level of significant 0.05. It means that there is a significant relationship
between information literacy skills and use of electronic information resources. Therefore, the
null hypothesis is rejected. Hence, there is a relationship between computer self-efficacy and use
of electronic information resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University.

4.3 Discussion of Findings
The study critically examined the influence of computer self-efficacy and information
literacy skills on the use of electronic resources by undergraduate students in the University of
Ilorin and Kwara State University. Based on the finding, the first finding of the study which
focuses on the influence of computer self-efficacy on the use of electronic by undergraduate
50

students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University. The study found that majority of the
undergraduate student in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University are highly computer
self-efficacy which they perceived that it influences their use of electronic information resources.
This finding is in line with the work of Okello and Ikoja (2010); Obuh (2009); Micheal (2003);
Kenneth (2012) who reported that the level of self-efficacy of student enables them to use
electronic information resources effectively.
Based on the second finding of the study, the finding shows that majority of
undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University claimed that
information literacy skills influence the use of electronic information resources. This finding
contradicts the work of Okello and Ikoja (2010); Obuh (2009); Micheal (2003); Kenneth (2012)
who found in their study that electronic information resources are grossly under-utilized by
undergraduates in Nigeria Universities because of their lack of information literacy skills.
Furthermore, the study shows that the information literacy skills coupled with their level of
computer self-efficacy influence their use of electronic information resources. This finding is in
agreement with the study carried out carried out by Ahmet et al. (2017) who reported that the
combination of computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influences the use of
electronic information literacy skills.
In the same vein, the study also examines the purpose of using electronic information
resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and Kwara State University. The
study found that majority of the undergraduate students use electronic information resources to
do the assignment and also use electronic information resources to get relevant academic
materials through personal searches. This finding is in agreement with the work of Ajiboye and
Tella (2007) who reported in their study that undergraduate students use information resources to
51

do their assignment. Finally, the study identifies various ways of improving the use of electronic
information resources among undergraduate students. The study found that majority of the
respondents stated that management should provide good facilities (e.g., good computer
hardware and software and good communication network) to support usage and also improve
internet connectivity.
Furthermore, the study tested two null hypotheses. The first null hypothesis which states
that there is no significant relationship between computer self-efficacy and use of electronic
information resources is rejected. The study reveals that there is a significant relationship
between computer self-efficacy and use of electronic information resources. This finding is in
line with the work of Adedeji and Tella (2011) who reported that computer self-efficacy had a
strong relationship with the use of electronic information resources. Similarly rejected was the
second null hypothesis. It is because the study found that there is a significant relationship
between information literacy skills and use of electronic information resources. This finding is in
agreement with the work of Ahmet et al. (2017) who found in their study that information
literacy skills influence the use of electronic information resources.

52

CHAPTER FIVE
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
5.1 Introduction
Chapter five gives the summary of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations based
on the findings of the study.

5.2Summary of the Findings
Based on the survey done among the undergraduate's Students University of Ilorin and
Kwara State University, the study found that majority of the undergraduate students had a high
level of computer self-efficacy which influence their use of electronic information resources. In
the same vein, the study found that majority of the undergraduate students found that information
literacy skills influence their use of electronic information resources. Furthermore, the study
found that the combination of computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills influence the
use of electronic information resources by undergraduate students in University of Ilorin and
Kwara State University. Similarly, the study found that majority of the undergraduate students
use electronic information resources to do their assignment and also use electronic information
resources to get relevant academic materials through personal searches. On the other hand, the
study found that that management should provide good facilities (e.g., good computer hardware
and software and good communication network) to support usage and also improve internet
connectivity to improve the use of electronic resources among the undergraduate students.
Finally, the study found that both computer self-efficacy and information literacy skills have a
significant relationship with the use of electronic information resources.

53

5.3. Conclusions
Based on the findings of this study concluded that a majority of the undergraduates are
fully aware of electronic resources as their major sources of information retrieval. The study
reveals that most of the students as the skills to use electronic resources but their major
challenges are an improvement in the internet connectivity, adequate power supply, training and
orientation more on the utilization of electronic resources. If the university management can
improve the listed challenges above more of the students will improve the proficiency and
perform better on the use or e-resources.

5.4 Recommendations
Based on the findings of the study, the following recommendations are at this moment
suggested to improve the undergraduate students‘ use of electronic resources in the university as
well as the libraries:
The university management and the library should create awareness about the electronic
resources available in the library and its relevance to student‘s subject background. It is possible
to achieved awareness through group training for the library users especially during the library
orientation programme for fresh undergraduate students.
University management should also make an effort to provide sufficient internet connected to
computer terminals and electronic devices that will serve a reasonable number of students at the
same time. The number of computers that are presently in use is grossly inadequate for the
population in both universities.
More electronic resources should be provided by the university management to the library and
also made accessible to the users. Users who lack skills in the use of electronic resources should
be given necessary assistance to encourage the use.
54

To ensure a higher computer literacy level of the undergraduate students at the time of entry into
the university, education authorities in Nigeria should ensure adequate provision of computers in
schools and well-trained computer teachers to impart practical skills on the students.
Also observed in the two universities was that there is no sufficient staff, especially in the
System Unit and so, there is limited time to serve the users. Therefore, more staff should be
employed to serve the users. It is also advisable for the libraries to run a shift. They should be
running shift from morning to evening so that the undergraduate who is bored with lectures
could visit their university libraries at the convenient period to use the resources.
The University management should have alternative power supply system to generate steady
power supply for effective use of electronic resources in the university libraries. The
management can also harness the electronic resources when there is the steady power supply.
Therefore, management of the universities should make adequate arrangement for alternative and
more dependable power supply to the library since the public power supply system is very
unreliable.
5.5 Contribution to Body of Knowledge
The primary aim of the researcher in this study is to look at the influence
of computer self-efficacy and Information literacy skills on the use of
electronic resources by undergraduates, at University of Ilorin and Kwara
State University in Kwara State, Nigeria.
The Contributions of the Study to knowledge are as follows:

55

1. The study has provided a framework for the discussion on computer selfefficacy of undergraduate students at the University of Ilorin and the kwara
State University.

2. The study also

provides a framework for discussion on Information Literacy

skills
undergraduate

of
students of

the University of Ilorin and the Kwara state

University.
3. The study provides a framework for discussion on the level of improvement
on the use of electronic resources by undergraduate students at University of
Ilorin and Kwara state University.
4. On the hypotheses tested, there is no significant relationship between computer self-efficacy
and use of e-resources among undergraduate students of University of Ilorin and kwara State
University.
5. There is also no significant relationship between information literacy skills and use
of electronic resources.
5.6 Areas of Further Studies
Based on the present study, the following areas are identified for further research:

1. The present study involved only students from certain faculties the researcher believed to be
more committed to the use of e-resources like Engineering, Information and Communications
Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and Pure and Applied Sciences. Future studies can concentrate
on other departments and faculties of the institutions.
2. Comparative study could be done on other faculties of the institutions or
in another institution in the State.
56

3. The same study can be done with different method such as transaction log for getting better
picture of those using electronic information resources in the faculties.
4. The effect and impact of e-resources usage on students‘ academic performance and scientific
output can be another area for future studies.