LIBRARIANS LEADING CHANGE: INFORMAL LEARNING SPACES AND THE
INTERCEPTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND STEAM

ABSTRACT
LIBRARIANS LEADING CHANGE: INFORMAL LEARNING SPACES AND THE
INTERCEPTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND STEAM
Public libraries throughout the United States are increasingly using technological platforms to
provide information resources to students across socioeconomic environments. Advances in
technology have affected the way in which we learn with the advent of online learning,
e-learning and shared learning experiences that have become ever present in schools and
libraries. How relevant is the public library in the initiatives that are directly related to the muchneeded support of science, technology, engineering, arts, and math (STEAM)? This study
explores the public library as a free, public space for informal learning and the democratic ideals
of success as it relates to science education, achievement, and national innovation. The purpose
of this study was to determine the challenges that the public library experiences in the
implementation of STEAM programs, strategies, and practices employed by the public library in
managing the implementation, and how the public library measures success in the process. The
questions explored are an (a) examination of best practices in developing strategies for
implementation and the challenges that public libraries face as they relate to the implementation
and development of STEAM programs, (b) the challenges that public libraries face as they relate
to the implementation and development of informal learning programs focused on STEAM,
(c) how public libraries measure success within informal learning programs related to STEAM,
and (d) what lessons have been learned in the development of informal learning spaces focused
on STEAM in the public library.

Chapter 1. Introduction
The disruptive technologies of today are the driving force of the public library worldwide
(“Shaping the Future,” n.d.; Vargas, Vanderkast, García, & González, 2015). According to Lee
(2007), the dynamic shift from print to digital has had the greatest impact as a result of
technology. Author and authority on artificial intelligence, Raymond Kurzweil (1992) foretold
what was thought to be the end of books. Although computer technology has increased since
then, libraries continue to purchase books, which remain as a Stallworth and a core service
alongside new resources and programs. According to Publisher’s Weekly and BookNet Canada,
print book sales were on the increase in 2016 (“BookNet Canada Reports,” 2017; Segura, 2017).
Throughout the last century, libraries have experienced continuous change, driven largely
by user demand for fast Internet, access to Wi-Fi in the library and beyond, and resources
hitherto never imagined outside the confines of the physical structure. The future of books is a
great concern as the digital age continues to affect the circulation of materials and focuses more
on electronic resources and how learning takes place in the public library, as noted by the
Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS, 2017) and others (Cummings, Neatrour &
Callaway, 2018; Little, 2011). The IMLS is the primary source of federal support that also
provides statistics, demonstrating that citizens support over 16,000 public libraries in the United
States that offer a plethora of programs and are primarily focused on digital inclusion and
instructional programs related to science, technology, engineering, art and math (STEAM). The
thought of the library services having diminishing returns as a result of the technology has been
mistaken as growth continues, addressing the needs of 21st-century clientele.
Service in public libraries has exponentially become technological in function as
processes and procedures are automated and the constant demand for quicker, smarter, and

1

virtual access to information increases (ALA Office for Research and Study, 2011). As a result,
the public library, a service organization hinged on information at its core, is finding itself in an
obligatory stance as it competes with the growth of technology applications. Wiegand (1999)
described the field of library information science as an area of study in which the technology to
which it is harnessed defines the field.
The use of public libraries has grown beyond imagined numbers, and technology has had
an unexpected effect on the role libraries serve. Today’s library has been reimagined with the
involvement of architects and the provision of space for the arts, meetings, public events, and
STEAM programs as it redefines itself as a place of relevance in communities throughout the
nation. Reinventing the library, with technology as the catalyst, involves investigating the recent
changes related to how learning takes place in the library, how collections are repurposed as a
result of technology, and the implications of automated systems.
Changing Role of the Public Library
Much can be said about the future of libraries and the need for instant gratification. The
diversification of service modules has moved from what was a written collection of knowledge
to one that is mobile and yet connected. The ability and need to reimagine service is evermore
clear as the literature expresses the broad range of possibilities in meeting the need of the
community (Thompson, 2015). The most practical role of the library is sharing information
throughout the lifespan. The learning is centered around organized resources, the preservation of
ideas and artifacts, and making the ideas and artifacts accessible, which creates social interaction,
bringing people together for a common good or interest. Therefore, the library has always been
the place where the sharing of information intersects within a social context within the walls of a
physical structure, according to Mattern (2014), who supported the thought of library as a

2

“platform,” similar to the ideas of Weinberger (2012). The conceptualization was loosely based
on a content model resembling Facebook in that the library would provide access to everything
including content and the metadata of the content as well as enabling the creation of new
products and services from which others could build, thereby integrating everything in the library
and creating a net ecosystem.
The changing role of libraries highlights the need for even more services (Mattern, 2014)
as opportunity centers where those left behind and disenfranchised can attain a skill or perhaps
learn to navigate an increasingly technical world and its complexities. The traditional services
are still relevant for many including seniors. The world today requires seniors acclimating to
increased technological functions needed for routine business processes (Schwartz, Mosher,
Wilson, Lipkus, & Collins, 2002). Many persons also seek assistance with job readiness skills
and basic reference information.
Repurposing of Collections
Although libraries struggle with the constant threat of closure and budget cuts (Child &
Goulding, 2012), the foot traffic continues. The library is a point of connection, providing vital
information for its clients’ survival. The intrinsic need to attain knowledge of some type may
not contribute to the circulation of books. Circulation statistics still pose a viable question about
the desire for books in the midst of the e-book format. Kurzweil (1992) and Berube (2005)
concurred that e-books could conceivably be a threat to physical books with a possibility of
obsolescence by the turn of the century, slowly slipping into antiquity and diminishing what has
been a reading culture. The provision of electronic resources over the last two decades has been
extensive; however, libraries continue to purchase books. Chadwell (2010) in “What’s Next for
Collection Management and Manager?” asserted that technology advances to meet demand and

3

suggested that as the years progress, the use of e-books will become even more robust.
Conversely, the e-book has begun to plateau. The expansion of e-books was rapid. However, this
was not the case with music and other digital media that have flooded the public library.
Research found the e-book to be of interest for specific reasons, such as storing a favorite
title on a device, using a reference work on a regular basis, and keeping aspirational titles
available for reading in the future (Shatzkin, 2011). As public libraries reimagine their spaces,
many have engaged in conversations about rethinking and remodeling older structures and the
cost of retrofitting their spaces for new technologies (Brown & Long, 2006). Many people do not
visit a library solely to read but also to convene in a space. Pritzker Award winning architects Ito
and Martin (2013) explored the influences of new media, digital technology, urban environment,
and the notion that people go to the library to be a part of the community in the library.
Repurposing the collections also involves what any library experiences when budgetary
constraints prevent a rebuilding or renovation but allow for modifications of a few structures to
provide spaces that are accommodating and welcoming. Many libraries seek assistance from
community entities as well as governing bodies in providing greater accessibility by adding such
items as outlets, wiring, and redeveloping layouts of traditional structures for self-service
options.
Implications of Automation
Information once perceived to be inaccessible or readily available is now part of the
world-wide web. Although this seemingly provides a tightening of the gap in digital inclusion as
well as the digital divide, other factors preclude the notion. Freeman (2017) and Cohen (1975)
discussed other socioeconomic issues and causes in an attempt to address the exclusivity of
access and the importance of the libraries’ role with the underserved. According to Cotten,

4

Davisson, Shank, and Ward (2014), although an elevated use of smartphones and digital access
is found among children and teens, a divide in levels of access, rationale for use, as well as the
skills to navigate the web still exists. Therefore, access does not determine usage or proficiency
in use (Stern, Adams, & Elsasser, 2009). The inequalities become ever present in the differences
of human assets in online settings. As such, the literature speaks to an underlying digital divide
in skills rather than access (Gonzales, 2015). Broadband access, digital literacy, and the library
working in concert is a key factor in addressing the society’s needs to equalize the justice of
possibilities.
The division noted in skills also exists in the realm of achievement as it relates to the
dialogue on education. The apparent lack of achievement in the areas of math and science in the
United States revealed a heightened concern for technological innovation, and by extension, the
economy (Bailey et al., 2016; National Research Council, 2002; “Science & Engineering
Indicators,” 2018; STEM Education Coalition, 2018). The recent phenomena of science
education in public spaces examine the intersection of informal learning, public libraries, and
STEAM, creating a rationale that substantiates the public library as a viable organization that
supports and implements STEAM initiatives that place value in the ecosystem of learning.
Statement of the Problem
The library experience has vastly changed over the last decade. The usage has increased
due in large part to technology, and as a result, usage is varied, multifaceted, and accessible
beyond the physical structure. The evolution of service in the public library requires an
engagement that is transformative and student-centered (Collins & Somerville, 2008). How can
the public library examine its role and contribution of providing educational opportunities related
to STEAM programs in an informal setting? How will the public library create value that meets

5

the enduring and evolving mission of service and the ideals of youth and acquire the leverage
needed within organization and community to support a pedagogy of lifelong learning?
Purpose Statement
The purpose of this study was to determine the challenges that the public library
experiences in the implementation of STEAM programs, strategies, and practices employed by
the public library in managing the implementation, and how the public library measures success
in the process. The study also gathers suggestions from public librarians for managing the
implementation. Four research questions were created to assist with this process.
Research Questions
The following research questions (RQ) were addressed in this study:
1. What strategies and practices have been implemented in public libraries that focus on
informal learning opportunities related to STEAM?
2. What are the challenges that public libraries face as they relate to the implementation
and development of informal learning programs focused on STEAM?
3. How do public libraries measure success within informal learning programs related to
STEAM?
4. What lessons have been learned in the development of informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the public library?
Significance of the Study
The timing of this research was of significant value as STEAM programming increases in
public libraries (Gangopadhyay, 2017; Rosa, 2017). These efforts also enhance the conversation
of informal learning and the need for transformative leadership in the area of data-driven
research that supports STEAM learning in the public library. The timing of this study also

6

aligned with national initiatives such as the STEAM Education Coalition, the National Research
Council, and the National Science Board, which were conducting research to improve STEAM
education within the context of schools, not public libraries. This phenomenon represents a void
in the literature. This study has meaning for addressing the vast importance of STEAM education
in public libraries and its contribution to lifelong learning, as well as the logical shift in
technology programming that leads to the active participation of the community and the
education of its youth. Given the significance of program initiatives related to science education
and creative digital literacy that has presented itself in the form of digital labs and makerspaces
across the nation in public libraries. There is also a school of thought that access STEM in a
broader context to include the arts primarily due to the creative elements of science that is
centered around the creative elements of innovation such as making of exhibits, demonstrations
and models that provide a physical replication of investigating and the art based requirements of
STEM projects and programs. According to the Maker Spaces and making is significant to the
paper as a key component of STEAM initiatives that introduce marketable and strategic skills
attainment for youth and future career pathways. This paper examines the opportunities for
informal learning in a public library setting that can stimulate the interest of children in the area
of computer science in concert with the educational platforms on science education known as
STEAM. This research sought to show the value of informal learning initiatives in the form of
science, technology, engineering, art, and math education in public libraries.
Significance for patrons. According to Wiegand (1999), the 20th-century American, the
library was one the nation's most understudied yet ubiquitous institutions. The American library
possesses a rich history of service to millions of people across generations. However, research on
the public library and the community it serves is not adequately represented in the literature as an

7

educational, mission-driven organization (Gross, 2013). This affects the role of the present-day
library and the future of the public library. One area for further theoretical research is the need
and desire of the general public for STEAM programs in a public setting. The evidence of such
need is embedded in the changing roles of public libraries.
Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) was one of the formidable philanthropists of his era.
Carnegie was an immigrant who, as a young man, amassed wealth through various business
investments in steel production and iron works, railroads, and oil wells. Carnegie, who worked
long hours in his youth, had no access to formal education; however, a retired merchant, Colonel
Anderson—to whom to Carnegie gave much credit for his success—loaned books to Carnegie
and his contemporaries from Anderson’s small, private library. The actions of Colonel Anderson
would spark the development of over 2,509 libraries throughout the world (“Andrew Carnegie’s
Story,” 2015). Carnegie’s vision was attributed to his desire to give all Americans access to
books and to provide information for immigrants on the culture of their new home (Whyte, n.d.).
Andrew Carnegie’s contribution to the development of public libraries and the
transformation of access to information is very much akin to the transformation that is eminent
today. The public library has an opportunity to redefine itself, as a result of technological
advances and the intersection of science education services in public libraries. Advances in
technology and the augmentation of access has changed the relationship with its patrons who
now can have access anytime and anywhere with services such as e-books, electronic resources,
and self-directed use of accounts.
New technologies have surfaced in public libraries, schools, and the world we live in,
transforming the ways we live, work, communicate, and learn. The nature of digital literacy is
contingent upon the context of informal learning settings, such as public libraries, as a real-

8

world, authentic measure of filling the gaps in digital readiness for the general public, a means
for introducing access, and in particular, providing STEAM programming. Informal learning in
the public library provides an opportunity for today’s youth to conceivably grasp some
understanding of their future involvement in career paths that involve science and hands on
opportunities that involve innovation.
Significance for public libraries and schools. The significance of this study as it relates
to the public library is in the form of grounded research on a public organization that serves
everyone. The prevalence of public libraries as a community entity, according to Freeman
(2017), gives credence to the increased levels of support across the nation during the last decade.
The American Library Association’s (ALA) public library survey demonstrated the level of use
and for what reasons (“Digital Inclusion Survey,” 2013). This study adds value to the mission of
the ALA and assists librarians in their efforts to provide programming that meets the needs of the
community.
The significance for schools as educational partners with public libraries is to address the
national initiative to improve overall performance of students in science, technology,
engineering, and math. The goals are to also prepare students for career paths in the sciences by
integrating science education programs in informal settings with formal school learning. The
concepts of informal learning and digital literacy are both contingents of the Internet. The
literature speaks to how the Internet has had a profound effect on public libraries (Kinney, 2010)
as the mechanisms through which services are delivered. As reported by the National
Telecommunications and Infrastructure Administration (NTIA; 1999), the Internet was
introduced in public libraries in the late 1990s by the NTIA of the United States Department of
Commerce and its third report addressing the digital divide in a document titled “Falling

9

Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide” (McConnaughey & Lader, 1998). The
concept of universal service was introduced during 1995–2000, as detailed in NTIA’s report,
which extended the service from telephone to the Internet. This idea also identified some
disparities in access and service across demographic lines that are lessened today but not
obliterated.
Much of the demand has been reported via surveys that document the desire for programs
in the areas of digital inclusion and STEAM. Despite the far-reaching results shown by the ALA
and IMLS, no dominant research has focused on informal learning within the walls of public
libraries. Public libraries have been targeted as untapped spaces for STEAM programs by many
outside of the institution. Many organizations partner with and support such programming, but
support of a theoretical framework of learning by the libraries and librarian themselves is needed
to create a relevance that is meaningful and justifiable within the field of library science.
Assumptions and Limitations of the Study
This study assumes that IPAC is the only organization that is a definitive resource
providing information for public libraries in the United States. Although some data are available
as a result of the survey implemented by ALA, the Institute for Museum, and IMLS and gathered
by Information and Policy Access Center (IPAC), every state was not represented in the study.
Definition of Terms
The following definitions were gleaned and simplified from several research resources
that have contributed to the subject matter and will appear repeatedly throughout the study.
● Digital divide—Digital divide, as it relates to public libraries, addresses the
inequalities in web access for the general public and by extension, human capital.

10

Gunkel (2003) described the term as the gap separating those individuals who have
access to new forms of information technology from those who do not.
● Digital inclusion—The shift in technology, as it relates to public libraries, includes an
increased need for training of the general public in the use and functionality of
technology and an increased, positive effect on the everyday lives of patrons. The
Institute of Museum and Library Science (“Toward Equality of Access,” 2004)
defined digital inclusion as the ability of individuals and groups to use technologies to
access information and communication systems.
● Informal learning—Learning that is beyond the classroom and the question of
whether informal learning elevates and provides well-being is experiencing a
resurgence of interest. These emerging perspectives on informal learning are directly
related to STEAM initiatives in public libraries as pathways to interest in science. The
lifelong process by which every individual acquires and accumulates knowledge,
skills, attitudes, and insights includes daily experiences and exposure to the
environment at home, work, and play; the examples and attitudes of families and
friends; travel, reading newspapers, and books; and listening to the radio and viewing
films or television. Generally, informal education is unorganized, unsystematic, and
even unintentional at times and accounts for much of any person’s total lifetime
learning—including persons with formal education (Coombs & Ahmed, 1974).
● Informal learning spaces—The public library is one example of an informal learning
space that provides opportunities for self-directed, lifelong learning. The term was
defined by Harrop and Turpin (2013) as non-discipline-specific spaces frequented by

11

both staff and students for self-directed learning activities and can be within or
outside library spaces
● STEAM— An acronym developed as a result of educators observing a need to inject
creativity in the teaching of STEAM—science, technology, engineering, arts, and
math. Proficiency at STEAM has been a goal of educators for the last decade as a
need to increase performance in math and science across the nation.
● STEM—As defined by Hom (2014), STEM is a curriculum based on the idea of
educating students on four specific disciplines—science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. The acronym was previously SMET and was coined STEM by Dr.
Judith Ramaley (as cited in Hom, 2014), director of education and human resource
directorate for the National Science Foundation from 2001–04. Later, STEM was
developed to demonstrate a connection between each discipline and not one being
superior to the others (Sanders, 2009).
● STEAM education—Many educational institutions and organization have placed an
emphasis on STEAM. As a result, curricula have been revised to meet the needs of
this national initiative. The phrase STEAM education is an interdisciplinary approach
to learning in which rigorous academic concepts are coupled with real-world lessons
(Tsupros, Kohler, & Hallinen, 2009). STEAM education includes teaching and
learning apply science, technology, engineering, and mathematics through
educational activities to make connections between school, community, work, and the
global enterprise. The concepts range across all grade levels from primary to postdoctorate (Gonzalez & Kuenzi, 2012), enabling the development of STEAM literacy
and choices for work, study, and career (Beatty, 2011).

12

Chapter Summary
This chapter explored the changing role of libraries and the implications of technology to
its service model, the patrons that are served and future programs needed that address the
changing tides of the society. As technology intensifies the services offered are beyond the
existing walls and therefore thought must be given to the structure, the use of space, the
acquisition of materials and equipment (LaConte & Dusenbery, 2016; Omdal et al., 2006).
Although many changes to the service model have been made, a vast amount of resources
continue to support public libraries’ commitment to lifelong learning for the communities they
serve. The library collections are relevant and responsive and provide educational support for
school enrichment, the services offered are enhanced as a result of technology, and the spaces are
utilized to best support the communities served. The advent of technology has had a considerable
effect on the level of enrichment librarians are able to provide to all library users.
Clark (2015) asserted that the public library continues to evolve as technology advances.
The survey conducted by ALA, IMLS, and IPAC has shown the progression of digital inclusion
in the overall operations of the public library. The literature conveys the importance of meeting
the population’s needs for access, application, and programs to further the education of 21stcentury patrons. These informal opportunities for learning the STEAM disciplines provide access
for students who may not otherwise have this kind of exposure. The digital inclusion programs
offer a pathway for all to enhance skills and gain access to programs that may ignite interest in a
career. According to the Aspen Institute, the libraries’ role in society is becoming transformative
by virtue of the innovative culture created with programs such as STEAM that provide new
forms of participation (Garmer, 2014). These programs lead to fulfillment of the democratic
ideals of success.

13

Wilbur Cohen wrote that “learning is a continuous, permanent, lifelong pursuit. It is a
process which commences with birth and only terminates at death and is then carried on by
others in a never-ending continuum” (1975, p. 83). According to ALA, lifelong learning was
established as a core value of librarianship and being central to the “enhancement of a learning
society” (Elmborg, 2016, p. 533). The library is that one location where the new technology and
the traditional forms of information gathering mesh. Learning and literacy in the public library
has been one of situated learning, in that the adult is engaged in learning and self-initiating skills
needed in the midst of working a job or caring for a family. Therefore, lifelong learning is what
the adult desires, and it is driven by the user. This tendency does not transcend cultures but only
derives from the social context in which it is shared across cultures and is dependent on the
social context in which it is embedded.
Literacy is also considered to be intergenerational, with one generation influencing the
other, and has been seen as a pathway out of poverty (Thompson, 2012). Another significant
finding is that the need to improve literacy is just as important for children as for adults, given
the longevity of today's population. Robinson et al. (2015) also explained the effects of digital
literacy and the inequalities that senior citizens face as much or more than those of working age.
This insight provides further justification for informal learning in a public setting that might
provide even more social and economic stability, which is important for today’s lifestyles of
social interaction and educational modes of learning via computers.
The characteristics of STEAM and the support the both formal and informal learning of
science have strong possibilities for an even broader reach. Our nation is in need of reform in
education; however, in the midst of this discussion, the educator’s role as innovator is in need of
community involvement and funding (STEM Education Coalition, 2018). The use of out-of-

14

school settings such as the public libraries as a possibility of broadening STEAM initiatives and
programs for future generation is one to be considered. Much has been said about schools not
performing according to standards (Drew, 2011; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine, 2016); however, the National Research Council, Board of Science Education, and
The Center for Education, as well as the Board for Testing and Assessment have supported
research and numerous workshops and programs that can support STEAM disciplines
effectively.
The prospect of the public library, the one remaining independent civic organization,
having an influence on the innovative research of informal learning is very much congruent with
the overarching mission of lifelong learning and access. Bell, Lewenstein, Shouse, and Feder
(2009) identified a significant number of studies that support the role of the public library as an
informal learning space or out-of-school experience that can provide opportunities for STEAM
achievement. Progress has been made in the growth of informal learning opportunities over the
last 200 years in the United States and specifically, in the presence of science as a social
construct in the everyday lives of people (Bell et al., 2009).
The 1993 report on the Federal Coordinating Council of Science, Engineering, and
Technology confirmed the federal government’s expenditures of over $67 million on the public
understanding of science (cited in Feder, Shouse, Lewenstein, & Bell, 2012). The support of
national foundations and nonprofit research is evident in the literature review; however, central
planning for future initiatives are emerging (“Shaping the Future of digital economy and
society,” n.d.). Today, most STEAM programs in public libraries are facilitated by professionals
and experts in various science fields. Funding is customarily provided through grants from
foundations and corporate entities.

15

Finally, Chapter 1 explores the state of public libraries and the support for an increased
interest in STEAM programs (Bell et al., 2009; IMLS, 2017; “Libraries Support Digital
Readiness," 2014). The programs have recognized not only the need for STEAM learning as an
educational support to schools but also as a catalyst for the introduction to new technologies in
the realm of the digital divide (Cohron, 2015), and the national effort to enhance performance as
well as career paths in the sciences (Dusenbery, 2014; “Fact Sheet,” 2016; Rainie & Anderson,
2017). The other aspects for consideration is the history of the public library as a lifelong
learning entity. The public library has been a free public learning space that has sustained itself
throughout the years for the underserved, providing programs to supplement and assist parents
and students with materials that support the school curriculum and meeting the needs of the
community at large (Garmer, 2014).
The relevance of STEAM programs for society has brought an increased emphasis on
children and achievement in the area of science, math and the make trend. The public library has
historically linked itself to education dating back to the 18th century and have symbiotically
existed hand in hand throughout the changing of times. In the last decade, technological
advances have created an interest and platform for the sciences and creativity that have begun to
address a greater need for innovation and economic stability for future generations
(Subramaniam, Ahn, Fleischmann, & Druin, 2012). In recent years, conversations have included
architects and space planners to ensure the creation of successful informal learning spaces that
support science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics learning. The library as a place
for a deeper engaging opportunity to explore and test curiosity through a creative blend of
science and art that introduces concepts of “making” that are grounded in engineering and the
construction of things in library space sometimes caller maker spaces. This study sought to offer

16

best practices for the implementation of STEAM programs as viable informal learning spaces for
future generations in public libraries. This research also sought to add value to STEAM efforts in
public libraries and contribute to the next generation of STEAM learning. These initiatives also
create further relevance for the public library as an informal learning setting that specifically
addresses the credibility of this neutral space and its commitment to supporting the community,
learning, and national advancement.

17

Chapter 2. Literature Review
Introduction to the Literature Review
This chapter reviews literature relevant to studying how individual frames of reference
influence informal learning in public libraries, and the history and plausibility of STEAM
programs within the public library as a means for securing the democratic ideals of providing
access, social and economic possibilities for 21st-century youth. In the public library, the term
digital literacy, as defined by Visser (2012), means “having the ability to use information and
communication technologies to evaluate, create, and communicate information” (para. 2) with a
conceptual understanding of safety, license, permission, and ethics in the appropriate use of
information that requires both cognitive and technical skill (Erickson, Meyers, & Small, 2013).
The inception of computers in the public library during the early 1990’s represented a massive
undertaking of providing instruction for the employees and the general public on how to use the
hardware and software. Both have inevitably changed and advanced in difficulty as technology
gradually become more complex over the last century. In the midst of this evolution is an
undeniable need for instruction from one year to the next. In addition to the necessity of
developing skill sets, new divides need to be addressed in the public library and how these needs
should be met in equal measure to maintain access as a necessary means of closing the digital
divide (Carlson & Goss, 2016; Erickson et al., 2013; Swan, Grimes, & Owens, 2013).
The library continues to evolve on the level of service offered and programming offered
to a digitally savvy clientele. Mattern (2014) described the arrangement as an informational and
social infrastructure meeting at a physical infrastructure to support the need. Weinberger (2012)
contended that the library should be thought of as an “open platform” with open collections and
the exposure of metadata. This model would create “free innovation”—another model introduced

18

by Eric von Hippel (2017)—and creativity building, on the notion of providing products and
services and moving away from the provision of resources.
The way in which the service is rendered today requires flexibility and agility of a
workforce that is not prepared or lacks the skills to negotiate, perceive, and plan for the needs of
tomorrow's library. Elmborg (2016) presented the argument that if the public library indeed
seeks to establish a pedagogical model for lifelong learning in its attainment of professional
learning and the development of formal information learning within the organization, a firm
commitment to the terms core value and lifelong learning is needed, as determined in the
mission of the American Library Association. Anderton (2012) questioned that if indeed the
commitment exists, then why are only meager means available for addressing funding and
increasing new literacies in public libraries? Elmborg (2016) concluded that until these areas are
confronted, the public library is strictly a support entity for educational institutions.
According to the Institute of Library and Museum Services (IMLS, 2017), over 16,000
public libraries are present in the United States; programs are offered in the areas of technology,
digital inclusion, and instructional programs to assist in the application of such technologies. The
public library has become a learning center, a learning hub, a tech center with descriptors that
provide valuable resources and programs in the area of digital inclusion—generally and
specifically in STEAM-related subjects (Baek, 2013; Bell et al., 2009; Dusenbery, 2014). In
today’s library, the average person can access most choices electronically in the form of e-books
and databases. Technology has had an effect on the use of books and inevitably allows patrons to
interact with the library beyond its brick and mortar. In the same vain, young people born in the
last decade have an orientation to technology that is second nature to their ability to find
information. In the midst of this phenomena, a segment of the population has limited or

19

inconsistent access to technology. Code.org, a national organization, has begun an initiative to
provide rigorous curricula in schools, educate teachers, and provide initiatives that focus on
improving access to computer science (“Code.org: Anybody Can Learn,” 2017).
The National Academy of Sciences (2007), as well as the National Academy of
Engineering (2008), is comprised of many leading research initiatives. They embrace the
understanding of science and its influence, as both organizations assert that global issues such as
climate change, threats to human health, and access to clean water are the major challenges
facing society today and are rooted in the fundamentals of STEAM. The issue is the need for
persons with the prerequisite skills to address such future challenges. Current and future students
who are diverse and skilled in STEAM career pathways must be prepared, which is critical to the
needed innovation and ambitious rigor in a STEM-capable workforce (“Revisiting the STEM
Workforce,” 2015). In 2009, President Obama ignited much discussion on “the race to educate
our kids” (Rottenborn, 2009, p. 11), in order to sustain the United States as the leader in research
and technology. The initiative began with ambitious goals to bring forth the need for
achievements in math and science, and by extension, transform the educational systems to
prepare today’s youth for tomorrow's workforce.
The dialogue on education is an accurate result of concerns about the apparent lack of
student achievement in the areas of math and science, as well as the need for the United States to
project the vitality of an economy that is hinged upon technological innovation. When the U.S.
Department of Education examined the presence of science and math efforts in research as well
as the graduation rates of students in STEAM-related fields, it presented an alarming call, as the
prospective jobs for a student in 2020 involve career paths that are currently unnamed but
dependent upon the evolving technological advances. Anderton (2012) described the

20

phenomenon as a pedagogical zeitgeist that the public library supports by providing and helping
schools and parents with resources and programs that contribute to integrating these initiatives
into the community as a whole. This statement reflected one of the enduring missions of public
libraries—to enhance learning and provide access to information for all.
Informal learning in public libraries has become an attractive commodity in general, and
with the recent proliferation of STEAM learning in the form of programs in public libraries,
much is being written about this phenomenon. Informal learning has fundamentally substantiated
the public library and its underlying mission of lifelong learning that began with philanthropist
Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie, a Scottish American philanthropist, built 2,509 libraries between
1883 and 1929: 1,689 libraries in the United States, 660 in the United Kingdom, 125 in Canada
and others in Russia, South Africa, New Zealand, Serbia, Belgium, France, the Caribbean,
Mauritius, Malaysia, and Fiji (Larsen, 2017).
Carnegie's “free-to-the -people libraries,” as coined by Lowry (2003, p. 1) are one of the
most significant cultural exchanges of humility. Lowry described libraries as a gift that has
shaped the minds and lives of millions. This adage relates to some of the most powerful learning
effects in the public domain. According to Allen et al. (2007), an informal learning environment
is learner-centered, specifically because the agenda is agreed upon by the participants. For
example, they include the involvement of peers, parents, and facilitators without any perceived
limitations on the learning potential. This interaction allows for spontaneity that encourages selfseeking of goals and motivates further interest.
The new technologies that are utilized in public libraries, schools, and the world in which
we live have transformed how we live, work, communicate, and learn. The nature of digital
literacy is contingent upon the context of informal learning settings, such as public libraries, as

21

(a) a real-world, authentic measure for filling the gaps in the digital readiness of the general
public; and (b) a means for providing access, and in particular, STEAM programming. Informal
learning in the public library provides an opportunity for 21st-century students to take control,
creating and mapping their future involvement in career paths that involve science and
innovation.
This chapter examines the literature regarding the intersection of informal learning and
public libraries. The content also explores how libraries, as informal spaces in cooperation with
the schools and businesses, will prepare the public through the use of alternative educational
platforms for achievement, economic stability, and workforce readiness within the domain of its
fundamental mission to provide access and engender the tenets of lifelong learning. Resources
used for this research include university, public, and private library resources available from
EBSCO, ProQuest, and Digital Dissertations, via access through Pepperdine University’s library
website and home page. The nomenclature in this search criteria includes learning, non-formal
learning, informal learning, incidental learning, experiential learning, public libraries, science
education, digital literacy, digital divide, and science, technology, engineering, arts, and math,
commonly identified as STEAM.
The continuous intersection of technology and public libraries is a topic that requires
further exploration. The future existence of a structure called a library and the defining of the
public library as place not only for books but a place that ignites ideas for those who would not
otherwise have access, exposure, and experiential learning options presents a dilemma. The
provision of space and constructivism in a public place allows for creative thinking,
collaboration, problem solving, and critical thinking in an ever-changing society that is greatly
influenced by technology. These realities and dilemmas require a critical look at best practices

22

for future public libraries and the implementation of STEAM programming. This research
explored some uncharted territory related to the role of the public library as a viable place for
informal learning opportunities that produce sustainable results.
This research synthesizes the concepts of learning and establishes the public library as an
informal environment for learning the sciences. In today’s library, increased automation is
making the library a technologically rich environment with collaborative spaces for learning.
Perhaps these efforts are also possible with the over 16,000 public libraries offering STEAMrelated programs that involve science education and learning. The opportunity exists to influence
the trajectory of students of underserved populations who lack access and mentoring for building
a future in yet-to-be named professions in the sciences.
This dissertation addresses the fundamental question regarding science learning in an
informal setting and the best practices needed for implementation and maintenance of such
programs for future librarians and the youth served in the near future. A large body of
information on informal learning is available; however, when linked to the public library, that
body of information is limited in scope. The intent is to contribute to the breadth of research on
the topic of informal learning in public libraries, address the changing roles of libraries, as well
as the future of public libraries as STEAM learning environments. These themes will hopefully
influence the reform of schools, policy making structures, funding, and the recognition of the
value of public libraries as informal learning spaces.
The Digital Inclusion Survey (2013) provided comprehensive data that supports evidence
of the public libraries’ commitment to foster access and inclusion in advanced technological
initiatives throughout the nation. The public library ensures opportunities for success in building
technological competencies through programs that support digital readiness (Gerding, 2011,

23

IMLS, 2017). In an effort to engender the endearing mission of the American Library
Association, the majority of program offerings involve the guidance of the participants. The
program renderings are guided by the request of the individual or the community in concert with
the education entities in the community.
The Public Library
Within the context of the research, some delineation between the public library and other
libraries is needed, including the public library’s role and stance in comparison to all other types
of libraries. The United States has an estimated 119,487 libraries, which vary in type
(“Number of Libraries in the United States,” 2006). The data that support the numbers are
derived from three organizations that support libraries through government funding. The three
organizations are IMLS, The National Center for Education Statistics, and The American Library
Directory.
The IMLS is the primary source of federal support for libraries and museums in the
United States. The IMLS assists libraries and museums with encouragement in the development
of lifelong learning initiatives, advances in innovations such as STEAM, and support for cultural
and civic engagement. The support extends to all facets of libraries, historical societies,
planetariums, botanic gardens, and zoos. The IMLS undergirds the efforts of libraries and
museums in the form of research, such as the public library survey. Such reports support the
efforts of the local library in discerning trends that appear throughout the nation, as well as the
recognition of needs of museums and libraries and the services offered. The research also
recognizes statistics, reports, and the effectiveness of the services offered as it assists with plans
that will improve the delivery of services, as well as identifying best practices for program
implementation ("Libraries Support Digital Readiness,” 2014; IMLS, 2017).

24

The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) collects and analyzes data for the
purposes of measuring performance in education in the United States. The NCES is the
predominant funding entity and relies on the data collected to continue its efforts to support
education. NCES’s responsibility is a congressional mandate to collect, analyze, and report on
the condition of education in America. The public library is an educational support entity
(“Education and Continuous Learning,” 2007), that is a free organization open to everyone
regardless of educational attainment, age, or socioeconomic status. The NCES supports public,
academic, school, and state libraries through a library statistics program. The NCES conducts the
Academic Library Survey as a part of an integrated, postsecondary data system (IPEDS) before
2017, the Public Library Survey was conducted by NCES; however, currently it is conducted by
IMLS and houses retrospective surveys previously done by NCES.
The American Library Directory maintains a list of personnel and a plethora of
information on its organizations, special collections, and consortium libraries, as well as libraries
equipped for people with differing abilities and in-service educational programs. All three
organizations collect and provide essential data for public librarians, with IMLS being the
mandated preponderate of funding (Rosa, 2017).
Background
The Internet was introduced in the public libraries in the late 1990s by the NTIA of the
United States Department of Commerce (USDC). The concept of universal service was
introduced during 1995–2000, which extended the service from telephone to the Internet, as
highlighted in the report entitled “Falling Through the Net II” (McConnaughey & Lader, 1998).
This idea also presented some disparity in access and services across demographic lines
that speak to the digital inequalities that prevail. The question of access remains today, as the

25

concept of digital divide has shifted to socioeconomic limitations such as access to broadband,
the skill set of users, and literacy—the ability to read and comprehend (Cohron, 2015; Kinney,
2010; Robinson et al., 2015).
According to “State of the Urban/Rural Digital Divide” (Swan et al., 2013), 75% of the
American population has access to and use of the Internet; however, a significant discrepancy
remains between urban and rural populations despite the increased accessibility and adoption of
devices such as smartphones. Similarly, Swan et al. (2013) stated that although the public library
provides access to segments of the population, some would-be users have challenges based on
location, such as in rural areas. In spite of the local, fiscal, and technological disadvantages rural
users face, the public library in rural America serves a vital role for persons who otherwise are
difficult to engage because of distance from broadband access. Other areas of concern when
seeking to assist rural communities include the level of educational attainment, the lack of skill
in the use of technology, and literacy skills, which is less uncommon for the urban dweller
(Hoffman, 1998).
The gap existing between those who have Internet access and those who do not seems to
be closing; however, for some communities, a slower process has presented itself as a delayed
effect, realized from the existing economic, social, and historical inequalities related to race,
gender, and income that predicates the divide (NTIA, 2017; Robinson et al., 2015). The public
library initially was conceptualized as the equalizer (“Declaration for the Right to Libraries,”
2013) where anyone could come and obtain access as a result of the infusion of technology.
Vice President Al Gore, the most noted viable advocate for the Internet, introduced what
was initially call the “The National Data Highway.” The advances in a combination of
technologies that involved advances in cellular networks, fiber optics, and cable presented new

26

ways to communicate (Ives, 1993). In 1994, President William “Bill” Clinton declared in the
State of the Union address that the Internet would “connect school, the hospitalized, and public
library to what was called the super highway by 2000” (McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994, p. 1).
The public library was thought to be the perfect, free entity to meet the needs of the
underserved. In the 2016 State of the Union address, President Barack Obama spoke of
“empowering our youth for 21st-century careers” through a new emphasis on computer science
and coding called “computer science for all” that brought forth attention to a dire need for
students’ mastery of science education and STEM-related initiatives (“Fact Sheet,” 2016, para.
3). This seemingly new push for science education was not a first effort, but had been recognized
by past presidents Dwight E. Eisenhower and John F. Kennedy during the Sputnik era (Powell,
2007), by NASA, and in the challenge America felt as a result of the launching of the Russian
satellite in 1957 (“A Look at the History,” 2016). In the early 1990s, with inception of the
personal computer in public libraries, U.S. educators found it necessary to increase standards and
curricula related to STEM.
According to Nishi (2011), libraries are recognized as providing an opportunity for all
Americans. The library was the one premier place where all people, regardless of age, ethnicity,
income, or level of education, could have free access to the Internet, and by extension, access to
the possibility of success. As libraries continue to experience the fast rate of changes in
technology, the disruption of what has been known as a standard is likely to increase with a
steady climb in the next few decades of the 21st century, as predicted by library strategist Levien
(2011). These disruptive technologies assessed by Levien (2011) have gradually eradicated, in
just a few years, an existing system that lasted for centuries, with improvements along the way.

27

Levien (2011) asserted the possibility of thriving amid continuing economic and funding
declines with a hard and fast analysis of service structures. The article, “Future of Libraries,”
Kurzweil, 1992) addressed the fundamental needs of a population’s reliance on the public library
as a free commodity. However, this free place that assures access for the economically
disenfranchised; a risk is posed if the library doesn’t stay abreast of the demands of the public.
As such, many libraries have difficulty maintaining Internet services due to funding and
infrastructure, according to the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction (Ward & Hart,
2008).
While informal learning is the driving force for this research and its relationship to public
libraries, the underlying topics in libraries according to an article by ALA, (“The Digital
Inclusion Survey,” 2013) includes digital inclusion and digital literacy (“Public Libraries Lead
the Way,” 2014). These issues are a result of evolving technological advances and the
inequalities this movement has uncovered. These issues are the foundation from which STEAM
programming has intercepted the programming initiatives of the public library and other informal
learning hubs throughout the United States.
“The Digital Inclusion Survey” (2013) conducted by the American Library Association
was the first of its kind, as no other national survey measured the extent to which the public
library had integrated its service to meet and support the human capital with programs that could
affect the economic growth and development of the citizenry. The survey measured programs
that were educational, entrepreneurial, offered job readiness skills, and fostered personal
enrichment. According to the ALA (2017), “the study also begins to map new programs and
technology resources that range from STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) maker
programming to 3-D printing to hackathons” (para. 1–2).

28

As a library positions itself to help all in the community, a few statistics must be
considered:
●

essentially all (98%) libraries offer free public, Wi-Fi, up from (89%) in 2012;

●

nearly 98% of libraries offer technology, literacy, and job readiness training;

●

one-third of libraries provide literacy, GED, STEAM, and afterschool programs;

●

an estimated 95% of libraries support “out of school” with summer reading programs;

●

60% of libraries host social events that support literacy through book club
discussions;

●

98% provide assistance to patrons through government assistance programs and their
websites; and

●

every library supports patrons seeking employment with workshops and online help
(“Digital Inclusion Survey,” 2013).

The Digital Inclusion Survey (DIS) provided the first look at emerging trends in the area
of STEAM. The American Library Association reported over 3,000 public libraries supported
programs involving makerspaces, 3-D printings, application development, and coding. The ideas
of creating is becoming a new digital competency as libraries build and expand their collections
of programs, expertise, and space to encompass the needs of the community yearning for
technology and its possibilities. The Obama Administration recognized the country’s need to
enhance science education that would help maintain the innovative stronghold that once was
prevalent in the history of the United States. However, in recent comparisons to other nations,
the U.S. has lagged in educational performance and maintaining cutting-edge curricula preparing
children for 21st-century career paths in the sciences. The literature on the inequalities of the
digital divide is relevant to the topic, as Robinson et al. (2015) wrote of the digital differences

29

with regard to access, usage, skills, and self- perceptions, as well as future lines of related
research.
What is Informal Learning?
The major influential theories on the learning process and the acquisition of knowledge
include behaviorist theories, cognitive psychology, constructivism, social constructivism,
experiential learning, situated learning theory, and community of practice. The empirical process
of studying the phenomena of learning began at the turn of the 20th century. This paper
addresses learning as a pervasive change in behavior born out of an experience that helps to
make sense of future problems. A few major theories have influenced the concept of informal
learning and its origins that occur in the theoretical framework of constructivism, cognitive
theory, social learning theory, and the humanistic perspectives of learning. Malcolm Knowles
coined the term informal learning in 1950 (as cited in Knowles, 1950), developing the notion
that all adult education is informal.
However, at an even earlier stage, John Dewey conceptualized the notion of informal
learning (“Recognition,” 2010). The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) evaluated the returns of schooling and vocational and occupational training in OECD
countries, of which the U.S. and UK have a preponderance of statistics. According to Cohn and
Addison (2006), the role of human capital on economic growth and development is of great
importance. OECD’s evaluation and the discussion on the legitimacy of informal post-school
training became relevant.
Due to the structural changes in the world, the way in which information is garnered also
changes and affects the ways people learn. Changes in content and methodologies have been
heavily influenced by technology, and the means by which information is accessed and collected

30

in larger quantities allowed for a larger grasp of information by extension learning, now
considered a modern learning method. Informal learning can also be categorized as incidental
learning, which is not typically structured nor classroom-based. Informal learning can be
intentionally encouraged or take place in a space that is not necessarily conducive to learning
(Groff, 2013; Holton & Swanson, 2010; Riel, 1994).
In comparison, incidental learning exists exponentially and can take place unconsciously
(Garrick, 1998; Marsick & Watkins, 2001). The notion of the limited focus of traditional modes
of learning and outcomes are at odds with how learning takes place outside of the realms of
school. According to Feder et al. (2012), the theoretical discussion of learning has been focused
on experiences with school, but the pursuit of many social activities such as visiting a museum or
gaming experiences can potentially lead to an increased interest in the formation of career paths.
The National Research Council (2011) asserted that experiences garnered in early childhood are
valuable in providing the underpinnings of learning that are specific to a profession.
In the context of learning, informal learning is any learning that is neither formal nor nonformal learning. Non-formal learning, according to the OECD (“Recognition,” 2010), is learning
that takes place in a setting that is not an official classroom mandated by an educational system.
Informal learning can be thought of as real learning or do-it-yourself learning without controls
over the experience (Lee, 2009). Informal learning is an independent process that is not imposed
by someone else. Informal opportunities are fluid and can be structures but without the
constructs of a curriculum or any other requirement associated with formal education parameters.
Conversely, informal learning can take place anywhere without an age limitation and only
requires the desire and use of the senses. A familiar element of formal education is the
implementation of testing with the prevalence of results that can inflict pressure on the

31

participant. The theory and practice of the phenomena of informal learning have resurfaced in
the writings of researchers such as Coffield (2000), who asserted that informal learning should
not have a lesser value and a prerequisite to formal learning processes. Coffield (2000) sees
informal learning as an inherent element in the learning paradigm and germane to seeking
employment and skills needed.
The literature also speaks of a collaborative innovator who asserted that informal learning
is a step into a new dimension of education. Leadbeater (2000) wrote of moving away from
viewing education as a rite of passage involving the acquisition of enough knowledge and
qualifications to acquire an adult station in life. The point of education should not be to inculcate
a body of knowledge but to develop the basic capabilities of literacy and numeracy, as well as
the capability to act responsibly towards others, take initiative, and to work creatively and
collaboratively. The most important capability—and the one that traditional education is worst at
creating—is the ability and yearning to carry on learning. Leadbeater (2000) asserted that too
much schooling kills off a desire to learn. Schools and universities should become more like
hubs of learning, within the community and capable of extending into the community. More
learning needs to happen at home, in offices, and kitchens—in the contexts where knowledge is
deployed to solve problems and add value to people's lives.
The library is a lifelong learning organization of which many have written. One example
is Bekerman, Burbules, and Silberman-Keller (2006), who worked with a group of international
researchers who support the notion of a resource book that guides academia and professional and
lay readers to futuristic thinking on learning practices. The majority of policymakers influencing
education perhaps regard informal learning practices to be supplemental, marginal, and
recreational; little recognition has been given to informal education until recently. The pursuit of

32

lifelong learning as described by Cohen (1975) and Elmborg (2016) should be a core value for
public libraries and one that substantiates the profession and its service.
Informal Learning and the Public Library
The public library has traditionally engendered learning as a provider of information;
however, with the pervasiveness of access beyond the book and even the physical structure,
libraries also promote learning through instructional programs. These programs are also
examples of informal learning that Gilton (2012) delineated as information literacy instruction
(ILI). Combined with traditional library services, ILI indeed promotes learning. Another example
was reported by (Lemke, Lecusay, Cole, & Michalchik, 2012) as informal learning in media-rich
environments such as libraries. Informal learning encompasses a broad category of activities th at
involve face-to-face experiences that are not formal in content and may include voluntary
participation in science-geared programs such as STEAM initiatives that are prevalent across the
United States, according to the 2016 American Library Association survey. Participation in all
STEAM-related programs are voluntary and are developed for children to engage with each
other and explore for the sake of learning. STEAM programs require communication skills,
literacy skills, critical thinking, problem-solving, self-management, and teamwork, all of which
are key to having discipline-specific knowledge and capability (Koehler, 2015).
Nielsen (2014) took the stance in his work, Public Libraries and Lifelong Learning, of
understanding libraries as part of the phenomena of lifelong learning in this age of information
literacy, which is an essential part of today's ease of access to information in the public library.
Establishing the concept of learning throughout life or periodically is in agreement with the
mission of the American Library Association’s “Education and Continuous Learning” (2007).

33

The efforts to provide access and information that are not restricted to educational institutions
supports self-directed learning and improves the overall well-being of the citizenry
economically, politically, and socially.
Feder et al. (2012) in Learning Science in Informal Environments postulated that school
is the ideal space for enhancing science education, teacher training, and straightening the science
pipeline. But overlooked and underestimated informal learning spaces should also be recognized,
as many people visit libraries, museums, and other locations during out-of-school times. Feder et
al. (2012) also took a historical snapshot of the early American education establishment of the
18th century, during which libraries, museums, and churches were perceived as the primary
institutions of higher learning for the general public.
Early educational philosophers did not place value on what would later become the
constructivist theory and Piaget's thoughts of people constructing their understanding through
experience, on which Gerner Nielsen (2014) based his article, “Public Libraries and Lifelong
Learning.” Neilsen believed in lifelong learning as an essential for all people and in the library’s
role as a supporter and facilitator of learning—a dominant role in informal learning.
Neilsen’s study coincided with the constructivist theory of learning cited by Bates (1986),
Belkin, Oddy, and Brooks (1982), and Dervin and Nilan (1986). This current study examines the
understandings of public librarians and their role in carrying out lifelong learning. The mission
of public library is to provide lifelong learning to citizens. This study focuses on the perceptions
of this role and the responsibility involved. This study’s research methodology uses four research
questions and an e-mail survey to present an empirical study of library users’ perceptions and to
develop a discussion on how users perceive the public libraries' role in the education, literacy,
and the competency of public librarians as teachers (Nielsen, 2014).

34

The responses from the respondents of the study yielded three categories: (a) information
resource center, (b) a place for independent learning, and (c) a place for support and guidance.
The online survey brought forth the realization that the public librarians have some apprehension
concerning teaching as the pedagogical underpinning, as teaching is not congruent with the
requirements in the field of library science. However, librarians are willing and have
demonstrated that, as of 2015, the programming efforts of community librarians throughout the
United States are at an overwhelming 90% for programs directly related to instruction on the use
of technology (Digital Inclusion Survey, 2013).
In the public realm of library service, many people may not have consistent access to
Internet or technology, especially in underserved or minority communities and even in middleclass communities, as a result of the 2008 economic downturn in the economy. Access to
technology is not always defined as having a smartphone or even access to the Internet. Many
communities have one or both of these technologies but lack the skills or literacy that enables
understanding of the written word. The digital divide has a two-prong effect for people who are
at risk and susceptible to irregular periods of access to Internet due to the inability to maintain
Internet services as well as challenges involving literacy. Cohron (2015) and Gonzales (2015)
agreed that closing the digital divide in our population is dependent on maintaining access as
well as maintenance of the existing technologies. Digital divide is defined as not having access to
computers and the Internet in comparison to those who have. The difference in Internet usage
and access is a relative one when access is evaluated by parameters such as income, race,
education, age, ethnicity, and community type (Cohron, 2015; Rainie, 2017; see Figure 1).

35

Figure 1. Internet usage 2015. Retrieved from http://www.starnetlibraries.org/about/who-weare/. Reprinted with permission.
The Internet represents a significant transference in how people communicate, as asserted
by Poe (2011) and Zickuhr, Rainie, Purcell, and Duggan (2013). In “A History of
Communication: Media and Society from the Evolution of Speech to the Internet,” Poe (2011)
explored the effects and causes of media development from speech, writing, print, audiovisuals
devices, and the Internet and how each medium has progressively influenced how people
organize themselves and what is believed. People wrote and shared daily experiences with others
living a distance apart with the inception of a quill for writing in 1250. In 1836, Samuel Morse
developed the Morse Code and the electric telegraph line, which created the first method for
long-distance communication (Marshall & Mandell, 2011; Minkel, 2004). The progression of
technology continued in 1889 with Alan Strowger and his patent for a telephone that would
directly dial another telephone. In 1920, the first broadcast radio station went “on the air,”
followed by the first commercial television broadcast in 1947. The development of electronic
computer in the 1950s led to the first e-mail being sent in 1965 at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Kim (2005) argued that the Internet is the result of changing social and economic
indicators, unequal distribution, and the changing modality of use around the world. The Pew

36

Research Center examined the broadband use of participants based on the following parameters:
adult; African Americans; rural residents; household annual income of less than $20,000, $20–
50,000, and $50–75,000; parents; and education attainment at or below the high school level.
Researchers have corroborated similar findings in the concerns for access. The NTIA survey
(Goldberg, 2016) suggested that the issues are multifaceted and involve access as well as the
ability to purchase a computer. In recent years, Internet access via smartphones and other devices
seems to be closing the divide; however, access is not the only factor. Maintenance, locale,
access in rural communities, literacy, and skills surrounding a knowledge of how to use said
devices are factors in underserved and aging communities (Araque et al., 2013; DiMaggio,
Hargittai, Neuman, & Robinson, 2001; Gonzales, 2015). Gilbert (2010) asserted that the ways in
which users are not able to access information and communication technologies or find success
with them is a deeper construct than initially realized or understood. Gilbert (2010) analyzed
these challenges by studying individual social networks that are dependent on personal
narratives. Therefore, the premise is based on personal circumstances such as the individual's
residence, education, and occupation, which by extension includes race, gender, and the
historical implications of social and economic inequalities. This current study summarizes a need
for further research into how users excel or not, based on the information and communication
technology they use and how the effect is measured based on their personal narratives—in turn
looking at the broader inequalities.
The question of the digital divide began with the increase in Internet usage in the mid1990s and is a major concern for populations who visit the public library. The age of computers
and the Internet has brought forward many research efforts on the use of libraries, computers and
the Internet. According to Zickuhr et al. (2013), most Americans view libraries as important part

37

of the community, housing and providing access to materials and resources that are seen as
needed. Over 1,600 Americans over the age of 16 in the District of Columbia were surveyed
during a 30-day period from March to April 2016, with results positing the public library as a
viable institution. The dire need for programs that teach digital skills weighed in at 80%. Some
divide on the use of books was 21% for removing books and 34% stating that books should
remain, with creative usage of space to accommodate technology.
Regarding the divide in skill, Cohron (2015) was in somewhat of an agreement with
Horrigan (2016b), noting not only the need for skill sets but also readiness as it relates to the
ability to navigate technology in the user's personal life, whether it be for work or personal
adaptation to technology as it relates to using and embracing of applications for everyday life.
Horrigan (2016b) postured that through a cluster analysis of the surveyed, participants are
grouped according to similar answers that also identified their readiness for the use of
technology, noting those at the lower spectrum with a bit of hesitancy do not use technology for
education but simply for learning how to use new devices such as smartphones.
The underlying theme of relevancy is evident as informal learning in libraries represents
a digression from understanding the library as a depository. With technology, a physical visit is
not a requirement. A person can reference resources electronically and use electronic databases
remotely. The evolution of technology has naturally posited a discussion of the library’s
relevance as the need for physical space is not a necessity. The idea of libraries as places of
experience in the community is becoming more discernible (Chadwick, DiPilato, le Conge,
Rubin, & Shaffer, 2012).
As a result of these findings, some thought has been given to the concept of learning-ondemand as a type of lifestyle in modern society (McLoughlin & Lee, 2008). The public library

38

has become the bulwark of free access that promotes possibility through programming efforts,
encouraging self-directed learning in underserved communities that may not have Internet access
due to social, economic, or historical barriers. The development of STEAM programs in libraries
allows underserved youth the opportunity to transform their lives, the communities in which they
live, and by extension, the world by exposure to career paths in the sciences. The library building
is then able to facilitate instruction and access in a very different way than before. The
overwhelming demand for computer usage has prompted significant enhancements such as
computers, software, Mondo boards, Wi-Fi, study rooms, and technology-driven meeting spaces.
Since 2011, the Pew Research Center has served as a depository of information in survey
format that provides relevant data on the evolution of library usage and the explanation of
patterns, public comment, and attitudes on the role of the library in the community. The
information has largely been a positive representation of America's interest in libraries and their
services. The survey over the last few years has shown a vast amount of interest in digital skills
and the retrieval of information. The overall consensus of the people is favorable toward the
public library, which is perceived as providing safe, creative, opportunities for everyone to learn.
Understanding the newly designed levels of library services calls for a higher standard of
usage, one that has been exemplified in programming statistics for 2015 and 2016 (Rosa, 2017).
During the end of the 21st century, a plethora of privately-funded organizations throughout the
United States developed research-based programs in underserved communities, fostering
connected learning in informal learning spaces. The spaces have been called Learning Hubs,
Tech Centers, and Maker Spaces, providing not only access to information and technology but in
some instances, safety and shelter. A growing population of young people in low socioeconomic

39

communities without technology will lack the necessary skills in a world that is rapidly changing
as a result of technology if this issue is not creatively and urgently addressed.
Digital Media is one such organization working to address the issues of digital divide. Ito
and Martin (2013) contended that a close examination of informal learning/connected learning
principles in the public library can be a catalyst for socio-economic leverage for 21st-century
youth. The post-doctoral research of the authors, in collaboration with Digital Media and
Learning Hubs, connected with the learning network at the University of California. The report
to the MacArthur Foundation sought to discover student needs in the community as well as in
learning institutions.
The study used webinars and online discussion groups to explore how the library can
affect school achievement and real-world opportunity through connected learning. The article,
“Connected Libraries and the Future of Learning” (Ito & Martin, 2013) furthered the discussion
on the phenomena of connected learning principles as it relates to public libraries and access for
marginalized populations. This likely use of public space places value on libraries as places
linking interest, academics, and career opportunities through connecting learning hubs. This
research sought to inform and further research the importance of libraries in the conversation
involving education reform.
As the concept of connected learning gains widespread momentum throughout the United
States in museums, communities, and after-school programs, the effect has also surfaced in the
public library. Connected learning has its theoretical underpinning in informal learning, which
happens outside the classroom and beyond the school day. The public library continues its efforts
to advocate for the development of youth. Many of the programs and resources contribute to the
youth becoming informed and active participants in a democratic society (“Teens 13–18,” n.d.).

40

Multifaceted research initiatives and reports exist on the subject of after-school programs.
The after-school programs are informal programs of action that address the concerns of youth not
being adequately prepared for tomorrow's workforce, such as the Computer Clubhouse
developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Kafai, Peppler, & Chapman, 2009).
This program was designed to provide informal learning initiatives that are hands-on and
accessible by all. These kinds of programs explore the role of informal learning and experimental
play in public spaces as a complement to formal schooling.
Leadbeater (2000) presented several theories on the ideals of the contemporary
knowledge economy, knowledge creation, and ideas about mobile schooling. Leadbeater (2000)
also gave insights into the modernization of education through institutional reform that started in
1902 in England and Wales. The Butler Act of 1902 enforced participation in secondary school
until the age of 14. The trend was constantly updated through the 1990s with the inclusion of
three- and four-year-olds in formal education. Leadbeater (2000) explained the slow drive behind
the trend, asserting that people find success through creativity out of thin air, and that perhaps the
shift from an agrarian society to knowledge-based learning through science and education has
proven to be beneficial, as people increasingly share and collaborate as a community of practice.
Many of the programs situated in public libraries exemplify the trend that Leadbeater
(2000) identified, thriving with enthusiastic teens who have interest and strong desires to
succeed. Programs such as Science-Technology Activities and Resources (STAR NET) provide a
tenable way to introduce science education in the form of STEM programming. Foundations
support science education by providing financial support for an initiative when public libraries
do not have the means for such programs. This study, conducted in by Dr. John Baek in 2013,
involved a semi-structured interview protocol with eight libraries selected by an online

41

community of practice website. STAR NET was funded by the National Science Foundation,
which also promoted and supported the efforts of public libraries toward becoming venues for
STEM learning.
Baek’s (2013) study sought to determine the ways in which libraries support the
development of STEM learning. The study used a non-probability method based on the
convenience of the sample group of librarians. Eight librarians were selected from a pool of 54
librarians. The participants held various positions with the stipulation of five years of experience
in STEM initiatives. The investigator concluded that libraries that seek to enforce the traditional
mission of providing self-directed learning experiences are going to be considered STEM
learning centers that foster literacy of all.
Baek (2013) surmised that STEM is not any different from any other service provided by
public libraries that support lifelong learning. The support for lifelong learning is also the
antithesis of the national dialogue on education. Anderton (2012) noted in “STEM, Teens and
Public Libraries” that it is easier than one might think! The call is for new efforts in preparing
our teachers with deeper content knowledge and skills so they can encourage science,
technology, engineering, and math skills to meet the needs of future career paths. The article
referenced the efforts of a teen services manager, Holly Anderton (2012) at the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh, and her effort to bring forward the cause of STEM programs in a public library.
Anderton (2012) wrote of her attainment of a grant and the mechanisms by which the
program was promoted, advertised, and brought to fruition. Anderton’s (2012) experiences are
evident in the statistical analysis reported by ALA’s “Presidential Committee on Information
Literacy” (2006) and “Public libraries lead the way to digital inclusion” (2014), and in the
iteration of digital literacy and the demand for STEM-related programs in the majority of public

42

libraries. The applied digital literacy perspectives examined by Erickson, Meyers, & Small
(2013) exuded with the great thesis of informal learning as a continuous engagement of young
people that requires endless access to resources and tools in every aspect of community
interaction—at home, school, work, and the social context of social media that intersects with
learning. Informal learning not only makes up for the gaps; informal learning also fills the voids
where a lack of instruction is present.
The Carnegie Library in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, intentionally decided to infuse STEM
resources into the public library in 2009. The committee of stakeholders included the Finely
Charitable Trust and the Shirus Charitable Trust by the PNC Charitable. Trust Committee.
Charitable Trust. The team addressing learning science in informal environments and examined
the potential of informal settings by reassessing the evidence of learning as to whether the
assertion of the school setting had some distinct advantage for youth. The effort initially
developed to give rise to the development of resources for the library on STEM. The resource
collection was comprised of science, education, psychology, and media materials to cover a
broad scope of the literature that is STEM-related including and materials to promote the
acquisition.
While McLoughlin and Lee (2008) supported life learning as a lifestyle, Feder et al.
(2012) asserted the importance of establishing clear, common constructs and language, as well as
goals for informal learning environments. The potentiality of learning points as well as the
assurance of continued funding to maintain the cost of technology and access are of primary
concern. Learning science in informal environments provides a framework for dialogue from a
public library perspective.

43

STEAM and the Public Library
The public library was founded on the tenets of education as a resource for providing
self-directed learning and services to meet the learning needs of the community and the
undeserved who want an entity that provides resources for enrichment (Baek, 2013; Gross,
2013). The public library connects with the people on their terms; everyone is welcome, no
requirements exist. The power of America is our ability to reach the common person and provide
opportunities for empowerment. The public library is the equalizer that reaches out to all,
especially the disenfranchised. Although there is an increasing divide in our country, the public
library has the opportunity to be the convener, bringing communities together with the provision
of resources that make for a better tomorrow. According to Gross (2013), the public library
delivers high quality public education for all that today includes innovative programs and new
technologies that allow for meeting a potential customer in an unlikely place.
Drori (2000) asserted that science is an essential, social institution. The role of science in
STEAM programs has recently gained a vast amount of attention. Educational programs from
elementary school throughout college are emphasized. The interest has surfaced as a result of
recent reports and surveys that continue to highlight a need to ensure the vitality of the United
States and groups that support scientific literacy and national progress. Proficiency in the
sciences rich learning environments is an essential factor in economic development, as
demonstrated by the White House under President Obama's administration (“Fact Sheet,” 2016,
para. 2), which set out to increase the prevalence of science and math in school curricula.
Environments that promote collaborative experiences that create a deeper understanding and
high-quality learning opportunities. Programs that promote hands on exploration that involves
investigating, learning and creating also promotes the arts in STEAM. STEM with art allows

44

hands-on art projects that includes constructing and tinkering of objects for constructing
demonstrations such as makerspaces. The concept of hands exploration and creation provides a
balance in the learning process. The overall goals emphasized the need for future careers in the
sciences and the construct of art that will contribute to the economic growth and national security
of the United States. Consider a few facts about students and STEM:
•

Only 16% of high school students are interested in a STEM career and have proven
a proficiency in mathematics (Hom, 2014; “Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math,” 2015).

● Fifty-seven percent of students who show an interest in STEM-related subjects tend
to lose interest before graduation.
● Over 8.65 million workers will have STEM-related jobs (“A Look at the History,”
2016).
● The gap in needed skills in the manufacturing sector has a significant impact in the
ability to fill the projected job market that was estimated to be 600,000 by 2018.
● Fifty-two percent of programs offered have been described as arts-based STEM
programs.
The literature and statistics presented in various studies have substantiated that STEAM
is a promising endeavor for the public library. The literature gives rise to the efforts of
partnerships inside and outside of the public library and recognition to governing bodies that are
scrutinizing the federal STEAM education effort and the status of STEAM education in the
United States (Gonzalez & Kuenzi, 2012). The STEM Education Coalition is the largest
proponent for science education at the national, state, and local levels, supporting policy
development with the endearing mission to remain competitive on the world stage (Gonzales,

45

2015). The literature brings forth three areas of importance as it relates to STEM in the public
library. The first examines informal learning as it relates to public libraries and the deep history
and knowledge that has cultivated a new phenomenon of science education in “out-of-school”
settings.
The public library as a life-long learning organization is one that goes beyond the formal
education received in a school setting to the acquisition of knowledge from various entities. The
desire for richer existence became a mantra for the 20th-century view of education. The public
library as an informal learning organization has one of the leading responsibilities of not only
providing pathways for information and creating an informed society but also providing assets
such access, Internet, and computers that can lead to transforming STEM education (Pacios,
2007). The public library as a stakeholder is juxtaposed with other educational advocates. The
public library’s relevance as the demand and technological platforms advance further
substantiates this informal space as a possible influencer in the area of STEAM education and
securing the democratic ideals of citizenry through programs that lead to economic growth,
employment, and opportunities for underserved populations in the sciences.
As the trends increase, the library, as well as other organizations beyond the classroom,
support science learning and fully understand the need for involvement. STEAM education is a
science center organized for adults as well as children. Zoos’ film producers across the nation
have joined the effort as a community-based need to strengthen efforts in science education
(Hakala et al., 2016). Many of the spaces have been coined as “learning hubs,” spaces where
individuals can connect and collaborate on their own terms (Penuel, Clark, & Bevan, 2016).
Others are called tech centers, aimed at providing space to improve interest and achievement in
STEAM initiatives.

46

Significance of Makerspaces in Public Libraries
Makerspaces are also prevalent throughout the nation as libraries reimagine their space to
create designated areas for creating, inventing, and learning-making stations mostly in areas
where there is the highest need (Britton, 2012). Makerspaces in public libraries like other digital
media programs provides education and access to shared resources in a public setting that
emphasizes the need for time shared access to expensive equipment that would otherwise involve
fees for use in membership-based makerspaces for business. There is also literature that speaks
to the need for the maker movement and the crucial implications on manufacturing and economic
stability that have implications and should be thought not just as a crafty maker faire event but
one that has potential for job development (Fallows, 2016; Holman 2015).
The public library as free entity is providing meaningful programs that offer experience
that could have lifelong value to its users. One organization addressing the needs of the
community with makerspaces and digital media is Digital Media, for which Mimi Ito and Crystle
Martin and asserted in the article “Connected Learning and the Future of Libraries” (2013) that
the examination of informal and connected learning is indeed learning principles in the public
library are a catalyst for 21st-century socio-economic leverage. The discussion on new
technologies and new media and the engagement of youth in public spaces presents an important
examination of future strategies for public libraries. You Media's focus on the digital and maker
movement through project development includes learning, creating and play with open-source
learning that lends itself to shared economic models that teach pooling of resources and time.
With the increase of technology, the literature speaks to the practices adopted by youth. Some
advantages and disadvantages such as networking and online practices affect relationships;
however, a clear advantage is young people’s ability to steer their interests especially as it relates

47

to STEAM programming in public settings. The opportunity is optional and allows for creativity
that may lead to social and economic implications that youth may possibly benefit from in the
future (Ito & Martin, 2013).
The University of California, in conjunction with the MacArthur Foundation, seeks to
find out what students needs are in the community as well as the learning institutions. Webinars
and online discussions are used to explore how the library can affect school achievement and
real-world opportunity through connected learning. The article, “Connected Learning and the
Future of Libraries” (2013) furthered the discussion on the phenomena of connected learning
principles as it relates to public libraries and access for marginalized populations. This likely use
of public space highlights the value of libraries as places linking interest, academics, and career
through connected learning labs. This research seeks to inform further research on the
importance of libraries in the conversation involving education reform.
Many programs thrive within the public library as a result of teens who have an interest
and strong desire to learn and explore. Programs such as STAR NET provide a tenable way to
introduce libraries to science education by providing financial support for programs that libraries
are not able to fund. P. D. Investigator’s research analysis on public libraries as places for STEM
learning interviewed eight librarians and the ways in which the collaborative efforts of
partnerships benefited from the initiative. The study, conducted in 2013 by Dr. John Baek,
involved a semi-structured interview protocol with a selection of librarians by an online
community of practice website (“STARNet Science-Technology Activities & Resources for
Libraries,” 2018) Science and technology activities and resources are funded by the National
Science Foundation, which promotes and supports the efforts of public libraries and their desire
to be venues for STEM programming.

48

Using a non-probability method, the study was at the convenience of the eight librarians
chosen from a group of 54 librarians. The professional position of the librarians varied with the
stipulation of having at least five years of experience with STEM programming. Investigator
(2012) surmised that STEM is not any different from the other services offered at a library that
supports lifelong learning.
The support for lifelong learning is also the antithesis of the national dialogue on
education and the broader impact of STEM education of all aspects of society as well as research
(Anderton, 2012). STEM research learning is a rapidly growing body of scholarship for the next
generation of STEM learning research and the implications for the public library (Bailey et al.,
2016). The National Science Foundation supported the efforts of the American Library
Association and, by extension, the public library. As the keystone entity in the community, the
library becomes the information stronghold for many, especially during the summer when
schools are not in session—a key time when libraries become venues for STEAM learning.
The Public Interest in Libraries
ALA, IMLS, and IPAC are the major sources of definitive data on public libraries. The
overall perception as determined by visits and program interest was conveyed in the Public
Library Survey. Other organizations conducted surveys that provided tangible information and
research supporting the findings of the aforementioned bodies. One such organization is the Pew
Research Center, a nonpartisan research bank that explores public opinion of issues and trends
that shape the future. The goal is to create data and opportunity for the general public to engage
and inform the public (Funk & Hefferon, 2018).

49

The Public Library and STEAM Education
While public libraries across the United States reimagine their community roles as
STEAM educators, society at large will draw collectively on resources from a number of
initiatives to gain knowledge to improve science literature (McComas, 2014; National Research
Council, 2011). This emphasis reflects not only the resources that the public library offers but
also on the resources of other organizations that provide services for youth. As a result of the
increased programs and interest, a proven leverage and public trust in libraries exists for their
neutral space for learning and career exploration. The American Library Association and the
Digital Inclusion Survey conveyed an increase in demand and attendance in STEM program
efforts in 2014–15. The survey has consistently gathered statistics since 1988 and is the only
organization that has extensive data on libraries nationally. The study is conducted annually by
ALA (2017) and the University of Maryland’s Information Policy and IPAC. The trends for
libraries have been consistent (“Issues and Trends,” 2015; Pundsack, 2016).
A recent analysis of data that compared the data of the public library with findings from
the Pew Research Center asserted the following:
● Persons between the ages of 18–25 are more likely to use the public library.
● Millennials used the public library more frequently than other generations.
● Younger generation are more likely to use the public library website compared to
older generations.
● 31% of adults used a public library’s website within the last year, which is similar to
their usage in 2015 (see Figure 2).

50

Figure 2. Millennials are the most likely generation of Americans to use public libraries. About
half of U.S. Millennials have visited a public library or bookmobile in the past year. From
Internet usage by generational groups. A. Geiger (2017). Pew Research Center.
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/06/21/millennials-are-the-most-likely-generation-ofamericans-to-use-public-libraries/ft_17-06-21_librariesabouthalf/ Copyright 2018 by Research
Center. Reprinted with permission.
The Pew study by Geiger (2017) also asserted that the increase of use by millennials is
likely a result of the recent changes in today's public library. The availability of computers,
Internet connections, and programs that provide introduction to and use of high-tech gadgetry
such as program spacing for coding, makerspaces, and 3-D printers created a growing interest of
51

a tech-savvy community. In order to provide much of the technology, many libraries have
undergone facility renovations to their infrastructure in order to support the use of computers.
Research has shown that the average public library structure across the United States was built
around 1970; therefore, many of the public libraries that are meeting the technology trends of
today have renovated to meet the demands of a digital age (Freeman, 2017).
The survey specifically noted the wording in the survey so as to delineate between public
libraries and academic libraries. Across all generations, use of the public library mobile
applications is less common. The Pew Research study also conveyed a greater use of the library
by women than men (54% and 39%). Similarly, persons with college degrees showed greater use
of the public library and services offered than persons with a high school diploma (54% and
40%). Finally, parents of young children were more likely to use the public library than those
persons without children (54% and 43%; Geiger, 2017).
Parker (2015) asserted that millennials will likely exist with a lower standard of living
and economic possibility due to the debts from previous generations; however, (Howe, Matson,
& Strauss, 2000) connoted a perspective of influence and adaptability by asserting that
millennials, as a positive generation of thinkers with well-intentioned belief structures, will
ascribe to community building. (Howe et al., 2000) described millennials in great numbers as
better educated, more affluent, and having positive social habits. These attributes also yield a
greater outlook on racial and cultural diversity (Taylor & Keeter, 2010). The element being of
technology planners could be deducted as one of the reasons, in support of the Pew Research
Center’s study, that millennials are the generation that is keeping the public library alive (Livni,
2017). The Pew Research Center study (Rainie, 2014) stated that millennials grew up online,
understand the technology, and see the resources as a mechanism for attaining success, with

52

ready access to the Internet, computers, and the extra services surrounding technology and the
informal opportunities for learning, such as access to 3-D printers for creating useful things.
Many millennials are also parents (Livni, 2017) who are raising the next generation of techsavvy users whose parents are accustomed to library use. The Pew Research Institute added a
survey to the literature that examined the overall use of public libraries, resulting in a conclusive
return of 91% of Americans finding value in the public library and in underserved communities,
the public library is very important to the community (“Public Wants Libraries to Advance
Education,” 2015). STEM education in public libraries is essential (Jakubowski, Riendeau, &
Shtivelband, 2017) for achievement and diversity within the science educational efforts (see
Figure 3).

Figure 3. “Public wants libraries to advance education, improve digital literacy and serve key
groups.” From Public Libraries and Education. Pew Research Center,
http://www.pewresearch.org/2015-09-15_libraries_0-01/. Copyright 2018 by Pew Research
Center. Reprinted with permission.

53

Although little statistical reporting has been done, substantial evidence exists regarding
the establishment and implementation of makerspaces and partnerships with for-profit
organizations. According to Jakubowski et al. (2017), STEAM education programs in public
libraries are essential to the increase of achievement and diversity within the sciences and
STEM-related careers. The Afterschool Alliance (2015) also explained in its literature that
ethnic/minority children who attend afterschool programs initiatives are more likely to
participate in STEM programs. However, some social and economic barriers involving fees
associated with such programs prevent many from participating. Although the public library is
the place for learning (Baek, 2013), proven in the representation of programs, and responds to
current trends, the public library can very well be the place to address not only the needs for
increased educational efforts in math and science but also the level of participation of the
underserved. The public library has in essence arbitrarily supported the addressing of barriers
with the development of SciGirls CONNECT (“What is SciGirls?” 2018), a program that
provided a place for girls to collaborate with equity and fairness, using hand-on projects and
creativity in ways that were meaning to the participants (Jakubowski et al., 2017). Although the
public has been able to develop, promote, and implement programs across the nation, much of
the development has been done through partnerships that support public libraries, such as the
STAR Library Education Network (STAR Net).
STAR Net is a collaborative effort between the Space Science Institute (SSI) and
National Center for Interactive Learning and the American Library Association, providing
programs, exhibits, and training for the public libraries, lunar planetary institutes, and the After
School Alliance. Other affiliate organizations also partner together in efforts to raise awareness
and potential for students in the area of space science, technology, earth science, and engineering

54

through the use of hands-on activities, professional development opportunities, and exhibits
funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, NCIL, and the Cornerstones of Science,
which is a clearinghouse of resources for public libraries and their staffs (STAR Net, 2018).
STAR Net reported in its project impact statement that over 1,500,000 persons visited STAR Net
exhibits, 125,000 persons participated in STAR Net sponsored programs in public libraries, and
over 3,900 professional librarians are members of the STAR Net community. In addition to
STAR Net, other programs are connecting with youth through the public library in the areas of
science. Dr. Mizuko Ito introduced a research model for engaging teens through social media and
technology. The model was then implemented as YOUmedia Chicago, funded by John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and placed in the Chicago Public Library. You Media
focuses on connected learning in public spaces as a catalyst for research and practice on selfdirected learning. Dr. Ito conceptualized YouMedia (Santiago, 2012) and surmised that youth
use technology as a means for socialization and expressing an interest in the sciences. The
Cultural anthropologist, Mizuko Ito developed You Media, a 21st-century learning space, as a
result of a living and learning digital media project. The latest space is centered in the Chicago
Public Library’s Harold Washington Library (Bannon, 2012; Santiago, 2012). The model was
developed through an ethnographic research model that studied 700 youth in activities. The study
found three distinctive areas of learning around the theme of digital media. The three areas are
described as “Hang Out,” “Mess Around,” and “Geek Out” (HOMAGO), which was developed
by Ito, and resulted in a sleuth of research and collaboration that targets youth and their driven
interests in media development and the learning that they experience while connecting to their
contemporaries. The trend has spread across the United States as several public libraries have

55

extended their spaces to encompass a You Media lab. The following map denotes the states that
have media labs in libraries that have embraced this emerging trend (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Nationwide Reach, STAR Net programs. Space Science Institute, the National Center
for Interactive Learning, 2018. From STARnet, Science-Technology Activities & Resources for
Libraries website. http://www.starnetlibraries.org/about/who-we-are/. Reprinted with permission.
In 2011, You Media engaged with yet another public library in Miami, Florida,
emphasizing the use of technology and the public library as a place for innovation for teens. The
Miami Dade Public Library was able to act on the collaboration with the support of a grant
funded by the James S. and John L. Knight Foundation. The space invites teens to explore,
create, and read with their peers, mentors, and librarians. This program is significant to MiamiDade County as the population amasses over 107,000 residents, with the vast majority being of
African American descent and under the age of 18. As with all You Media models, teens
participate in programs that are certificate-bearing with the completion of the required units of
work (Bannon, 2012; Santiago, 2012).

56

You Media (Bannon, 2012; Santiago, 2012) has provided a greater sense of connectivity
with the public library through reading and research so as to proliferate the element of lifelong
learning and literacy. Consider these statistics generated from two of You Media’s 17 locations:
● 43% of participants are without Internet in their homes,
● 41% use the public library as their primary source for accessing the Internet,
● 35% of teens had never used a MAC prior to entering the You Media program,
● 46%t did not own a digital camera,
● 35% had never use software to record music,
● 86% had never produced music on any software,
● 96% collaboration with teens inside of You Media while 76% say they collaborate
with teens outside of You Media,
● 93% say that the You Media Miami program has changed the way they view the
library (Ito & Martin, 2013; Santiago, 2012).
The initial, single purpose of the public library was to provide resources for continuing
education through informal learning opportunities in a public space (Pungitore, 1995). The
historical context highlighted the more industrialized cities and the need to inform citizens in the
mid-19th century. Stephen Kern asserted in the book The Culture of Time and Space (2003) that
the creation of new technologies and culture began around the 1880. World War I brought
forward a changing in thinking about time and space. Elmborg (2016) further established that the
development of the telephone, wireless telegraph, movies, medical equipment such as x-rays, and
modes of transportation such as the bicycle, automobile, airplane provided the foundation for
today's transformation of communications.

57

The transformation of American society as described by Surdam (2015) involved rapid
changes from agrarianism to industrial and post-industrial 20th-century society. The technology
evolved to support the first commercial radio station and the beginning of a national media
culture. Thereafter, the automobile and trains provided a connectivity across the nation. Like no
other time in history, the transportation and communication lines gave people the power and
ability to physically move themselves and their ideas across the country.
As many cultural organizations had begun their efforts, the public library was taking
shape as well, highlighting Andrew Carnegie's idea of providing access to information as a
means of self-education and lifelong learning. The institution's aim was to first Americanize
immigrants, providing civility and manageability, and later to serve the needs of the elite,
educate the masses, and provide access to materials for those who would someday become
leaders.
The literature also speaks of the STEM Education Coalition as one organization that
seeks to lead, support, and raise awareness in Congress and other organizations about the
democratic ideals of learning and STEM. Having a precise understanding of STEM programs
and how they interconnect science, technology, engineering, and math disciplines gives power to
the improvement of the economy and society. This shared responsibility, as noted by the STEM
Education Coalition 2017 Annual Report (2018), is a means for improving the way kids learn
and understanding the need for future preparation in the sciences.
Critical thinking and problem-solving help build the skill sets needed to develop and
solve the tough problems of tomorrow's workforce. The future of the economy and STEM is a
necessary prescription for preservation of the nation’s vitality in the international arena of
discovery and innovation (“Science, Space, and Technology Committee,” 2017). According to

58

James Brown (as cited by Vilorio, 2014), in 2015, President Barack Obama reauthorized what
was formerly known as the 1965 “Elementary and Secondary Education Act” as the “Every
Student Succeeds Act” (2015). According to “The Case for Investing in Out-of-School Learning
as a Core Strategy in Improving Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Education” (2016), STEM education is closely related to the nation's prosperity and the
provision for a well-rounded education.
According to Nager, Ezell, Cory, and Ezell (2015), one job in the high-tech sector leads
to 4.3 jobs in goods and services. STEM-oriented job holders earn 11% higher wages compared
to their same degree counterparts in other jobs (Brown & Peterson, 2013), and the fastest
growing occupations in the next decade will require some STEM knowledge (Riel, 1994). The
ever-changing world demands an adaptable workforce, one that is a national priority requiring
reforms, policy development, and the recognition of informal settings as viable learning spaces
that support the educational initiatives of our nation. This summary briefly surmises the direction
that is needed to support STEM strategies, best practices, and policies needed to support today’s
youth as they prepare to enter the workforce.
Positioned opportunities are open for public libraries to host informal learning settings
that present long-term learning, economic stability, and social change for all but specifically for
the underserved. The public library can potentially reach segments of the population who are
under-represented as a result of social and economic disparities, thereby providing some leverage
in access to low-performing schools and diverse communities affected by poverty. This catalyst
for change, as libraries extend and expand their reach through STEAM programs for women,
Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, and others, is becoming more evident as nonprofit and
for-profit foundations and science-related organizations assist with funding for much needed

59

initiatives that provide opportunity for engagement in public spaces (Bureau of Labor Statistics,
2014).
In May 2015, over 8.6 million jobs were STEM jobs, which amounted to 6.2% of the
total employment population. Computer-related fields comprised 45% of the STEM jobs, with
19% in engineering. Diversity in STEM jobs varies by occupation; however, the racial and ethnic
distribution of the STEM workforce is 71% non-Hispanic white, 15% Asian, 6% Black, and 7%
Hispanic (Landivar, 2013).
The public library is a place where the community garners support and value. Whether
school is in session or not, the opportunities are available for everyone regardless of who they
are. According to Semmel (2015), the public library can serve as the community-based mainstay
that provides cross-sector STEM collaborations. There are three places that are described as
spaces that people spend the majority of time with the home being first and work in second
place. The public library has emerged as the third place as a space for community gathering
where people connect and share information looking to the future (Coppola, 2010). The public
library provides a framework for STEAM programming in public libraries as one of instruction
and resources based on the nature of the organization and its core value of lifelong learning.
Collie (2013) defended libraries as places where the public can learn the techniques for finding
pertinent information that will be the guiding force for future interests and encourage the desire
to attain more knowledge. Collie (2013) endorsed lifelong learning as a core value. The ultimate
desire is to provide opportunities for success as the one civic organization that is free and open to
the general public regardless of gender, sexual orientation, religion, status, socioeconomic status,
ability, or race. Everyone is someone in the public library and everyone has possibility.

60

The shift in service and the emergence of technology are being addressed in research,
examining both the need for aggressive action and the need for collaboration around the national
topic of science education in the United States in both schools and informal learning spaces
(Freeman, 2017; Omdal et al., 2006). Freeman (2017) asserted that the momentum has begun,
continues, and clearly signifies that the public library is an active participant in the STEM
movement, with a vast amount of activities that support 21st century learning initiatives.
Omdal et al. (2006) addressed the national crisis in the areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. They proposed solutions to a threatening crisis in science
education for the State of Colorado and by extension, the nation. The economic effect of STEM
education is a topic of significant value as all states review the statistics from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) as well as White (2018).
The STEM Index provides an interactive measure of science activity in the United States
since 2000. While much has been accomplished, according to the Index, recent indications are
that instead of STEM being a priority, as it was with the previous administration’s federal
programs, STEM funding is on the chopping block for the fiscal year 2018. The economic
impact is of concern as projections estimated the need for 8.65 million workers in STEM-related
jobs within the next few years, according to STEMconnector. A few sectors will have an even
greater need in the area of manufacturing, which is estimated to need 600 million positions
related to a STEM skill. In the years between 2011 and 2015, cloud computing jobs alone
yielded 1.7 million jobs. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (Fayer, 2017) stated that the
majority of STEM jobs will be in the following areas:
● computing—71%,
● traditional engineering—16%,

61

● physical science—7%,
● life sciences—4%, and
● mathematics—2%.
Disenfranchised populations that are not represented in the college community’s STEM
fields or areas of related studies that provide skill sets for future jobs are also of grave concern
(Camera, 2017). The following data from the National Science Board (2014) and the National
Academy of Sciences (2007) exemplify the need for reform and a rigorous strategy on all
educational fronts, including the public library as a bridge that supports the formal institution
outside the walls of academia:
●

Between 2000 and 2013, an average of 37.6% of high school males reported having
interest in at least one STEM discipline versus 14.8% of females.

●

In 2013, the average Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) math score for white students
was 534, compared to 461 for Hispanic students and 429 for Black students.

●

As high school students’ interest in STEM has waned, their scores on international
assessments like the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) have also
dropped. In 2000, the average U.S. PISA math score was 493. In 2012, that average
score dropped to 481. Compared to other developed countries, the United States is
near back of the pack (National Science Board, 2014).

The need for preparation before college is essential if we are to competitively address
national security, innovation, climate change, medical discovery, and new information industries
that are grounded in STEM. The American College (ACT) has actively provided data through
yearly STEM reports discussing and highlighting the relevance of STEM education and future
workforce needs. A lack of preparation will adversely affect the workforce (National Academy

62

of Engineering, 2008). The STEM pipeline has a steady decline with fewer graduates with
bachelor's degrees in STEM fields (Tierney, 2000). The highest percentages of STEM degrees
(36%) was achieved in the early 1960s, with slight fluctuations that continued through the 1970s.
In the 1980s, the fluctuation saw a drop to 35%. The 1990s presented a low of 31%. Some
improvement was realized in 2006 with 32% STEM degrees (Tierney, 2000). The “STEM 2026”
report (Tanenbaum, 2016) provided research on needed innovation as well as equitable access to
a higher level of science education initiatives. The report sought to create a dialogue about the
need as well as build tangible evidence in support of practices involving science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) education. The value placed on public libraries as informal
learning spaces can that provide valuable educational opportunities for students, supported by
policy and developed funding, will help in the effort of supporting the democratic ideals of
society (Stephens, 2015).
Chapter Summary
Public libraries across the nation have in some ways reimagined their roles, spaces, and
services driven by technological advances ("Library as Place,” 2012). The shift in service
implementation has leveraged resources and participation with a plethora of initiatives to address
the digital divide with courses, computers, and instruction of every aspect of job readiness and
other societal needs for acclimating aging populations as well as clientele that has a need for
access and literacy on varying levels. The public library supports and accepts all without
judgment. A gradual increase in science literacy is the current trend, based on the needs and
desires of the community and the existence of technologies that have forwarded the cause for
STEM and STEAM education in the public library (“Issues and Trends,” 2015).

63

Although the public library has always been the convener of possibility, the dialogue that
seeks to gain a balance between advocacy and inquiry that creates an alternative future through
community (Bohm, 1996; Block, 2008). The public library’s mission is to serve the entire
community including the underserved. It now has the formidable task of being an equalizer in
STEM, providing opportunities that have never imagined, foundational hands-on skills that
prepare youth for careers in the sciences, and training alongside an expert in the field through
cross-sectional, collaborated initiatives in a public setting. The public participation across the
nation speaks to the desire, need, and creative innovation that youth are yearning for as they to
return to the library not only for socialization purposes but creative problem solving with
technology (ALA, 2017; IMLS, 2017).
The STEM momentum continues; however, the momentum needs a methodology for
tracking the success of informal learning opportunities in the area of science, technology,
engineering, arts, and math in public libraries, identifying the inequalities present for girls in the
learning process and women in the workforce (Cheryan, Master, & Meltzoff, 2015; Landivar
2013), and documenting the representation of minorities in STEM fields (Graf, Fry, & Funk,
2018). The public library has been placed at a unique crossroads with the mitigating
responsibility to leverage educational opportunities for students as an informal learning entity, as
asserted by Datum, a research evaluation consulting firm in its report to the Space Science
Institute (2018). The integration of curricula and the resources that anchor STEM education will
provide a public square where the community can gather to discuss issues such as education and
the needs of the people (Garmer, 2014).
However, the articles “Developing the STEM Education Pipeline” (2006) and
“Diversifying the STEM Pipeline” (Boelter, Link, Perry, & Leukefeld, 2015) suggested that

64

interest in STEM degrees at the college level is dwindling. The decline is attributed to the facts
that most entering college students do not remain with their initially chosen course of study and
minorities and white persons of low income are underrepresented in STEM fields due to a lack of
exposure to STEM education. American College Testing (ACT), a mission-driven, non-profit
organization, seeks to create and explore college readiness for students entering higher
education. ACT has been instrumental in providing tools necessary for assessing science,
technology, engineering, and math that support STEM careers. The provision of assessment
research that guides a community or parents, teachers, students, administrators, and policy
makers on the skills for future career paths has found that early participation through classes and
career planning is more likely to result in students choosing to major in STEM fields (ACT,
2006; Boelter et al., 2015). The retention of students in the STEM fields is an area for future.
When assessing the retention issue, the Excel program, funded by the National Science
Foundation, suggested multiple solutions for addressing the decline of STEM degrees and
reasons for the decline (Dagley, Georgiopoulos, Reece, & Young, 2015).
Excel recommended preventative methods for STEM degree decline through holistic
approaches such as social programming, math assistance, and the involvement of the community.
Similarly, the STEM Career Interest Survey (STEM-CIS), (Kier, Blanchard, Osborne & Albert,
2013) suggested that the interest level of middle school students is developmental and maybe the
apropos time to foster interest in the sciences. STEM-CIS has developed a single factor
instrument that measures reliability through six stages of developing an interest in a STEM
career. The students tested were in grades 6–8 and were residents of underserved communities
(Kier et al., 2013). Perhaps public libraries could explore such a holistic approach to reaching
youth in a public setting before high school and college by (a) offering informal opportunities

65

that foster possibility for all with intentional thinking about implementation methods (Lettvin,
2015; Shilling, 2015); (b) partnering with STEM companies (Walters & Bishop, 2018); (c)
storytelling with effect, supported with data and STEM journaling (Awasom, 2015); and (d)
combining the resources of professionals and local educational institutions to create
sustainability nationwide (Hurtado, Newman, Tran, & Chang, 2010).
The greatest challenge today exists in the ability to produce a clear public mandate to
assert the public library as an essential part of the educational ecosystem by promoting informal
learning opportunities and digital literacy (Rainie, 2016). The Pew Research Institute (Horrigan,
2016a; Rainie, 2014) suggested that public libraries should deliberate some critical strategies as
technology continues to influence the viability of the public library. The future of libraries will
be dependent on librarians’ abilities to forecast and deliver innovative efforts that support the
national needs of an informed citizenry.
The formation of a national policy that is inclusive of the public libraries needs to
recognize the public library as a viable organizational partner within the educational ecosystem
that supports science literacy. The continued change in service and educational support for a
public organization whose mission is hinged on lifelong learning highlights the importance of
informal learning experiences and their spaces. Libraries across the United States have been
reimagining their roles by the leveraging resources and public participation and trust that has
been developed. The STEM/STEAM momentum continues throughout the nation and needs a
methodology for extracting the success of informal learning opportunities in that area of science,
technology, engineering, arts, and math in public libraries. The process of leading the change
will be exhibited through the methodology that engenders new ways of thinking in the execution

66

of the mission for the American Library Association, leading to future innovation and
engagement along with formal learning partnerships.

67

Chapter 3. Research Design and Methodology
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to investigate existing and needed strategies employed by
informal learning spaces such as public libraries and their implementation of STEAM programs.
The study also addresses the challenges faced in the development of STEAM programs in public
libraries. This investigation will also, by extension, measure related successes in the public
library and seek to discover overall recommendations for implementation of exemplary STEAM
initiatives that substantiate the public library as a recognized entity in STEAM education. The
effort will strive to show several samples representative of regional achievement within the
United States.
The lack of information regarding the strategic mechanism for the implementation of
STEAM in public libraries has been outlined in the preceding chapters. This chapter describes
the nature of the study, including the research design, and the research methods employed to
understand the STEAM experience in public libraries. This chapter also describes the interview
protocol, a statement of personal bias of the principal investigator, and the data analysis process.
Restatement of Research Questions
This chapter describes the research methods that were applied to achieve the objectives of
this study, which is to primarily answer these four research questions (RQ):
1. What strategies and practices have been implemented in public libraries that focus on
informal learning opportunities related to STEAM?
2. What are the challenges that public libraries face as they relate to the implementation
and development of informal learning programs focused on STEAM?

68

3. How do public libraries measure success within informal learning programs related to
STEAM?
4. What lessons have been learned in the development of informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the public library?
Nature of the Study
The focus of this qualitative research design is to determine the best practices for the
implementation of STEAM initiatives in public libraries. Qualitative research, as delineated by
Creswell (1998), is the process by which the principal investigator develops inquiry based on
distinct methodological traditions of inquiry that scrutinize a social or human problem.
Qualitative research, multi-method in approach, studies phenomena in their natural setting in an
attempt to make sense of the meaning that is brought forward by the people (Denzin & Lincoln,
1998). The investigator’s theoretical lens, as described by Creswell (1998), is influenced by
social science theories of leadership, attribution, political influence and control, and many other
factors that control the interpretive framework of the research. The interpretive framework is
guided by a set of beliefs and philosophical assumptions that the investigator brings to the
research. These beliefs and assumptions are important because they inform the body of the work.
Therefore, the investigator’s initiative is to undertake qualitative study by complying with the
philosophical assumptions and amalgamating their own worldviews that shape the charge of the
research. The qualitative method usually requires data to be gathered by observation, interviews,
or focus groups and may also include written documents and case studies. Qualitative research
involves collecting numbers on the meaning of behavior as opposed to collecting numbers of
people and the behavior displayed. The data collection also involves using open-ended questions
and fewer tools for a focus on answering the how and why, whereas the quantitative approach

69

emphasizes the who, what, and when questions. Data are usually gathered by observation
(Creswell, 1998).
Strengths. The strength of qualitative methodology and the theoretical perspective of
phenomenology lies in the understanding of social phenomena from the participants’
perspectives and understanding how the world is experienced (Taylor, Devault, & Bogden,
2015). This design also allows the researcher to use personal motivation and interest to further a
study—a strength in the completion of a dissertation (Maxwell, 2013). The collection of firsthand data is also an advantage in the interview process that yields information through openended questions (Maxwell 2013; Patton, 2002,). Jack Douglass (1970) wrote that the forces that
move human beings are beyond physical movement and include the development of internal
ideas, feelings, and motives. These elements are significant to the interpretation of the constructs
and beliefs behind the actions in studying a phenomenon. In this study, the design of the
qualitative research approach will provide and strengthen opportunities for insight into local
perspectives of the study’s designated population.
Weaknesses. The phenomenological design has numerous strengths that led to the use of
this methodology for this research design. A few weaknesses are also recognized in the process.
While the phenomenological method is credible research, its limitations are recognized. One
such weakness is noted by Janesick (2016), who asserted the need for the researcher to disclose
personal biases and beliefs prior to the actual study. The qualitative research methodology also
imposes a vast amount of data that could possibly be overwhelmed by an inability to limit the
scope of the study as well as the laboriousness of the process and time consumption (Bryman,
1988; Creswell, 2013; Janesick, 2016). Patton (2002) suggested the interviewer must give due

70

diligence to the process, present the data, and communicate what is brought forward in alignment
with the purpose of the study.
Methodology
The fieldwork for this study involved a phenomenological method that will explore the
lived leadership experiences of the subject. The phenomenology of practice refers to the kinds of
inquiries that address and serve the practices of professional practitioners as well as the quotidian
practices of everyday life (Van Maanen, 1979). Phenomenology studies the meaning of
experiences as they are lived, providing opportunities to collect descriptive, reflective, and
interpretive data and engage a means for conversation on the essence of the experiences
(Richards & Morse, 2013; Van Maanen, 1979).
Phenomenology gathers lived experience descriptions—not opinions, views, beliefs,
interpretations—but direct descriptions (depictions, renderings, portrayals) of an experience as
lived through in a particular moment of time (Van Maanen, 1979). The approach generally
phrases the phenomenon as a single concept (Creswell, 2013). In the context of this study, the
single concept under consideration are the strategies and best practices of librarians and the
implementation of STEAM education initiatives.
The methodology of this study rests on the exploration of a problem (Creswell, 1998).
The problem this study addresses is the lack of strategies for promoting STEAM efforts in the
public library. In the qualitative research design approach noted by Creswell (1998), the purpose
is to discover best practices for the development and implementation of STEAM initiatives and
informal learning environments such as the public library. The methodology also has a theory
base that asserts a connection between two or more phenomena. Theory guides the research and
organizes ideas. The theoretical basis for this study is phenomenological and is used to

71

understand several individuals’ communal perspectives surrounding a phenomenon based on a
qualitative approach. The phenomenological approach delves into a clear understanding of
common experiences in order to develop best practices, potential policy, and the features of the
phenomenon related to STEAM education in the public library. This study will scrutinize
information through semi-structured interviews that will assist in establishing best practices to
(a) improve the nation's competitive edge with students in the areas of math and science, and by
extension, improve school performance; (b) include all children; and (c) address the need to
increase the leverage of female and minority participants in STEAM career pathways. The public
library, as a lifelong learning institution, is situated as a free, public entity that can contribute to
the democratic ideals of success in increasing ways through informal learning programs
specifically related to science education.
Structured process of phenomenology. This qualitative research will employ a
phenomenological design that embraces a specific school of philosophy and research methods in
the form of three different schools of thought: transcendental phenomenology, hermeneutic
phenomenology and existential phenomenology. This phenomenological study will explore the
meaning of the lived experiences of several librarians about the concept or phenomenon.
Phenomenal study examines the structures of consciousness in the human experience
(Polkinghorne, 1989), which has its genesis in the philosophical perspectives of Edward Husseri
(1859–1938). The philosophical assumptions and interpretive framework of this study are
axiology, which describes the way in which values are discussed with both the researcher’s and
participants’ views reflected. The assumptions also include social constructivism and the
inductive method of expressed ideas that are obtained through methods that include interviewing,
observing, and analysis of text (Creswell, 2013).

72

Appropriateness of phenomenological methodology. Phenomenology gives a
description of the immediate experience, attempts to capture the experience as lived, is a method
of knowing that begins with the concepts themselves (free of perceptions), and is a method of
learning about another person's subjective world. In the real world, conceptualization involves
everyone using their own preconceptions. Phenomenology ventures to make clear our receiving
of information and the discovery of what is reality. Phenomenological research includes three
approaches to derive what is (a) an existential dimension, examining what is distinct in
experience and what is common among those sharing the same events; (b) hermeneutics
phenomenology, involving the thematizing after collecting descriptions (Hein & Austin, 2001);
and (c) transcendental phenomenology, which ignores the researcher’s and participants’ points of
view and examines the data, looking at shared beliefs, experiences, and views (Creswell, 1998).
This research provides a conceptual framework for meaningful practice using parallels as
described in transcendental phenomenology, and therefore, transcendental phenomenology is
best suited for the topic at hand. The findings will be aligned and descriptive of the participants’
experience without the researcher's frame of reference.
The overarching goal of phenomenology is to develop research that is a pure selfexpression without the voice of the researcher. Phenomenology attempts to understand the lived
perceptions, perspectives, and understanding of situations (Van Maanen, 1979). Every research
methodology has a set of intrinsic limitations (Leedy & Ormrod, 2005). These potential
weaknesses are identified (Creswell, 2005) and can be a threat to the validity of the study.
Creswell (2003) identified three fundamental challenges in developing an understanding of a
phenomenon when using Moustakas’s (1995) methods for data collection. Moustakas maintained
that once the data has been collected, the descriptions are what was expressed and how it was

73

expressed—the essence of the data, not an explanation of the data. First, prerequisite knowledge
of the broader philosophical assumptions is needed and should be identified by the researcher.
Second, the participants need to have experienced the phenomenon so the researcher can fashion
a prevalent understanding. Third, the researcher also needs to resolve the way in which his or her
personal understanding is brought forward in the study.
Research Design
This research study seeks to identify best practices by librarians in the development and
implementation of STEAM initiatives in public libraries. In social science research, typical
analysis includes individuals, groups, and social organizations. In order to analyze the data, a
unit of analysis must be determined. The unit analysis, as defined by Trochim, Donnelly, and
Arora (2015), is the who or why of the study and can be an individual student, group, or program.
Analysis unit. The unit of analysis for this study is a librarian in the public library. This
librarian must have experience in the development, implementation, and promotion of informal
learning activities described as STEAM. The librarian also needs to have a prerequisite
understanding of science, technology, engineering and math programs in a community library.
Population. The study seeks librarians who offer specialized programs that encourage
interest in the sciences such as makerspaces, coding classes, and STEAM after-school programs
clubs. As such, the population for this study will be composed of librarians who have promoted
STEAM programs, presented at conferences on the topic of STEAM programs in the public
library, published in journals on the topic of STEAM, or are noted in publications as survey
participants in studies that were made public. Ultimately, the participants will have provided
educational opportunities in the area of STEAM learning in a public library setting.

74

Sample size. Sampling, as it relates to this study, involves the selection of the individuals
to be studied. The sample will purposefully include only those with particular experience with
STEAM initiatives in a public library setting. Creswell (1998) asserted that the qualitative size
should be large enough to obtain feedback for most or all perceptions, which leads to saturation.
Moreover, Glaser and Strauss (1967) recommended the concept of saturation, whereas Creswell
(1998) also suggested that there are no set rules on the sample size, However, Creswell
recommended 5–25 participants, with some consideration of time allotted, research objectives,
and the availability of resources. This study will utilize a sampling size of 15 participants who
have thoroughly met the criteria through purposive sampling and maximum variation.
Purposive sampling. According to Patton (2002), purposive sampling is a practice that is
widely accepted in qualitative research and one that allows for the selection of participants
through a method of maximum variation. This qualitative research study employed purposive
sampling, allowing for maximum variation in the selection of participants that will provide the
knowledge, experience, and availability of the information proposed. Bernard (2002) and
Spradley (1979) also noted the importance of availability and the willingness to participate,
while Patton (2015) concluded that the qualitative research method of purposive sampling
intends to achieve a depth of understanding so as to saturate the information until no new
substantive information is acquired. It places an emphasis on knowledge gained as a
representation of the population from which the sample was drawn. Therefore, this method is
most apropos for this study, as purposeful sampling seeks to distinguish the best practices of the
participants who have actively demonstrated interest in the phenomena of STEAM in public
libraries.

75

Participation selection: Sampling frame to create the master list. The process for
selecting participants in this study began with the development of a master list. The master list
was derived from a series of Internet searches utilizing Google’s search engine. Holmes (2006)
asserted that Google is an approach to finding information across the worldwide web. The
following steps led to a subset of articles on STEAM efforts in public libraries, which included
authors and names of library systems to help yield contact information for the master list:
1. Type “google.com” in a search engine once a browser is open.
2. Several thematic headings in the study were used to access articles relating to
STEAM in public libraries as keyword searches. The variations are:
a.

“STEM/STEAM in libraries”

b.

“STEM/STEAM in public libraries”

c.

“STEM/STEAM + Library Activities”

d.

“informal learning in libraries”

e.

“informal learning in public libraries”

f.

“technology programs in libraries”

g.

“technology programs in public libraries”

h.

STEM/STEAM and Makerspaces in public libraries

3. Each search yielded published articles noting participating libraries, researchers, and
librarians in each article. The researcher selected appropriate authoritative articles
from the first two pages of the generated search engine results, until the search
yielded a sufficient number of prospective participants:
a.

Each library in the United States has a website that provides the name of the
library, its address, email address, and phone number.

76

b.

Articles. Each article provided the name of the participants (librarians) in the
study as well as the name of the libraries hosting the STEAM program.

c.

Additional searches. If the search did not yield the publicly available names
and contacts of potential participants to include in the master list, the
researcher reviewed the next two available pages for each keyword search.
This process was repeated until a master list is created.

4. Based on results, a database was created to house the publicly available names and
contact information of each person listed in the articles and their relevant experiences
in the promotion of STEAM programs in a public library setting.
5. The database was created with columns to delineate participants who met the criteria
for inclusion.
6. A set of criteria for inclusion and exclusion was used to identify and create a sample
of a final list of 15 potential participants for the study.
Criteria of inclusion. Participants for the study must meet the following criteria for
inclusion to participate in the study:
● have demonstrated the need for STEAM programs through implementation of a series
of programs over the course of a several months,
● have some experience with pathways for partnerships, grants, and collaborative
efforts with experts in the field of STEAM, and/or
● exhibited a noted presence in the field through various publications.
Criteria of exclusion. In order to gather the most effective the pool of data for further
scrutiny, participants who do not meet the following two requirements were excluded from the
study:

77

●

Librarians of libraries that have programs led and developed by teens under 15 years.

● Librarians of libraries with programs that did not demonstrate longevity.
Purposive sampling maximum variation. To ensure an information-rich study,
participants were recruited using a purposive sampling applying a maximum variation.
According to Creswell (2003), maximum variation is a method that assists the researcher in
identifying criteria in advance that distinguish participants, allows documentation of diverse
variations, and ascertains significant patterns in the study. This method is appropriate for this
study because it discovers the unique best practices of persons involved in informal learning and
STEAM in the public library who have experienced the same phenomenon. Purposive sampling
of a total of 15 participants will be needed to ensure that the maximum variation includes
(a) librarians or STEAM professionals, (b) demonstrated involvement with STEAM
programming efforts, (c) experience with networking, and (d) varied experience.
Protection of Human Subjects
The study began with the researcher processing who needs to be contacted to determine
availability for a conversation (Richards & Morse, 2013). The voluntary list of participants was
identified noting the involvement of human subjects and the need for study review and approval
by the Pepperdine IRB. Therefore, “the Researcher should not expose research subjects to
unnecessary physical or psychological harm” (Leedy & Ormrod, 2005, p. 101).
The main goal of Pepperdine University and the Graduate and Professional School’s IRB
process is to protect human subjects involved in the study. To that end, noting the involvement of
human subjects, guidelines are to be followed and are mandated by the United States Department
of Health and Human Services (Leedy & Ormond, 2005, p. 101). Institutional review boards
monitor this process before any person is approached as a potential participant in a study. As

78

deemed by Pepperdine University and its Institutional Review Board, the following details are
noted: (a) participants have the right to voluntarily withdraw participation in the study at any
given time, (b) participants are informed prior to participation of the fundamental reasons for the
study and the process of data collection, (c) participants are assured of the confidentiality of the
study, (d) participants are informed of any potential risk factors involved in the study, (e)
participants are provided with potential benefits of the study, and (f) the participants as well as
the investigator solidify the conditions of the agreement and that all information has been
provided with signed consent (Creswell, 2003).
Recruitment Process
Once the master list has been developed through a continuous process of searches
yielding 15 potential participants until there are 15 persons that have agreed to the parameters set
and willingness to be interviewed. Each prospective participant will then be reviewed based on
the previous stated factors for inclusion narrowing the results ensuring a maximum variation.
The prospective participants will then be sent an email introducing the interviewer, the study as
well the research questions. The potential participant will then be contacted via phone verifying
their interest and consent to participate and discussion of a possible interview via ZOOM, a
video conference or a face to face interview.
Data Collection
The data collection process began with an e-mail communication during working hours to
the librarians’ respective library e-mail accounts. All potential participants received an
explanatory document via e-mail detailing purpose and the prerequisite requirements of the
study. When a potential participant responded, further information was relayed via an e-mail
concerning the reasons for the study, the process for data collection, the confidentiality

79

statement, benefits of the study, and consent forms for participation. A copy of the nine openended questions will be sent for review. A phone call was made one week later to further clarify
any questions. The phone call was an opportunity to answer any questions concerning the
process, such as an explanation of the process in its entirety, duration of the participation,
voluntary participation, confidentiality, copyright, conflict of interest, remuneration, anonymity,
and contact information for the questions. If the potential participant agreed to take part in the
study, the semi-structured 45–60-minute interview will be scheduled at the discretion of the
participant in their perspective office spaces located in various organizations throughout the U.S.
At that point, the participant acknowledged having read the documents and chose a convenient
time and location for the interview. Once participation was solidified with a returned, signed
consent form, the signed documents were sent to the participant via e-mail prior to the scheduled
interview. If the documents did not arrive prior to the interview, the researcher provided
additional forms to be signed prior to the interview. The process in its entirety was repeated with
each participant.
Interview Techniques
According to Creswell (2007), rich data can be acquired in various ways in the qualitative
investigative process, implying the proper construction of research questions and the analysis of
the interview data. Creswell (2005) stated that “the intent is not to generalize to a population but
to develop an in-depth investigation of a central phenomenon” (p. 203). The process as it relates
to this study mandates gathering information from persons who are “information rich”; therefore,
the interview structure lends itself to a semi-structured process that gives participants ample time
and scope to express their views and allows the researcher time to react to ideas that may emerge
from the interview (Nohl, 2010).The semi-structured interview also allows for an expression of

80

experience in narrative form (Nohl, 2010); it allows for the free expression of ideas without
minimizing the researcher’s attitudes and previous findings (Creswell, 2005). This semistructured interview is structured to explore different topics related to a phenomenon while
simultaneously providing an outlet for the extrapolation of new ideas. The versatility of the semistructured method lends itself to appropriately addressing the topic of this study—the
intersection of public libraries and the STEAM movement as an informal learning initiative. The
arrangement of questions in the semi-structured approach yields multidimensional streams of
data through the use of open-ended questions. This process leads to the opportunity for a more
theoretical inquiry as the structure allows for further investigation of the lived experiences or
phenomena (Galletta, 2012).
Interview Protocol
The interview is the most common practice for gathering data in a qualitative research
process (Creswell, 2007; Marshall & Rossman, 2016). Typically, the interviewer asks the same
questions of each participant using one of three methodologies as asserted by Creswell (2003) as
unstructured, semi-structured., or structured. Interviews that embrace conversations between the
investigator and participants are unstructured, allowing the maximum flexibility in collecting
data discovery of information during the discourse (Ritchie, Lewis, Nicholls, & Ormston, 2013).
Unstructured interviews do not have any preconceived theories and generally provide very little
guidance (Leedy & Ormrod, 2005). The use of verbally administered questions that are
predetermined without scope or variation and do not give way to further questions are structured
interviews. When several key questions are used to define the scope and area to be explored,
semi-structured process allows for open-ended questions in pursuit of articular parameters, and
allows for detailed responses of a subject matter.

81

This qualitative research paper will utilize a semi-structured process. The study will bring
forward new, innovative ideas that have yet to be captured in the literature. Roulston, deMarrais,
and Lewis (2003) examined the challenges of the interview process, and in concert with Creswell
(1998), explored potential unexpected behavior such as emotional outbursts and the technique of
saying very little, as the process can be lengthy. The strategy chosen for this study was to use an
icebreaker question as recommended by Creswell (2013) to begin the dialogue and create a
relaxing environment in order to yield the best possible results.
The relationship between research and interview questions. The qualitative research
process for conducting interviews examines the relationship between the interviewer and the
interviewee (Kvale & Brinkman, 2009). The process for developing the interview protocol after
a careful review of conditions that foster quality interviews involves access to and selection of
participants (Rubin & Rubin, 2012). The investigator developed an interview protocol of nine
open-ended questions that were formulated from the four research questions and further
substantiated by the literature review. The process for selecting the research questions involved
assiduous concern for the design of the interview protocol, ensuring a comprehensive coverage
of the subject matter. The strategy used to construct the interview questions was designed to gain
the greatest results related to the lived experience and the meaning derived from the interview
questions. The use of open-ended questions gave the interviewees the opportunity to further
express their experiences as it related to a relatively new phenomenon in the public library with
the guidance of a research question. Table 1 details the relationship of the research questions
with their corresponding interview questions.

82

Table 1
Research Questions and Corresponding Interview Questions
Research Questions

Corresponding Interview Questions

RQ 1. How do public libraries measure
success in the promotion of informal
learning programs related to STEAM?

IQ 1. What were your strategies for creating
and implementing STEAM programs?
IQ 2. How did you decide on the structure of
your STEAM program?
IQ 3. How did you overcome resistance or
opposition to your plan?
IQ 4. How do you define a STEAM program
in your library?

RQ 2. What are the challenges that public
libraries face related to the promotion of
informal learning programs focused on
STEAM?

IQ 5. What challenges did you face in the
planning phase of the implementation?
IQ 6. How did you deal with or overcome
the challenge?

RQ 3. What Strategies and practices have
been implemented in public libraries to
promote informal learning opportunities
related to STEAM?

IQ 7. How did you define success for the
STEAM implementation?
IQ 8. What were the expected outcomes of
the program?
IQ 9. How did you measure and track your
success?

RQ 4. Are there any lessons learned in the
promotion of informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the public library?

IQ 10. What recommendations would you
make for public libraries in the
implementation process?
IQ 11. What advice would you give to other
public libraries who are considering
implementing STEAM programs?
IQ 12. What would you like to have known
before you started the STEAM initiative?
IQ 13. Is there anything else that you would
like to share about your experience that
would be relevant to the study?
IQ 14. If you could start over, what would
you do differently?
IQ 15. Have I left anything out?

Note. The table identifies four research questions and corresponding 15 interview questions.
Interview questions were reviewed by a panel of two peer reviewers and expert reviewers.

83

Reliability and validity of the study. The foundation of qualitative research is based on
data that is subjective, interpretive, and contextual, which sets the stage for questions and
scrutiny. Therefore, Best and Kahn (2006) asserted a critical need for the researcher to ensure
reliability and validity of the research findings. According to Kirk and Miller (1986), the findings
should be believable, consistent, applicable, and credible. Reliability refers to the ability of the
findings to be repeated, showing consistency within the research. Validity reflects the accuracy
and correctness of the findings and the degree to which the instrument produces consistent
results. Kirk and Miller (1986) reviewed how we judge reliability and validity, using these four
aspects:
● Credibility—In many instances, credibility is called internal validity and refers to the
believability and trustworthiness of the findings. Credibility/internal validity
examines the richness of data more so than the quantity, using triangulation for cross
checking information from various perspectives.
● Transferability—Commonly referred to an external validity, transferability allows for
the transfer of the context, comparing the legitimacy of the findings across groups.
Therefore, the results are generalizable and can be used in different populations,
situations, and settings.
● Dependability—Also known as reliability, dependability is the ability of the study to
be replicated with identical results. Dependability also defines legitimacy of the
qualitative research method, as other researchers may want to replicate the study.
● Confirmability—Confirmability substantiates how well the research is supported by
the data collected. Confirmability describes the level of objectivity the researcher
used in evaluating the results (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Cohen & Crabtree, 2006).

84

Prima-facie and content validity. According to qualitative pedagogy and the protocols
for data collection, the first step is to develop the data collection instrument. The instrument
consists of the research questions that align with the literature on the topic matter. According to
Rubin & Rubin (2012) and the interview refinement protocol, a four-phase process includes: (a)
ensuring the interview questions align with the research questions, (b) ensuring the questions
construct an inquiry-based conversation, (c) receiving feedback on the interview questions, and
(d) piloting the interview protocol.
Peer-review validity. Peer-review validity, according to Creswell (2013), involves
obtaining feedback from multiple sources, which increases alignment with participants. The peer
review validity permits the researcher select reviewers outside of the process but having some
expertise of the subject matter. This step in the validity process relies on outside experts to
examine the quality of the instrument development process to ensure data collection that is
effective in its purpose. The investigator began by constructing a table that situates each research
question with each interview question (see Table 2).
The next step requires the attainment of two subject matter experts to examine and
scrutinize the peer review process for any needed improvements. The search resulted in two
doctoral students who agreed to participate, both of whom have acquired over 20 years of
experience working in government organizations that serve the public. Their experience included
the promotion and development of services for the general public, and they offered their
combined knowledge of the research process as doctoral students. They provided the subject
matter expertise based on their experience as practitioners and their understanding of research
methods. The peer reviewers were provided copies of the interview and research questions and
research question table and were asked to follow these guidelines:

85

Table 2
Research Questions and Corresponding Interview Questions with Peer Reviewers
Research Questions
RQ 1. How do public libraries
measure success in the
promotion of informal
learning programs related to
STEAM?

Corresponding Interview Questions
IQ 1: What were your strategies for creating and
implementing STEAM programs?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 2: How did you decide on the structure of your STEAM
program?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 3: How did you overcome resistance or opposition to your
plan?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 4: How do you define a STEAM program in your library?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions

RQ 2. What are the challenges
that public libraries face
related to the promotion of
informal learning programs
focused on STEAM?

IQ 5: What challenges did you face in the planning phase of
the implementation?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 6: How did you deal with or overcome the challenge?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
(continued)

86

Research Questions
RQ 3. What strategies and
practices have been
implemented in public libraries
to promote informal learning
opportunities related to
STEAM?

Corresponding Interview Questions
IQ 7: How did you define success for the STEAM
implementation?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 8: What were the expected outcomes of the program?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 9: How did you measure and track your success?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions

RQ 4. Are there any lessons
learned in the promotion of
informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the
public library?

IQ 10: What recommendations would you make for public
libraries in the implementation process?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 11: What advice would you give to other public libraries
who are considering implementing STEAM programs?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 12: What would you like to have known before you started
the STEAM initiative?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions

(continued)

87

Research
Questions

Corresponding Interview Questions
IQ 13: Is there anything else that you would like to share about your
experience that would be relevant to the study?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 14: If you could start over, what would you do differently?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions
IQ 15: Have I left anything out?
Accept
Decline
Suggestions

Note. The table identifies four research questions and corresponding interview questions.
Interview questions were reviewed by a panel of two peer reviewers and expert reviewers.
● Assess the relevance of the research questions.
● Review the interview questions and evaluate whether the questions address the
research questions.
● Employ guidance with suggestions for fitting the interview questions with the
research questions.
● Make recommendations for enhanced questions.
Each expert reviewed the interview questions, and as a result, three suggestions were
made for revision:
● Revised IQ 1. What are the strategies you implemented in the creation of STEAM
programs?

88

● Original IQ 14 should be deleted and replaced by IQ 12: What would you like to have
known before you started the STEAM initiative?
● Delete original IQ 15 and replace it with IQ 13. Is there anything else that you would
like to share about your experience that would be relevant to the study?
Table 3 shows the arrangement of interview questions that have been revised.
Table 3
Research Questions and Corresponding Revised Interview Questions
Research Questions

Corresponding Revised Interview Questions

RQ 1: What strategies and
practices have been implemented
in public libraries to promote
informal learning opportunities
related to STEAM?

IQ 1: What were your strategies for creating and
implementing STEAM programs?
● How did you decide on the structure of your
STEAM program?
● How do you define a STEAM program in
your library?

RQ 2: What are the challenges that
public libraries face related to the
promotion of informal learning
programs focused on STEAM?

IQ 2: What challenges did you face in the planning
phase of the implementation?
● planning
● design
● implementation
● post implementation
IQ 3: How did you deal with or overcome the
challenge in:
● planning
● design
● implementation
● post implementation
IQ 4: How did you overcome resistance or opposition
to your plan?

RQ 3: How do public libraries
measure success in the promotion
of informal learning programs
related to STEAM?

IQ 5: How did you define success for the STEAM
implementation?
IQ 6: How did you measure and track your success?
(continued)

89

Research Questions

Corresponding Revised Interview Questions

RQ 4: Are there any lessons
learned in the promotion of

IQ 7: What recommendations would you make for
public libraries in the implementation process?

informal learning spaces focused
on STEAM in the public library?

IQ 8: If you could start over, what would you do
differently?
IQ 9: Is there anything else you would like to share?

Note. The table identifies four research questions and corresponding interview questions with
revisions based on feedback from peer reviewers and an expert reviewer. Subsequent changes
were made to the order and phrasing of questions within the interview protocol.
Expert review validity. The final step involved establishing validation from the expert
review. This step provides some assurance of a final decision in the event that consensus is not
established in during the peer review process. The dissertation committee becomes the mitigating
decision maker in the situation when a peer reviewer's remarks or comments are not in
agreement with the researcher. The dissertation committee then examines the suggestions and
comes to consensus on the inclusion of said edits or suggestions. The expert review was
conducted and the following revisions have been made to the interview questions:
● Original IQ 1: What were your strategies for creating and implementing STEAM
programs?
● Revised IQ 1: What are the strategies you implemented in the creation of STEAM
programs?
● Original IQ 14: If you could start over, what would you do differently?
● Deleted and replaced by IQ 12: What would you like to have known before you
started the STEAM initiative?
● Original IQ 15: Have I left anything out?

90

● Deleted and replaced by IQ 13: Is there anything else that you would like to share
about your experience that would be relevant to the study?
Reliability of the study. Reliability in qualitative research alludes to the replicability of
the process and the results. The essence of the process in qualitative research relies on the
consistency of data (Carcary, 2009). Kirk and Miller (1986) asserted the need of for both internal
and external validity in determining the credibility of the research instrument. The transferability
of the data collection, findings, and results across groups provides assurance in the reliability of
the instrument when others are able to discover the same phenomena (leCompte & Goetz, 1982).
The researcher also performed two pilot interviews to test for additional validation of the
interview questions. These participants met the established criteria for participation. The
participants were asked all questions and asked to provide feedback on the tool. The instrument
was further modified and changes were incorporated in the final interview tool. The researcher,
employing both external and internal reliability in the research process, sought to optimize the
reliability of the data collection instrument (Creswell, 2013).
Statement of Personal Bias
Creswell (2009) stated the need for a disclosure of personal bias in the qualitative
research process to provide the perspective from which the data was scrutinized for the study.
The researcher discloses the following personal biases to the research process:
● Twenty-five years of combined experience as a public librarian and international
academic librarian. The last 10 years included leadership and project management
with an emphasis on service to youth and science education.
● An undergraduate degree in Spanish with a minor in education, a master’s degree in
library and information science, and international experience that has molded the way

91

she views and analyzes public service and lifelong learning initiatives in public
libraries.
● Experience with the promotion of STEAM programs in public libraries.
Epoche and Bracketing
According to Chamberlain (cited in Sanders, 1982), epoche is the process of temporarily
suspending the researcher’s beliefs, preconceptions, and assumptions about the phenomena in
order to achieve pure clarity on the vision of the research. The process is also referred to as
bracketing (Creswell, 2013) or setting aside biases in order to optimize the experiences of the
participants, which include:
● The researcher identifies all potential biases, experiences, and knowledge that are a
part of the ethical awareness when research is congruent to personal values (Miles &
Huberman, 1994).
● The researcher also notes any biases that arise during the research process and the
reporting of such to inform the reader of the biases that come forth in the
interpretation of findings (Creswell, 2013).
In this study, the researcher examined and noted all experiences, biases, and knowledge
related to the subject matter of the paper. Second, the researcher developed a journal to also note
any biases that may arise during the interview process. Last, biases were identified and bracketed
for the readers’ review of the study’s findings, as recommended by Creswell (2013).
Data Analysis
Marshall and Rossman (2016) described data analysis as the process of bringing order,
structure, and meaning to the interview data collected. The process of data analysis commences
with the transcription of the interviews. The interview data is coded and analyzed as described by

92

Schwandt (2007) to make sense of the information gathered through general statements among
categories of data. The data is transcribed, analyzed, and coded to examine similar themes, ideas,
characteristics, and experiences. The researcher will also maintain a journal documenting any
insights that develop during the process (Creswell, 2013).
Other coders. The researcher then obtained other coders to assess themes and discuss
data codes with the goal of finding consensus on the common themes and data. When the
consensus met the co-reviewers’ challenges, the data analysis was forwarded to an expert review
for final determination.
Interrater reliability and validity. In an effort to show reliability and validity the
investigator will begin by taking the first three transcripts and code accordingly, Thereafter, the
investigator will share the themed categories with two doctoral students to provide validity of the
questions and process in order to arrive at a consensus for the agree methodology for coding and
thereafter code the remainder of the interviews following the same procedure.
To ensure the aforementioned process for clarity of the data analysis process, Creswell
(2013) recommended six steps for phenomenological analysis:
1.

Data organization—All interviews are recorded on an MP3 device. Each interview is
listened to and the spoken word is put in written format in a process described as
transcription. The researcher develops a structure for the data captured in the
interview process and incorporates the findings in an Excel document.

2.

Reading and annotating—The transcribed data is then reviewed and memoed. The
researcher develops codes representing ideas and concepts formulated from the
initial codes.

93

3.

Describing the data—The researcher aggregates data into categories or themes as
defined by Creswell (2013). Creswell’s recommendation was to establish 25–30
codes that yield five to six common themes that assist with unifying the data.

4.

Classifying the data—The researcher develops sub-themes that present themselves in
the description of the data. The researcher then develops statements that create
meaningful units of data.

5.

Interpreting—This step of the process involves textural descriptions and structural
descriptions that capture what happened and how it happened (Moustakas, 1995)
The researcher notes what happens by coding information in subsets or themes that
are derived from the collected data.

6.

Representing and visualizing the data—The final step involves completing the data
analysis. Once unanimity is reached by all, a summary is developed, with a report of
the findings in Chapter 4.

Chapter Summary
Chapter 3 takes and in-depth look at the research design and methodology used in the of
best practices of the qualitative phenomenological study on the intersection of the public library
and STEAM. The restatement of the research questions and explanation for the use of a
phenomenological approach is discussed. The process further delineated by Creswell’s (2013)
example establishes the unit of analysis, population, and sample. In order to select participants
for the study as well as define the sample, inclusion and exclusion were discussed. The IRB
process is an important step as it ensures the safety and confidentiality of participants. An
interview guide as established by Patton (2015) stated that the interview protocol guides the
same basic line of inquiry with each interviewee. The data collection tool then validates whether

94

the interview questions are related to the research questions and how interrater reliability and
validity was employed in the process. The chapter also presented discourse about the interview
process that allows for effective interviews. The final section outlined how the data is analyzed
by the researcher, detailing the validity and reliability of the methodology, including an
explanation of the method for reporting the results in Chapter 4.

95

Chapter 4. Findings
Today’s public libraries worldwide are collectively evaluating future usage and reshaping
the library’s use beyond the book without negating the core element of literacy and learning held
by the founding fathers of libraries. The public library serves as a need for many; however, for
some the influence is one of economics and for others sentimental thoughts of days past that
include functions and services that have been replaced with technological efficiencies (Brogan,
2015). Tomorrow's library embraces a service model that includes the library as a place in the
community with an emphasis not only on the reader and persons who are tech savvy, but also the
use of space planning for those seeking a place for retreat and entertainment (Dewe, 2017). In
addition, 97% of all public libraries have embarked on providing programs that have either been
developed in support of science education within the mandate of other education institutions or
district initiatives, as well as grassroot efforts lead by STEAM leaders who are moved by the
urgency to support the needed enhancements nationwide in the area of math and science in their
respective communities (ALA, 2014).
The purpose of this study was to explore best practices for the implementation of
STEAM programs in a public library system and advancing the informal learning opportunities
within public spaces. To accomplish this task, this study sought to answer the following four
research questions:
● What strategies and practices have been implemented in public libraries that focus on
informal learning opportunities related to STEAM?
● What are the challenges that public libraries face as they relate to the implementation
and development of informal learning programs focused on STEAM?

96

● How do public libraries measure success within informal learning programs related to
STEAM?
● What lessons have been learned in the development of informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the public library?
To answer these four questions, an interview protocol composed of nine open-ended
questions was developed, with each interview question directly informing a specific research
question. The interview protocol was validated through an interrater reliability and validity
procedure. Through the use of the interrater reliability and validity procedure, the following nine
research questions were approved and used to interview participants for this study:
1. What were your strategies for creating and implementing STEAM programs?
Follow-up questions: How did you decide on the structure of your STEAM program?
How do you define a STEAM program in your library?
2. What challenges did you face in the planning phase of the implementation?
Follow-up question: What challenges did you face in the design, implementation, and
post-implementation?
3. How did you deal with or overcome the challenge in planning, design,
implementation, and post-implementation?
4. How did you overcome resistance or opposition to your plan?
5. How did you define success for the STEAM implementation?
6. How did you measure and track your success?
7. What recommendations would you make for public libraries in the implementation
process?

97

8. If you could start over, what would you do differently?
9. Is there anything else you would like to share?
Interview participants were asked to provide responses to the nine questions and
elaborate by providing as much information as they felt comfortable. The responses to the nine
interview questions collectively provided an in-depth understanding of the best practices that
public libraries and persons responsible for STEAM programming employed to make the
programs successful. This chapter provides a description of the data analysis process and the
interrater review process used to validate the data analysis process. In addition, this chapter
reports the findings from the analysis of the data collected from the nine interview questions.
A total of 11 participants were interviewed as a result of reaching saturation in the
research for this study. Participants for the study ranged from ages 18–64. Of the 11 participants,
three (27%) were male and eight (72%) were female. Participants included three managers of a
systemwide STEAM initiatives, two with titles that are not traditional titles for librarians but
address the needs of persons with specialized interests; the remainder carried the title of
librarian. Three participants are former teachers with back grounds in science, education, and
learning. All participants have a sincere interest in learning initiatives. Six participants have
master degrees in library science and one participant has a bachelor degree in information
science (see Table 4).

98

Table 4
Participants' Statistics
Participants

Degree Earned

Gender

Interview Date

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6

Female
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female

02/07/2018
02/13/2018
02/26/2018
02/26/2018
03/07/2018
03/07/2018

P7
P8
P9
P10

BS Science/MLS Science
BS Information Science
MLS Science
MLS Science
Education/MLS Library Science
BS Biology/MLS Library
Science
MLS Library Science
MLS Library Science
Former Teacher
MLS Library Science

Female
Female
Male
Female

03/08/2018
03/12/2018
03/13/2018
03/14/2018

P11

Former Teacher/MLS Science

Male

03/22/2018

Data Collection
Data collection for the 11 interviews began with a series of Internet searches utilizing
Google’s search engine and eight keyword searches, using variations of the following terms:
● “STEM/STEAM in libraries,”
● “STEM/STEAM in public libraries,”
● “STEM/STEAM + Library Activities,”
● “informal learning in libraries,”
● “informal learning in public libraries,”
● “technology programs in libraries,”
● “technology programs in public libraries,”
● “STEM/STEAM and Makerspaces in public libraries.”
The search was first filtered to identify libraries and persons who have developed STEAM
programs. Next, the list was sorted to ensure that potential participants met all the criteria for

99

inclusion. The criteria for inclusion were verified by visiting the website for each library and
reviewing the scope of programs offered in STEAM. After applying all the actors of inclusion,
an initial list of 89 participants was obtained and narrowed to 15 participants, ensuring maximum
variation. Data collection began in late January 2018 after obtaining full IRB approval in early
January 2018 from Pepperdine University. Data collecting was conducted during February and
through the third week of March, utilizing the approved IRB recruitment script. During the last
week of January, a total of 20 recruitment e-mails were sent. The first batch of recruitment emails yielded two interviews, five responses of no interest, and 14 non-responses. During the
second week of February, a second batch of 20 e-mails were sent. The second batch of
recruitment e-mails yielded one interview. To further recruit, the list was expanded to include a
total of 89 participants who met the criteria for inclusion. With the expanded list, participant
recruitment continued for the next four weeks by sending an average of 20 recruitment e-mails
per week. A total of 89 interview requests were sent during a six-week period, yielding a total of
11 completed interviews.
Participants who agreed to be interviewed were provided a copy of the informed consent
form and interview questions prior to the initial meeting. All participants were provided with the
opportunity to ask questions prior to collecting the signed informed consent form. In addition,
participants were provided the option of anonymity. This option was provided in order to obtain
as much candor as possible during the interview but none of the interviews took more than an
hour to complete. The longest interview took 48 minutes, and the shortest interview took 24
minutes. All interviews were recorded after obtaining consent from participants.

100

Data Analysis
Coding, as defined by Creswell (2013), is the process of aggregating data into small
categories or themes that arise from data during the interview process. The data was captured by
audio recordings and handwritten notes taken during the interview. Next, the researcher listened
to the audio recording three times to memo and bracket all perceived biases to ensure that the
researcher’s personal biases did not influence the data analysis process. According to Creswell
(2000), it is necessary for a researcher to state his or her biases when conducting a research
project so that the reader understands the perspectives from which the data was analyzed and
coded for key phrases, viewpoints, or responses that provide a descriptive response to the
interview questions. This process was repeated three times for all questions. The process was
utilized to solidify the coding of key phrases, viewpoints, or responses. The next step involved
clustering the codes into common themes, then sorting and ranking the themes by highest to
lowest frequency. Theme names were derived by utilizing descriptive verbiage included in the
transcripts. The next step in the data analysis process was validating the data utilizing the
interrater review process.
Interrater Review Process
The interrater process was conducted by two doctoral students enrolled in the Doctor of
Education in Organizational Leadership program at Pepperdine University. Both doctoral
students have work experience in public organizations and have experience with similar research
technology. In addition, both doctoral students have training in qualitative research methods and
data analysis. The reviewers were provided copies of all the researcher’s grids that contained the
coded key phrases, viewpoints, or responses and their corresponding theme grouping. In

101

addition, the reviewers were provided with copies of the research questions to assist with the
review of the data analysis. The reviewers were asked to do the following:
● Review and provide feedback on all key phrases, viewpoints, or responses for proper
thematic designation.
● Review and provide feedback on the thematic name designation.
The interrater review process yielded 10 edits to the data analysis. A discussion regarding all
edits was conducted as a group and, based on the feedback, consensus was reached and three
edits were made (see Table 5).
Table 5
Interrater Review
Interview Questions

Items

1

structure in fluid

1

personal time
management
acquisition of staff

2

Suggestion

Action taken

move from theme
move to dynamic
knowledge creation to
development
theme
dynamic developments
broaden to include other changed theme to
concerns about time
time management
broaden to include other changes theme to
staff concerns
staff issues

Data Display
The data were presented and organized by research question and corresponding interview
questions. Key phrases, viewpoints, or responses were grouped and sorted into common themes.
Frequency charts were used to summarize and present data visually. In addition, a description of
each theme is provided and corroborated with a participant quote found in the transcribed data.
To preserve the integrity of the data and remove subjectivity of interpretation, statements and
excerpts were reported verbatim. As such, it is important to note that excerpts may contain
incomplete sentences. Notwithstanding, the researcher has made every effort to ensure that the

102

participant’s intent is not miscommunicated. Participant quotes are reported using labels
corresponding to their interview order, such as Participant 1 (P1), Participant 2 (P2), and so
forth.
Research Question 1
Research question 1 asked, “What were the strategies for creating and implementing
STEAM programs?” Two interview questions were asked to the interview participant in order to
provide an answer to RQ 1:
•

How did you decide on the structure of your STEAM program?

•

How do you define a STEAM program in your library?

The responses from all interview participants for the two interview questions were analyzed for
common themes that informed the overall response to RQ 1.
Interview question 1. How did you decide on the structure of your STEAM program?
Through the analysis of all responses to IQ 1, 65 elements involving structure were identified,
which were grouped into six common themes: (a) access and equity, (b) career pathways,
(c) collaborative implementation, (d) dynamic development, (e) promote innovative learning,
and (f) structured strategies (see Figure 5).

103

11

10
9

Count

8
7

7

7
6

6

5

5
4

4

4

Structured
strategies

Access & equity

3
2
1
Collaborative
involvement

Promote
innovative
learning

Dynamic
development

Career
pathways

Themes

n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee
Figure 5. Interview question 1: Coding results. In the discussion of strategies for creating and
implementing STEAM programs, six themes emerged from responses to IQ 1. Data are
presented in decreasing order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicates the number of
times a direct or indirect statement was made by an interview participant that fell into the
respective theme category.
Collaborative involvement. Collaborative involvement connotes that circumstances such
as STEAM necessitate the consensus of actions and agreements shared by external and internal
partners toward a mutual goal. Interview question 1 yielded collaborative involvement as a
strategy for creating and implementing STEAM programs. Of the 65 phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, seven (21%) responses to IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related to collaborative
involvement. Items that were coded under this theme included a statement by P1, “gather
suggestions from staff and experts.” In fact, P4 shared, “We collaborate and connect with
community partners.”
Promote innovative learning. The second strategy for creating and implementing
STEAM programs was the promotion of innovative learning. Promoting innovative learning
represents knowledge creation that is creative and provides meaning. Of the 64 phrases,
viewpoints, or responses, seven (21%) responses to IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related to the

104

promotion of innovative learning. Items coded under this theme included a statement by P2, “My
goal is to give youth the technology, the space and let them create your own future.”
Dynamic development. The third theme derived from the coding of strategic ideas on
creating and implementing STEAM programs was dynamic development. Dynamic development
happened in programs that were not static and continued to evolve in their development of
STEAM implementation. Of the 65 phrases, viewpoints, or responses, six (18%) responses to
IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related to dynamic development. Items coded under this theme
included a guideline noted by P2, “We’re going to let you explore and figure out what you’re
interested in.” P11 cited the library’s ability to “provide public access to a 3-D printer that has
been used in the creation of a medical prototype.”
Career pathways. The fourth theme derived from the coding was career pathways. Career
pathways education programs in the public library that provide resources for and guidance to
careers related to STEAM. Of the 65 phrases, viewpoints, or responses, five (15%) responses to
IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related to career pathways. Items coded under this theme
included this phrase by P3, “connecting kids to STEAM careers.” P8 noted that “the programs
are designed to increase youths’ confidence in topics related to science.”
Structured strategies. The fifth theme derived from the coding was structured strategies.
Structured strategies are those traditional methods for creating and implementing programs
which involve such elements as stated by P1 as “outlines, structures that are tested and are
proven to work well and clearly communicates what’s next.” Of the 65 phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, four (12%) responses to IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related to structured
strategies.

105

Access and equity. The sixth theme derived from the coding was access and equity.
Access and equity is defined as the provision of learning environments that provide opportunities
for diverse backgrounds. Interview question 1 yielded access and equity as a strategy for creating
and implementing STEAM programs. Of the 65 phrases, viewpoints, or responses, four (12%)
responses to IQ 1 were directly or indirectly related access and equity. Items coded under this
theme included a phrase by P5: “providing access to kids and adults of varying abilities” and P3
described “strategies that equate to access and equity in education.”
First follow-up question to IQ 1. The first follow-up question asked, “How did you
decide on the structure of your STEAM program?” Overwhelmingly, 90% (10) of the
respondents viewed the need for community engagement as the overall component in deciding
on the structure of the STEAM program. Secondly, 9% (one) participant explained the structure
as seasonal established by the program leader. P11 indicated that “the structure was 100%
community-led, with businesses, foundations, and individuals [telling] us what they wanted.”
Similarly, 100% of respondents also saw the structure as a needed element, creating awareness of
STEAM in the public library. P9 indicated that the challenge lies in learning as much as possible
to offer programs that are a la carte (see Figure 6).

106

10

10

Count

8
6
4
2

1

0

Community input

seasonal rotation

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 6.. Interview question 1, follow-up question 1: Coding results. In the discussion of
strategies for creating and implementing STEAM programs, two themes emerged from the
follow-up question “How did you decide on the structure of your STEAM program? Data are
presented in decreasing order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicates the number of
times a direct or indirect statement was made by an interview participant that fell into the
respective theme category.
Second follow-up questions to IQ 1. The second follow-up question asked, “How do you
define STEAM in your library?” The question yielded eighty-one percent (nine) of the
participants defined STEAM as noted by P5: “anything that hits on science, technology,
engineering, art and math.” Similarly, 9% (one) respondent also saw that art was a necessary
component but perceived STEM to be dominant in program development and another 9% (one)
spoke of art as the foundational platform for STEM. P11 stated, “Art is hands-on, interactive,
and engaging in any of the five areas of STEAM,” and conversely, “everything about making
and fabrication can be related to STEM” (see Figure 7).

107

10

9

Count

8
6
4
2

1

1

STEM and some arts

Arts as an expression of
STEM

0
All things STEAM

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 7. Interview question 1, follow-up question 2: Coding results. In the discussion of
strategies for creating and implementing STEAM programs, two themes emerged from the
follow-up question “How do you define a STEAM program in your library? 1. Data are
presented in decreasing order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicates the number of
times a direct or indirect statement was made by an interview participant that fell into the
respective theme category.
Summary of research question 1. RQ 1 sought to identify the strategies and practices
that have been implemented in public libraries to promote informal learning opportunities related
to STEAM. There was one interview question (“What were your strategies for creating and
implementing STEAM programs?”) and two follow-up questions (How did you decide on the
structure of your STEAM program? How did you define a STEAM program in your library?”)
were used to inform RQ 1. A total of six themes were identified by analyzing key phrases,
viewpoints, or responses to the interview and follow-up questions. The six themes were
(a) collaborative involvement, (b) promote innovative learning, (c) dynamic development,
(d) career pathways, (e) structured strategies, and (f) access and equity.

108

Research Question 2
Research question 2 asked, “What are the challenges that public libraries face related to
the promotion of informal learning programs focused on STEAM?” Three interview questions
were asked of each participant in order to provide answers for RQ 2:
● IQ 2. What challenges did you face in the planning phase of the implementation?
● IQ 3. How did you deal with or overcome the challenges in in planning, design,
implementation and post implementation?
● IQ 4. How did you overcome resistance or opposition to your plan?
The responses from all interview participants for the two interview questions were analyzed for
common themes that informed the overall response to RQ 2.
Interview question 2. IQ 2 asked, “What challenges did you face in the planning phase
of the implementation?” Through the analysis of all responses to IQ 2, a total of 50 key phrases,
viewpoints, or responses related to the challenges faced in the planning phase of the STEAM
implementation were identified. The key phrases, viewpoints, or responses were grouped into six
common themes: (a) programming, (b) training, (c) staffing, (d) budgets, (e) time management,
and (e) library narrative (see Figure 8).
Programming. Programming ranked highest in frequency with 21 instances.
Programming is defined as events centered around some aspect of the five areas of STEAM.
Interview participants indicated that programming is a challenge in the implementation of
STEAM. Of the 50 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, five (23%) responses to IQ 2 were
directly or indirectly related to the challenges faced in implementation phase of STEAM.
Programming involves offering courses that are culturally relevant, require evaluation and

109

10
8

Count

6

5

5
4

4

4
2

2

1

0
Programming

Training

Budget

Time
management

Staffing issues

Library
narrative

Themes
n = 11 mutiple responses per interviewee

Figure 8.. Interview question 2: Coding results. In the discussion on challenges faced by the
public library as related to the promotion of informal learning programs focused on STEAM, six
themes emerged from responses to IQ 2. Data are presented in decreasing order of frequency.
The numbers in each theme indicates the number of times a direct or indirect statement was
made by an interview participant that fell into the respective theme category.

resources, connect with adolescents’ interests, and are shaped by branding and networking. P9
pondered, “How do you evaluate a drop-in program and measure the effort?”
Training. Training ranked the second highest in frequency with 10 instances. Training is
defined as formal or informal methods for preparing staff to execute programs. Interview
participants indicated that training is a challenge in the implementation phase of STEAM. Of the
50 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, five (23%) responses to IQ 2 were directly or indirectly
related to the challenges faced in the implementation phase of STEAM. Training includes
acquiring the skills needed to instruct STEAM. P1 noted that “staff feel that they do not have the
expertise needed and are intimidated by the skills needed in providing programs related to
STEAM.”
Staffing issues. Staffing issues ranked third highest in frequency with eight instances.
Staffing issues are defined as the dynamics related to knowledge bases, experience, interests, and

110

expertise as well as the staffing model for implementing STEAM programs. Of the 50 key
phrases, viewpoints, or responses, four (19%) responses to IQ 2 were directly or indirectly
related to staffing concerns. P2 noted the lack of job titles for cutting edge program needs.
Budget. Budget ranked fourth highest in frequency with five instances. Budget is defined
as any aspect of the STEAM implementation that has a monetary value and influences the
implementation process. Of the 50 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, four (19%) responses
to IQ 2 were directly or indirectly related to the challenges faced in implementation phase of
STEAM. Budgeting includes items such as funding allocations from the library system as well
external grants and agreements. P9 stated that “sustainability is important because . . . we've
gotten the library to buy into STEAM. However, the fact remains that the items need to be
allocated as regular budget items.”
Time management. Time management ranked fifth highest in frequency with four
instances. Time management is defined as any aspect of the STEAM implementation that has a
monetary value and influences the implementation process. Of the 50 key phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, two (9%) responses to IQ 2 were directly or indirectly related to the challenges faced
in implementation phase of STEAM. Time management includes planning time for programs
and schedules, including other duties not related to STEAM programs. P10 stated that “it’s
difficult to find time to learn the technology.”
Library narrative. Library narrative ranked sixth in the frequency with four instances.
Library narrative speak to those unique occurrences in the community space. Of the 50 key
phrases, viewpoints, or responses, two (9%) responses to IQ 2 were directly or indirectly related
to the challenges faced in implementation phase of STEAM. Library narrative includes items

111

such as formats that tell the stories that occur. P1 wondered, “Are we really telling our story and
capturing what really happens in the STEAM space—and its impact?”
Interview question 3. IQ 3 asked, “How did you deal with or overcome the challenge in
planning, design, implementation and post-implementation?” Through the analysis of all
responses to IQ 3, a total of 30 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses related to how to deal with
or overcome challenges faced in the STEAM implementation were identified. The key phrases,
viewpoints, or responses were grouped into four common themes: (a) program enhancements,
(b) external partnerships, (c) community involvement, and (d) professional development (see
Figure 9).
11
10
9

Count

8

8

7
6

5

5

5

4

3

3
2
1
External
partnerships

Program
enhancements

Professional
development

Community
involvement

Themes
n = 11 mutiple responses per interviewee

Figure 9. Interview question 3: Coding results. How to deal with or overcome the challenges in
STEAM implementation. The figure demonstrates the four themes that emerged from responses
to interview question 3. Data are presented in descending order of frequency. The numbers in
each theme indicate the number of times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview
participants that fell into the respective theme category.
External partnerships. External partnerships ranked the highest in frequency with eight
instances. External partnerships are those community entities that support the mission of the
library in its efforts to proliferate STEAM resources as well as provide some financial stability to

112

program efforts. Interview participants indicated that external partnerships are needed to
overcome the challenges of implementation. Of the 21 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses,
eight (38%) responses to IQ 3 were directly or indirectly related to overcoming the challenges
faced in the implementation phase of STEAM. These partnerships often provide the staff training
needed for STEAM programs. P9 also noted, “Transportation barriers are being addressed [by]
businesses and other agencies that can assist youth in getting to the library.”
Program enhancements. Program Enhancements ranked second highest in frequency
with five instances. Program Enhancements are defined as items that are needed to create
meaning and value for the programs offered by the library. Interview participants indicated that
program enhancements are vital to overcoming the challenges in the implementation phase of
STEAM. Of the 33 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, five (23%) responses to IQ 3 were
directly or indirectly related to the challenges faced in implementation phase of STEAM.
Programming includes items needed to address the challenge (a) program enhancement,
(b) external partnerships, (c) community involvement, and (d) professional developments. P11
said, “Talking to people right now—whether they are colleagues, community members, or board
members to help them understand that STEAM is pivotal to the library.”
Professional development. Professional development ranked third in frequency with five
instances. Professional development is defined as any resource that provides increased skill and
comfort to overcome the challenges in implementation. Of the 21 key phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, five (23%) responses to IQ 3 were directly or indirectly related to the challenges faced
in implementation phase of STEAM. Professional development includes items such as training
on the use of equipment. P6 identified the “the need for time to master the evolving technology.”

113

Community involvement. Community input ranked third highest in frequency with six
instances. Community input speaks to the dynamics of neighborhood and their desires for
programs. Of the 21 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, three (14%) responses to IQ 3 were
directly or indirectly related to community input as a mechanism for overcoming challenges
related to STEAM implementation. P7 stated, “Invest in their interest” and P6 noted that
librarians should “anticipate trends in technology.”
Interview question 4. IQ 4 asked, “How did you overcome resistance or opposition to
your plan?” Interview question 4 yielded a total of 19 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses
related to dealing with and overcoming resistance or opposition to the plan. The 19 key phrases
were grouped into four common themes: (a) reevaluate process, (b) no opposition, (c) encourage

Count

interest, and (d) creative perseverance (see Figure 10).
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

6
5

Process evaluation

No opposition

4

4

Encourage interest

Creative perserverance

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 10. Interview question 4: Coding results. How did you overcome resistance or opposition
to your plan? The figure demonstrates the four themes that emerged from responses to IQ 4. Data
are presented in descending order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate the number
of times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview participants that fell into the
respective theme category.

114

Process evaluation. IQ 4 yielded process evaluation as a notable solution for overcoming
resistance or opposition to STEAM planning. Of the 19 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses,
six (31%) responses to IQ 4 were directly or indirectly related to issues of process evaluation.
Process evaluation includes evaluating planning, budget considerations, and communication
strategies. P7 said that “overcoming opposition and resistance involved the methods for
marketing and language used to communicate needs for STEAM programs.”
No opposition. IQ 4 also yielded “no opposition” as the second highest response. Of the
19 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, five (26%) responses to IQ 4 were directly or indirectly
related to having no opposition. No opposition includes the library organization have free rein to
develop a strategic model for STEAM with the goal of encouraging participation. P3 said, “The
[school] district valued STEAM programming and therefore gave full support to all efforts.”
Encouraging interest. Encouraging interest ranked the third highest response as a means
for overcoming resistance to the plan. Encouraging interest was identified as one of the factors
for dealing with resistance by breaking habits of traditionalism in service initiatives provided by
today's libraries. Of the 19 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, four (21%) responses to IQ 4
were directly or indirectly related to encouraging interest in STEAM programs. Encouraging
interest includes by getting the word out to those who do not frequent the library. P5 spoke of
encouraging interest through “the use of social media and newsletters and internal signage as a
means of proliferating this cutting-edge programming.”
Creative perseverance. Creative perseverance was another theme that emerged. Of the 19
key phrases, viewpoint, or responses, four (21%) responses to IQ 4 were directly or indirectly
related to overcoming resistance or opposition to the plan for STEAM implementation. Creative
perseverance includes developing new ways of overcoming rules that are not in alignment with

115

the creativity and flexibility need for STEAM implementation. P2 said, “There is a need to relax
county requirements of the library to use one server. When developing programs and
connectivity for cutting edge equipment, software or websites, the bandwidth exceeds what is
allowed. Therefore, creative conversations . . . facilitate this need.”
Summary of research question 2. Research question 2 sought to identify the challenges
that public libraries face as related to the promotion of informal learning programs focused on
STEAM. A total of 14 themes were identified by analyzing key phrases, viewpoints, or
responses to the three interview questions: programming, training, staffing issues, budget,
libraries narrative, time management, program enhancement, external partnerships, community
involvement, professional development, no response, process evaluation, encourage interest, and
creative perseverance.
Research Question 3
Research question 3 asked, “How do public libraries measure success in the promotion of
informal learning programs related to STEAM?” There were two interview questions asked of
each interview participants in order to provide answers for RQ 3:
● IQ 5. How did you define success for the STEAM implementation?
● IQ 6. How did you measure and track your success?
The responses from all interview participants for the two interview questions were analyzed for
common themes that informed the overall responses to RQ 3.
Interview question 5. “How do you define your success for the STEAM
implementation?” Through the analysis of all responses to IQ 5, a total of 33 key phrases,
viewpoints, or responses were grouped into six common themes: (a) creating meaning,

116

(b) cultivating possibility in youth, (c) recommendations for improvement, (d) youth impact,

Count

(e) experiential learning, and (f) expert collaborations (see Figure 11).
10
8
6
4
2
0

5

4

3

3

2

1

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 11. Interview question 5: Coding results. How success is defined in STEAM
implementation programs. The figure demonstrates the six themes that emerged from responses
to IQ 5. Data are presented in decreasing order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate
the number of times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview participants that fell
into the respective theme category.
Creating meaning. Creating meaning ranked highest in frequency for how public
libraries define success in the promotion of informal learning programs related to STEAM. Of
the 18 key phrases viewpoints, or responses, five (27%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or
directly related to creating meaning for youth in the community. Creating meaning includes
engaging teens in community activities in the public library that may provide improved
outcomes for youth. P11 stated that “a successful program strengthens relationships as a result of
providing access to tools in the library.”
Cultivating possibility in youth. Cultivating possibility in youth ranked second highest in
frequency for public libraries defining their success in STEAM. Of the 18 key phrases,
viewpoints, or responses, four (22%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or indirectly related to
cultivating possibility in youth. This theme includes how students respond to STEAM programs,
117

cultivating 21st-century skill sets, and providing experiences that lead to STEAM career paths.
P9 said:
One demarcation for success would be to have 3-D printer to be as passe as a paper
printer because you have so many people concerned with design thinking and concepts
that you know the 3-D printer is no longer a destination but a matter of fact.
Youth input. Youth input ranked third highest in frequency for how public libraries
define success in STEAM program efforts. Of the 18 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, three
(16%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or indirectly related to youth input. Youth input includes
attendance, self-reflection, and the feeling of self-efficacy. P4 said, “The engagement level of
students shows the immediate impact.”
Expert collaboration. Expert collaboration ranked fourth in frequency for how public
libraries define success in STEAM program efforts. Of the 18 key phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, three (16%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or indirectly related to expert
collaboration. Expert collaboration includes partnerships with other organizations of high
learning as well as corporations that are STEAM-related and want to add value by teaching,
mentoring, or coaching staff and students. P4 noted, “Partnerships with local universities are
beneficial to students and staff and assist with building authenticity into the STEAM program.”
Recommendations for improvement. Recommendations for improvement ranked fifth
highest in frequency for how public libraries define success in STEAM program efforts. Of the
18 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, two (11%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or indirectly
related to recommendations for improvement. Recommendations for improvement include
getting narrative feedback after programs, recording statistics, and surveys that ask for

118

confidence level after program implementation. P8 said, “Measure individual training separately
because it has its own outcomes and assessments that could be captured and tracked.”
Experiential learning. Experiential learning ranked sixth highest in frequency for how
public libraries define success in STEAM program efforts. Of the 18 key phrases, viewpoints, or
responses, three (16%) responses to IQ 5 were directly or indirectly related to experiential
learning. Experiential learning includes hands-on learning using real world problems and
produces ah-ha moments in the learning process. P1 defined experiential learning as “learners
mak[ing] connections on their own when connecting previous experiences with current ones in a
STEAM setting.”
Interview question 6. IQ 6 asked, “How did you measure and track your success?”
Through the analysis of all responses to IQ 6, a total of 23 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses
were identified as to how libraries measure and track success. The key phrases, viewpoints, and
responses were grouped into two common themes: data-driven methods and informal narrative

Count

storytelling (see Figure 12).
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

9

4

Data-driven methods

Informal narrative storytelling

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 12. How success is tracked and measured in STEAM programs. The figure demonstrates
the two themes that emerged from responses to IQ 6. Data are presented in descending order of
frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate the number of times a direct or indirect statement
was made by interview participants that fell into the respective theme category.

119

Data-driven methods. Data driven methods ranked highest in frequency for how libraries
track and measure success in STEAM programs. Of the 13 key phrases, viewpoints, and
responses, nine (69%) responses to IQ 6 were directly or indirectly related to data-driven
methods. The data-driven methods include counting people, evaluation of each program, tracking
repeat attendees, shared spreadsheets of statistics, program attendance database, and evaluation
tools. P1 noted:
We collaborate with the local university, [which assists us] by using a shared evaluation
tool that . . . captur[es] statistics for the entire system so that we can better express our
usage [and make a] strategic plan for future planning and funding.
Informal narrative storytelling. Informal narrative storytelling ranked second highest in
frequency for measuring and tracking success in public libraries. Of the 13 key phrases,
viewpoints, and responses, four (31%) responses to IQ 6 were directly or indirectly related to
informal narrative storytelling. Informal narrative storytelling includes staff debriefing in
narrative format and daily survey of success stories notating that quality is more important than
quantity. P3 “performs a pre-test and post-test of children and adults for every program as well
as a reflection survey for every program from the librarian or lead instructor.”
Summary of research question 3. Research question 3 asked, “How do public libraries
measure success in the promotion of informal learning programs related to STEAM?” The
responses from all interview participants for the two interview questions were analyzed for
common themes that informed the overall response to RQ 3. This question identified eight
themes by analyzing key phrases, viewpoints, or responses to the two interview questions.
The eight themes included (a) creating meaning, (b) cultivating possibility in youth,

120

(c) recommendations for improvement, (d) youth impact, (e) experiential learning, (f) expert
collaborations, (g) data-driven methods, and (h) informal narrative storytelling.
Research Question 4
Research question 4 asked, “Are there any lessons learned in the promotion of informal
learning spaces focused on STEAM in the public library?” Three interview questions were asked
of the interview participants in order to provide answers to RQ 4:
● IQ 7. What recommendations would you make for public libraries in the
implementation process?
● IQ 8. If you could start over, what would you do differently?
● IQ 9. Is there anything else you would like to share?
The responses from all interview participants for the three interview questions were analyzed for
common themes that informed the overall response to RQ 4.
Interview question 7. “What recommendations would you make for public libraries in
the implementation process?” Through the analysis of all responses to IQ 7, a total of 50 key
phrases, viewpoints, or responses were identified as recommendations for public libraries in the
implementation process. The key phrases, viewpoints, and responses were grouped into six
common themes: (a) meet the needs of the community, (b) embrace change, (c) be cognizant of
achievement gaps, (d) internal capacity of staff, (e) communicate strategies, and (f) realistic
spending (see Figure 13).
Meet the needs of the community. Meeting the needs of the community ranked highest
in frequency for IQ 7. Of the 30 key phrases, viewpoints, and responses, 10 (33%) responses to
IQ 7 were directly or indirectly related to meeting the needs of the community. Meeting the
needs of the community includes knowing your community and what’s missing, be adaptable,

121

and removing barriers to access. P8 said: “Always be intentional, knowing your community and
market. It is also essential to know your collection and brand it.”
11
10
9

10
9

Count

8
7
6

5

5
4
3

2

2

2

2

1
Meet the needs Embrace change Be cognizant of
Internal
Communicate
of the
achievement capacity of staff
strategies
community
gaps

Realistic
spending

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 13. Interview question 7: Coding results. Recommendations for public libraries in the
implementation process. The figure demonstrates the six themes that emerged from responses to
IQ 7. Data are presented in descending order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate
the number of times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview participants that fell
into the respective theme category.
Embrace change. Embracing change is essential as a recommendation for public libraries
in the implementation of STEAM programs. Embracing change ranked second highest in
frequency for IQ7. Of the 30 key phrases, viewpoints, and responses, nine (30%) responses to
IQ 7 were directly or indirectly related to embracing change. The practice of embracing change
means “we must recognize that when things change, we as librarians/mentors also change in
service and program delivery” (P1).
Be cognizant of achievement gaps. The practice of being cognizant of achievement gaps
ranked third highest in frequency as a recommendation for public libraries in the STEAM
implementation process. Of the 30 key phrases, viewpoints and responses, five (16%) responses

122

to IQ 7 directly or indirectly related to recommendations for public libraries in the
implementation of STEAM programs. Being cognizant of achievement gaps requires researching
the curriculum requirements for local schools as well as being proactive in the enforcement of
the library’s mission to provide learning opportunities. P3 spoke of the importance of “being
aware, locally and nationally, of the achievement gaps and really studying what's going on in
your public schools, your private schools, and where those gaps are.”
Internal capacity of staff. The internal capacity of staff ranked fourth highest in
frequency for recommendations for public libraries implementing STEAM programs. Of the 30
key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, two (6%) responses to IQ 7 were directly or indirectly
related to the internal capacity of staff. This internal capacity of staff includes capitalizing on the
strengths of the workforce and finding out which skill sets are internal that may provide training
and facilitation of STEAM programs. P11 recommended that librarians “take stock of where you
are today, know the strengths of your staff, and perform an internal assessment of your own
skills, as well as staff knowing current capacities and opportunities.”
Communicate strategies. The practice of communicating strategies ranked fifth highest
in frequency of recommendations for public libraries implementing STEAM programs. Of the 30
key phrases, viewpoints, or responses, two (6%) responses to IQ 7 were directly or indirectly
related to communication strategies. The task of communicating strategies includes actively
communicating with staff, leadership, governing bodies, partners, and community. P11 offered
this example:
The community librarian or the lead instructor must have a conversation with the
technologist to assure that the Internet or Wi-Fi does not impede a program unnecessarily
because staff failed to communicate the kind of program and technology needs.

123

Realistic spending. Realistic spending ranked sixth in frequency for recommendations
for public libraries and the implementation of STEAM programs. Of the 30 key phrases,
viewpoints, and responses, two (6%) responses to IQ 7 were directly or indirectly related to
realistic spending. Realistic spending includes not getting caught up in buying stuff and
evaluating where money is being spent and why. P11 advised, “Don’t buy a kit! Don’t buy a kit!
Be aware of gimmicks, be aware of changing technology and evaluate your in-house talents.”
Interview question 8. “If you could start over, what would you do differently?” Through
the analysis of all responses to IQ 8, a total of 20 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses were
identified as to what librarians would do if they could start over in the implementation process.
The key phrases, viewpoints, and responses were grouped into four common themes:
(a) research, (b) define personnel needs, (c) assessment of location, and (d) no regrets

Count

(see Figure 14).
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

8
6

3
2

Research

Define personnel needs

Assessment of the
location

No regrets

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 14. Interview question 8: Coding results. Figure 14. If you could start over, what would
you do differently? The figure demonstrates the four themes that emerged from responses to IQ
8. Data are presented in descending order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate the
number of times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview participants that fell into
the respective theme category.

124

Research. Research ranked highest in frequency for IQ 8. Of the 19 key phrases,
viewpoints, and responses, eight (42%) responses to IQ 8 were directly or indirectly related to
research. Research includes investigating trends in technology as well as what is happening in
other libraries and examining outcomes and assessments earlier in the implementation. P9
warned: “Be aware of technology turnover when purchasing software; some upgrades become
obsolete overnight.”
Define personnel needs. Defining personnel needs ranked second highest in frequency
for IQ 8. Of the 19 key phrases, viewpoints, and responses, six (32%) responses to IQ 8 were
directly or indirectly related to defining personnel needs. Defining personnel needs includes
pushing harder for staff acquisition and preparing for the interview process to be disruptive to
programs; therefore, planning ahead for coverage while in the staff acquisition process. P6 said:
“Staff for STEAM efforts should be a separate hiring process without typical duties of traditional
staff.”
Assessment of the location. Assessment of the location ranked third highest in frequency
for IQ 8. Of the 19 key phrases, viewpoints, and responses, three (15%) responses to IQ 8 were
directly or indirectly related to the assessment of the location. Assessment of the location
involves evaluating the extent of the STEAM program offered and what technical as well
structural negotiations will be needed to make effective use of the space. P1 explained:
The installation of a sink would have been a nice feature in the makerspace for use when
having programs that involve messy materials or for simple cleaning of the space. . . .
There needs to be some consideration for the technical infrastructure and making
decisions about the purchase of equipment with that in mind.

125

No regrets. No regrets ranked fourth highest in frequency for IQ 8. Of the 19 key
phrases, viewpoints, and responses, two (11%) responses to IQ 8 were directly or indirectly
related to having no regrets. This theme was voiced by librarians and staff who expressed that
they were satisfied with the present status of their STEAM programs and would not change
anything. P6 said, “Everything has been a great learning process.”
Interview question 9. “Is there anything else you would like to share?” Through the
analysis of all responses to IQ 9, a total of 17 key phrases, viewpoints, or responses were
identified and grouped into three common themes: (a) professional development of staff beyond
traditional roles, (b) succession planning, and (c) scalable effort (see Figure 15).
11
10

9

Count

8
7
6

6

5
4

3

3

Succession planning

Scalable effort

3
2
1
Professional development of
staff beyond traditional roles

Themes
n = 11 multiple responses per interviewee

Figure 15. Interview question 9: Coding results. Is there anything else you would like to share?
The figure demonstrates the three themes that emerged from responses to IQ 9. Data are
presented in descending order of frequency. The numbers in each theme indicate the number of
times a direct or indirect statement was made by interview participants that fell into the
respective theme category.
Professional development of staff beyond traditional roles. Professional development of
staff beyond traditional roles ranked highest in frequency for IQ 9. Of the 12 key phrases,
viewpoints, and responses, six (50%) responses to IQ 9 were directly or indirectly related to

126

professional development of staff beyond traditional roles. Professional development of staff
beyond traditional roles includes obtaining 21st-century skills, building science literacy and
being competent in all areas. P19 said:
The demands of our community are far too complex for us to assume that the masters of
library and information science [degree] can prepare us to be able to develop and execute
the diversity of programming that meets the needs of the community.
Succession planning and scalable efforts. Succession planning and scalable efforts
scored equally second in frequency for IQ 9. Of the 12 key phrases, viewpoints, and responses,
three (25%) responses to IQ 9 were directly or indirectly related to succession planning.
Succession planning involves thinking strategically about identifying and developing staff
leaders who can replace current cutting-edge leaders in implementing STEAM in public
libraries. P2 noted “a need to leverage the responsibilities and job titles for the next generation of
staff because we have to integrate other professions in other expert areas to change the culture.”
Scalable efforts scored second for question 9, “Is there anything else you would like to share?”
Of the 12 phrases, viewpoints, and responses to IQ 9, three (25%) responses were directly or
indirectly related to scalable efforts. Scalable efforts include libraries of varying sizes having the
ability to implement STEAM initiatives. P6 encourages others to not be intimidated by STEAM
and to realize that any library can do STEAM programs without purchasing technology.
Summary of research question 4. Research question 4 asked, “Are there any lessons
learned in the promotion of informal learning spaces focused on STEAM in the public library?”
A total of 13 themes were identified by analyzing key phrases, viewpoints, or responses to the
three interview questions. The 13 themes included (a) meet the needs of the community,
(b) embrace change, (c) be cognizant of achievement gaps, (d) internal capacity of staff,

127

(e) communicate strategies, (f) research, (g) define personnel needs, (h) assessment of the
location, (i) professional development of staff beyond traditional roles, (j) succession planning,
and (k) scalable efforts.
Chapter Summary
The purpose of this study was to determine the challenges that the public library
experiences in the implementation of STEAM programs, strategies, and practices employed by
the public library in managing the implementation, and how the public library measures success
in the process. To accomplish this task, 11 persons responsible for STEAM programs in public
libraries were recruited as interview participants for the study. All participants were asked nine
semi-structured interview questions designed to inform four research questions:
1. What strategies and practices have been implemented in public libraries that focus on
informal learning opportunities related to STEAM?
2. What are the challenges that public libraries face related to the promotion of informal
learning programs focused on STEAM??
3. How do public libraries measure success within informal learning programs related to
STEAM?
4. What lessons have been learned in the development of informal learning spaces
focused on STEAM in the public library?
Data for this study were collected through 11 semi-structured interviews. The researcher
coded the data and validated the results with the assistance of two interraters who were
Pepperdine University doctoral candidates. Data analysis was conducted employing the
phenomenological approach explained in Chapter 3. Data analysis yielded a total of 41 themes.
Table 6 provides a summary of all the themes obtained through the data analysis process.

128

Chapter 5 presents a discussion of themes, implications, recommendations, and conclusions of
the study.
Table 6
Summary of Themes for Four Research Questions
RQ 1. Strategies and
Practices
collaborative
involvement
promote innovative
learning

RQ 2. Challenges

RQ 3. Measurements
of Success

programming

creating meaning
cultivating possibility
in youth
recommendations for
improvement

training

RQ 4. Lessons
Learned and
Recommendations
meet the needs of
the community
embrace change
be cognizant of
achievement gaps
internal capacity of
staff
communicate
strategies

dynamic development

staffing issues

career pathways

budget

youth impact

structures strategies

library narrative

experiential learning

access and equity

time management

data-driven methods

research

program
enhancements

informal narrative
storytelling

professional
development

define personnel
need
assessment of the
location
professional
development of
staff beyond
traditional roles
succession
planning

process evaluation

scalable efforts

external partnerships
community
involvement

encourage interest
creative perseverance
Note. This table demonstrates a summary of all of the themes derived through the data analysis
process.

129

Chapter 5. Conclusions and Recommendations
Chapter 5 presents an analysis of the literature and data collection and provides a review
highlighting the findings and their relationship to the current literature. In addition, this chapter
details implications of the study, recommendations for future research, and final thoughts. This
study also contributes to the existing body of literature on public librarians and STEAM efforts.
The library and library profession are in a constant state of change; however, few have
aggressively taken steps to redirect the strategic direction of libraries in an area that could
potentially add relevance to the profession as well as the physical space. This study highlighted
the voice of 11 participants who reflect the actions of over 17,000 public libraries in the United
States that have developed and implemented some form of STEAM programming in public
settings. An unintended consequence of this study validated the argument in a book of essays by
Josiah Quincy (Shera, 1945) concerning “the public library as one secular institution with selfdevelopment as its aim” (p. 546). The public library is a social institution (Martin, 1937), an
edifice likened to other social bodies such as governments as political institutions, the family and
religion, schools of high education, corporate entities, medical systems, and legal systems. The
public library today meets the needs of humans and embrace a system of behaviors and patterns
that are interwoven and span across the entire society.
The public library continues to provide opportunities for those who seek access,
knowledge, and pathways to a better tomorrow. STEAM, in this public space, is yet another
service that has been elevated throughout the United States in various forms with the sole intent
of proliferating science through informal learning initiatives. Similar to the experiences of many
organizations affected by the disruptive technologies in the workplace, the public library has not
been able to keep an advanced pace ahead of the changing technology. In this instance of

130

STEAM programming as a project-based learning practice, the concept that the library is trying
to offer can be related to what Blackner (1993) described as an organizational learning practice.
STEAM has become a subset of organizational learning practices that are urgently required in
the establishment of study and practices related to science education in the public library. My
experience, in alignment with participants in this study, is very relatable in the expressed lack of
time or professional development to keep pace with the personal learning demand when
implementing the next generation of industry trends while trying to present current and relevant
program offerings for youth. Today’s STEAM leaders are actually learning from and through
projects rather than leading the plan and reacting based on the need.
The paradigm shift in the library model to facilitate STEAM initiatives is one element of
change that has immersed as a result of technology and its influence on the service model and the
need for additional knowledge (Edwards, 2009; Mattern, 2014). The effect is noted in the skill
sets needed as well as a change in the scope of work and the way in which it affects the
traditional acquisition and development of program needs. The role of the library in the life of
the community it serves has evolved with new and improved models of success that speaks to the
now altered service to the public. This transition has presented itself in the reimagination of
space, the provision of program efforts that have spanned beyond the traditional initiatives of a
few years ago and continue to do so as libraries renovate and build new structures that attract
new populations wanting a higher level of knowledge attainment (Stark, 2013). In order to
remain relevant and continue significant connections as civic commons to the community, the
library professionals have reconciled a need by observing a change in the community’s demand
(Dewe, 2017). This need has been addressed by recognizing trends across the nation related to

131

STEAM and the differences related to access, usage, skills and self-perception that influence
implementation and participation.
The findings of this study call attention to the need for strategic measures involving
community collaboration in the proliferation of STEAM as a dynamic effort for public libraries
and its role in promoting innovative learning opportunities for all. One such need is an overall
understanding of STEAM and support from governing bodies, which would require mandates on
a district or state level. Funding is also one aspect for a long-term STEAM initiative that requires
a fluid mechanism, for funding that does not fall into the rigid guidelines of procurement that
most libraries who are dependent on county or city financial support. Another aspect is the
acquisition of staff and the need for a having the technical expertise in addition to library science
or have prior experience that lends to the unique trends in STEAM. Participants in this study
who have expertise or prior experience related to STEAM or have experience with teaching
seemingly have programs that are greater in magnitude and planned aggressively for future
programs with an awareness of future trends and work accordingly. This theme is also related to
the literature that speaks to the public library adopting projects in order to become change-adept,
the need to prepare librarians in organizational competencies, and the need to evaluate the
conventional image of knowledge as being located within the literature rather than the brains of
the employee (Blackner, 1993), as knowledge work is dependent on the expertise of the staff as a
result of the new communication technologies in STEAM programs.
Grassroots Development and Making Meaning
The exploration of materials and ideas is not a new concept, as stated by one of the
participants noting that the focus on making meaning is based on a past conceptualization of
inquiry-based experience and skills-based training in the form of apprenticeship in what was

132

once an agrarian society. STEAM programs provide an opportunity for youth to investigate and
engage in problem solving and critical thinking about their future in a public space. The findings
from the research as well as the 25 years of practical experience by the researcher also
recognizes a basic level of development of STEAM efforts at the community level. Core
components of school and neighborhood in the development of programs are desired by its
constituents. This is indeed a grassroots movement for many of the participants in this study,
focused on creating meaningful experiences that can potentially lead to youth development. The
majority of the participants have been charged with developing and implementing STEAM
programs without prior chartered strategies or best practices. The efforts are described as
“considerate” by one participant, meaning that many considerations for the youth involved have
to be taken into account, such as providing opportunities for employment for these youth who
have volunteered to assist, and developing a program internally that can provide leverage for
youth on a larger scale with experience, employability, and job skills.
The researcher, similarly to the participants, developed successful programs that are
hinged upon what I describe as grassroot efforts to carry out a mission of information in the area
of science. The majority of the participants have executed these programs with fortitude that is
self-directed and very new to the profession. One participant describes the task as having to
innovate early and often, which requires learning new technology on your own time in order to
stay abreast of changing technology. The knowledge needed in the implementation is uncharted
and innovative, using a trial and error methodology. Many programs were solely the
responsibility of STEAM believers who sought nontraditional funding, grants from corporate
entities, and the involvement of other educational institutions to proliferate the community’s
need for science learning. These grassroots efforts have formed the foundational model for future

133

development of science programs. These efforts can be furthered developed by library systems
and lead to STEAM librarians or staff creating collaborative networks with neighboring
countries, districts, and states among themselves in order to share and establish resources based
on best practices of existing programs.
Specialized Skills
One theme that recurred throughout the research was the need for persons with
specialized interest in STEAM or persons who have amalgamated prior experience and
professions who seek out such opportunities within a library setting. Findings show that 50% of
the participants had preexisting knowledge in the areas of science and were specifically looking
for opportunities with in a library system. Fifty percent were not librarians by profession but
knew that their skills and talents were needed within the library and applied them accordingly.
Fifty percent of the participants were former teachers with knowledge of curriculum
development and existing knowledge in STEAM. Twenty percent of the participants spoke
emphatically of their experience in other professions and directed programs based on their prior
knowledge of industry needs. Eighty percent of the participants had full autonomy in the
assessment and development of the program initiatives and have been successful with the
support of leadership within the organization. Therefore, most programs were developed without
a preassessment of conditions, including the physical structure and the implications of a STEAM
program; therefore, many organizations are retrofitting for STEAM and makerspace in facilities
without having factored in the development of the structure. One example is related to the initial
STEAM influx of programs centered around technology and the acquisition of equipment. The
equipment includes items such as laptops, software packages, without fully understanding the
limitation placed on many public libraries as it relates to the Wi-Fi capability and the impact of

134

Internet access being flooded by several devices. The license requirements for software and
limited usages based on licensure, installation of platforms on equipment with limited memory,
and basic items such as a sink for arts and crafts or the procurement process for technology were
sometimes outdated before receipt because of the lack of good procurement processes.
Kits
The participants in the study have at least two years of consistent programs and many
have experienced great success. While success was gradual for some without any prerequisite
directions, many used a trial-and-error method for developing each program. Therefore,
participants deduced what worked and what didn't work. Some initially started with what they
personally desired to teach and offer, some were youth directed with a space and platform for
development with no requirements but a free form space for exploration. Some developed
curricula and focused on a system of themes with a set of expectations for completion and
moving to the next level of development. In this instance, the participants began to lead the
development of the STEAM program with their own ideas, and the leader simplify facilitated
based on the expressed desires. One participant found a lot of interest in kits and then realized
abundance of kits had been purchased that youth were no longer interested in after the task had
been completed, which led to a discussion on kits.
Many programs in this study began with kits, later to find that technology nor kits are
required for the execution of a STEAM program. One participant asked the public for ideas by
offering a wall to post sticky notes of what they wanted. She began to listen and centered the
purchase of items in tandem with the community’s willingness to contribute. The program
expanded to an astronomical level of participation. Eighty percent of this study’s participants
warned against purchasing prior to getting an understanding of what the community wants. As a

135

professional librarian and observer of the purchase of kits, this researcher has found that while
there’s an inherent notion that purchasing kits is a desire for many libraries as they embark of
program development, clear objectives are necessary for purchasing choices that are combined
with other activities to provide some guided instruction that reaches the need of the participant or
community. My recommendation, based on the research from this study and personal experience,
is to develop a curriculum with a clear vision that provides deeper fundamental knowledge
beyond a replicated program.
Summary of the Study
The purpose of this study was to investigate existing and needed strategies employed by
informal learning spaces such as public libraries and their implementation of STEAM programs.
The study also addressed the challenges faced in the development of STEAM programs in public
libraries. This investigation also measured, by extension, related successes in the public library
and sought to discover overall recommendations for the implementation of exemplary STEAM
initiatives that substantiate the public library as a recognized entity in STEAM education. Guided
by the literature review, four research questions and nine open-ended interview questions were
developed to inform this study. The study was designed as a qualitative study utilizing a
phenomenological approach. The research employed a phenomenological approach that studied
the meaning of experiences as they are lived; provided opportunities to collect descriptive,
reflective, and interpretive data; and engaged a means for conversation on the essence of the
experiences (Richards & Morse, 2013; Van Maanen, 1979).
Participants for this study were identified through a series of Google searches, using an
ascribed set of keywords. A purposive sample of 11 participants was identified as a result of
saturation for this study. Participants were in the age range of 18 to 65, worked in a public

136

library, and developed and implemented a series of programs over the course of a several
months, as well as had some experience with pathways for partnerships, grants, and collaborative
efforts with experts in the field of STEAM.
The study began with a Google search using a number of keyword combinations to
capture public libraries that met the criteria for significant STEAM programs. The search
instantly produced a list of results from all over the Internet that matched the query. The search
yielded hits with the noted keywords, and the researcher assessed each one, looking for key
information about STEAM programs. A master list was created, based on the results, and 83
invitations were e-mailed to libraries that met the criteria. The recipients were all in the United
States, representing 24 states of 50 states plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
As a result, 27 states out of 52 were invited, with 51% of states represented in the emailings and 40% of the 27 recipients participating. Of the participants, half have developed
cutting-edge programs and have provided significant leadership in the STEAM movement in the
United States in training, and resource sharing, as well as literature that has provided some
guidance to the profession. Of the 11 participants, 5 of the 11 were former teachers, which meant
45% of the participants had other expertise in science, with one being an expert but not a
librarian. Of the 11 participants, 9 are librarians. Invitations were sent based on the results of
several Google searches combining the terms STEAM, STEM, MAKERSPACE, and public
libraries. Librarians need personnel who have a clear understanding of the technology acquired
and must also develop relationships that allow for full expression of the library’s needs;
however, most libraries do not have their own information technology (IT) division and rely on
IT departments that are outside the departments they manage. Success requires the public library

137

to be purposeful in the creations of meaning through programs that ascribe to youth developing
and helping to cultivate possibility in future generations.
The maximum variation method assisted the researcher in discovering the unique, best
practices of persons involved in informal learning and STEAM in the public library who have
experienced the same phenomenon. The criteria for maximum variation was used to include
(a) librarians or STEAM professionals, (b) demonstrated involvement with STEAM
programming efforts, (c) experience with networking, and (d) varied experience. The data
collection for this study was done through semi-structured interviews with 11 participants.
Participants were asked nine open-ended questions that were developed and validated through an
interrater and validity procedure. The reliability and validity of the data collection instrument
was obtained through a three-step process: (a) prima facie validity, (b) peer-review validity, and
(c) expert review. Data collected through the interviews were audio recorded and transcribed to
word documents. The data were then analyzed and coded to determine common themes.
Validation of the codes and themes was accomplished through an interrater review procedure. As
a result of the interrater review process, four edits were made to the initial codes as reported in
Chapter 4. Last, the findings of the study were summarized and displayed in bar charts that
tabulated and reported the number of key phrases, viewpoints, or responses that fell under a
particular theme. The findings across the four research questions and the corresponding
interview questions were directly related to a need for assessment in functions, community
needs, and training. All findings had an implicit relationship with the three learning theories that
guided the literature and research as it relates to informal learning in non-school settings.
The desire of the public library is centered around providing situated learning efforts that
arise as meaningful actions that may potentially grow into stable interest in the sciences.

138

Cognitive learning theories that support stability are present some of the time and later
nonexistent. The implications of STEAM in public settings also support the theory of social
engagement while sharing in the learning process and gaining support in the discovery of
learning that exists in the development of makerspaces in public libraries as collaborative spaces
that provide hands-on interaction to cultivate opportunities for new activities, such as sewing or
coding for those with no prior experience. The chart below speaks to the recurrence of themes
related to learning theories that support the literature on STEAM initiatives as informal learning.
(see Table 7).
Table 7
Summary of Findings and Related Theories

Themes

Situated
Learning
Theory

Cognitive
Learning
Theory

Social
Learning
Theory

collaborative involvement

•

•

promote innovative learning

•

•

dynamic development

•

career pathways

•

structures strategies

•

access & equity

•

define personnel needs

•

assessment of the location

•

professional development of staff
beyond traditional roles
succession planning

•

•

•

•

scalable efforts

•

•

•

programming

•

Training

•

staffing issues

•
(continued)

139

Themes

Situated
Learning
Theory

Cognitive
Learning
Theory

Budget

•

library narrative

•

time management

•

program enhancements

•

external partnerships

•

community involvement

•

professional development

•

reevaluate process

•

encourage interest

•

creative perseverance

•

Social
Learning
Theory

•

•

creating meaning

•

•

cultivating possibility in youth

•

•

recommendations for improvement

•

•

youth impact

•

•

experiential learning

•

data-driven methods

•

informal narrative storytelling

•

meet the needs of the community

•

•

embrace change

•

•

be cognizant of achievement gaps

•

•
•

internal capacity of staff

•

communicate strategies

•

Research

•

Discussion of the Findings
The findings of the study are intended to identify the best practices for the implementation
of STEAM programs in a public library system and advancing the informal learning

140

opportunities within public spaces. The following section provides further discussion of the
findings and themes that were derived from the interview responses. Further, the findings are
compared to the existing literature to determine whether the results agree, negate, or add to the
existing body of knowledge.
Results for research question 1. Research question 1 asked, “What strategies and practices
have been implemented in public libraries to promote informal learning opportunities related to
STEAM?” An analysis of the responses and themes derived indicate that the strategies and
practices implemented in public libraries to promote informal learning opportunities related to
STEAM are centered around the following six areas:
● community collaborations as a means for sustainability,
● the creation of confidence through cutting edge learning opportunities,
● the need for aggressive approaches to program development,
● how content creation stimulates thinking of future endeavors,
● creating spaces that promote expected outcomes, and
● public spaces that allow for self-regulated learning that creates awareness.
Discussion of research question 1. The purpose of the study was to identify the best
practices that STEAM leaders have employed to make programs efforts successful in public
libraries. Research question 1 explicitly focuses on identifying the strategies and practices that
STEAM leaders exert to make the programs successful. The findings to research question 1
suggested that a STEAM leader requires a comprehensive understanding of STEAM initiatives
and the need for interdependence on collaboration between the library community and the
community at large. The strategies and practices are dependent on the level of interaction with
the initial conceptualization of idea sharing for libraries developing and implementing STEAM

141

initiatives. As such, STEAM leaders in the study sought to build community through proactive
conversations about the desires of their constituents related to doing science. As a result, the
STEAM programs give agency to youth and give a voice to their desires and future endeavors.
P1, describes the phenomena as “a space within the library for people to come together and to
begin to think together and to begin to think of the library.”
According to Bostwick in 1917 in The American Public Library:
The modern public library is required to be an active space, not merely a passive, force;
not only guarding and preserving its books, but also proving access and it tries to see that
those who need them realize that need and act according. (Bostwick, 1917, pp. 1–2)
This statement has relevance to this study that speaks of access to and equity in knowledge
attainment, which STEAM programs provide. The study findings in research question 1
highlighted the vigor that is required of a STEAM leader in the public library and the flexibility
that leadership has to demonstrate in support of this dynamic environment that has some
structure; however, the fluidity of effort is what determines the outcomes for the students
attending informal learning programs.
Results for research question 2. Research question 2 asked, “What are the challenges that
public libraries face as it relates to the promotion of informal learning programs focused on
STEAM?” Analysis of the derived responses and themes indicated that the challenges public
libraries face related to the promotion of informal learning programs focused on STEAM are
centered around 13 areas:
● navigating through the varying nuances of program development from development to
implementation,

142

● the lack of training opportunities for staff in preparation for STEAM inquiry-based
programs,
● the lack of knowledge on the part of the governing body on the scope of STEAM, job
descriptions, and title delineations,
● the need for clarity on budgeting for sustainability,
● the organizational need to formalize how the STEAM story is captured and quantified,
● the need for staff time to acquire technology, learn the technology, and then teach to
other staff for programming,
● the library’s need for a strategic plan for STEAM implementation,
● the development of external mechanisms for dealing with challenges,
● the desires of staff for formal, professional development to build staff interest in
STEAM implementation,
● examining the language and strategy used to communicate needs,
● outreach to the non-library-using constituents, and
● assisting governing bodies to understand what STEAM is and the need to do business
in a different way for this initiative.
Discussion of research question 2. The purpose of the study was to identify best
practices for the implementation of STEAM programs in a public library system and advancing
the informal learning opportunities within public spaces. Research question 2 specifically
focused on identifying the most notable challenges that public libraries face in the promotion of
informal learning programs focused on STEAM. Ruth Baleiko (as cited in Morehart, 2015)
described future libraries as structures that support and enhance navigation and exchange with
time and demand as the caveat for service that is almost collection free and a bevy of technology.

143

Question 2 speaks to the challenges of such a space and a new service model that poses
difficulties that are different from some traditional services still being offered within the same
space—a juxtaposition to a makerspace or computer lab conducting a coding project. Although
the two STEAM programs are engaging and inquiry-based, much of the remaining library exist
within a different cognitive space. Participant 1 said, “It’s mostly me; however as manager, I
have other duties as well and beyond the scope of the job description.” Other challenges are
situational and may differ from one library to another, depending on the skill sets of the STEAM
leader. Many librarians develop external mechanisms for dealing with challenges because they
have full autonomy of the program as the resident expert on STEAM. Budgeting for technical
needs with the confines of a county’s spending year doesn’t always satisfy the need to sustain a
program. Some study participants experienced issues related to material depletion before the end
of a budget year or faced constraints on budget deadlines and the need to purchase according to
the due date as opposed to the program plan. Sometimes this spending mode is not effective, as
software updates and versions of software and technology become obsolete sometime prior to the
receipt of the items. Many of the experiences shared demonstrated the need for a program
implementation strategic plan, with clearly defined expectations based of the structure of the
program and not the spending year.
Results for research question 3. Research question 3 asked, “How do public libraries
measure success in the promotion of informal learning programs related to STEAM?”
An analysis of the responses and themes derived indicate that libraries measure success in the
promotion of informal learning program related to STEAM around seven areas:
● the provision of programs that are meaningful, that empower people,
● fostering learning that support career development,

144

● community input on programs,
● increased levels of engagement by youth,
● celebrating the achievement of students in obtaining new skill set,
● evaluation tools and mechanism, and
● informal methods that tell the library’s story.
Discussion of research question 3. The findings from RQ 3 indicated that for many
libraries the most notable measurement of success (30% response rate) was creating a sense of
meaning. The library by its nature is place in the community, as noted by Buschman and Leckie
(2007). The library has a direct relationship with and resides in the hearts and minds of the
community. The findings expressed that the library is indeed a cultural space and has been so
through every period of history. The participants reflected on the importance of the community
involvement in the development of program initiatives and the overall concern of creating a
community of care in the midst of learning and engagement. The library was describing by P4 as
life changing in the offering of STEAM to youth and creating agency.
The opportunities that present themselves involving STEAM programming for a handson learning experience in public spaces were especially appreciated when learners made the
connection between a previous task with a new task. Much of this information is captured
through traditional data collection methods using people counters, attendance, and evaluation
forms; however, informal methods also appeared in the study. Examples included a daily survey
of success stories, pre-surveys and post-surveys. The informal methods lent themselves to
narrative stories about experiences in the STEAM spaces, such as described by P3, about a
reflection survey that allow the patrons to tell their stories. Another attribute that arose was a
desire by participants for programs to be worthwhile and more about quality than quantity.

145

Results of research question 4. Research question 4 asked, “Are there any lessons
learned in the promotion of informal learning spaces focused on STEAM in the public library?”
An analysis of the derived responses and themes indicated that lessons learned in the promotion
of informal learning spaces focused on STEAM in the public library focused on 10 areas:
●

meet the needs of the community,

●

the library needs to embrace STEAM,

●

research and program with achievement gaps in mind,

●

evaluate the internal capacity of staff,

●

communicate the plan for STEAM program ideas,

●

investigate and know what the trends are in STEAM,

●

communicate and substantiate staff needs to operate the program,

●

perform an assessment of the potential space prior to planning the programs,

●

training staff for STEAM,

●

consider future growth and skill sets needed, and

●

a STEAM program is possible in any size library.

Discussion of research question 4. Chapter 1 speaks to the changing roles of libraries in
the community (Mattern, 2014) and the continued threats of budget cuts (Child & Goulding,
2012). The library and continued STEAM efforts provide some measure for addressing the how
and why of continued buzz over science in the public library. One element of success is meeting
the needs of the community. P11 adamantly spoke of how her programs thrived by simply asking
the community what they wanted, not what she perceived the community to want. The lesson
learned involved traditional approaches to service, however with a greater sense of urgency. As
the library and staff embraced STEAM, they addressed feelings of intimidation. As the library

146

continueed to reimage its space, staff made themselves aware of the gaps in knowledge by doing
research, connecting with the area schools, and collaborating on curriculum needs. With the
growth in programs, a need for professional development of staff beyond the traditional roles
was expressed, so the STEAM leader had assistance but was also creating leverage with the
sharing of institutional knowledge. Last, the general consensus for lesson learned included what
P8 said, “start simple” and “be intentional.” P9 said, “Do not get caught up in buying stuff.”
Implications of the Study
The purpose of this study was to explore best practices for the implementation of STEAM
programs in a public library system and to advance informal learning opportunities within public
spaces. The research aimed to identify challenges and obstacles that librarians face in leading
effective implementation. As the public library continues to evolve amid ever-changing
technological advances, identifying the components that make up the prescription for success for
this public institution is necessary. Fundamentally, this research looked beyond the obstacles and
challenges and identified the strategies that best help maneuver the difficulties that sometimes
stifle success in public libraries. Ultimately, this research provides a model of success that other
librarians can employ to help them lead an implementation that delivers effective and efficient
informal learning opportunities for its users, as well as provide some strategic methodologies for
molding a fluid model that encompasses STEAM. The efforts of employing STEAM programs
also require a deep assessment of existing functions and the needs for future improvements.
Once librarians have truly assessed the needs and desires of the community and make a
concerted effort to meet those needs, existing models will require honest discussion and a
meeting of the minds for some librarians who have found STEAM to be intimidating and

147

relinquishing traditional roles of the profession daunting if the library is to remain relevant in and
to the community it serves.
As such, the findings of this study can be used by public libraries to develop or revise
strategies that incorporate the proven best practices identified in the study. The represented
sample of public libraries are indeed libraries that have embraced cutting edge service models by
listening and accepting the support of the community. In addition, public organizations can use
the findings to develop future STEAM leadership training, manuals, and programs that are based
on the successes and lessons learned by those currently in lead positions for STEAM
implementation. Last, the findings can be used to develop collaborative efforts across districts,
states, and national organizations facilitating STEAM initiatives.
Study Conclusion
The researcher began this study with the desire to add to the existing body of literature on
public libraries by seeking exemplary leaders of STEAM program efforts and identifying best
practices that make the programs successful. To accomplish this task, the researcher bracketed
her biases and perspectives as a librarian and as an employee of a library system. Through the
process of 11 interviews, the researcher was able to code and analyze nine open-ended interview
questions that informed four research questions, all designed to identify the challenges faced and
best practices STEAM leaders use in their roles as lead instructors in planning design,
implementation, and post implementation to understand what makes the programs successful. As
a result, eight findings were identified:
1. Pedagogy on the integration of STEM/STEAM specific job title descriptors that
quantify the needed skill sets for leading such an initiative is lacking. Therefore, libraries
as whole have to develop strategies for the integration of experts in STEAM fields and or

148

educators who inherently have experience in the foundational knowledge of the five
areas: science, technology, engineering, art, and math. The participants in the survey
included five persons with prior professional experience in the areas teaching, instructing,
science, and media who lead noted STEAM programs in urban and suburban
communities in the United States. The remaining participants were career librarians who
exemplified a wide range of experience within the field and an in-depth relationship with
local, county, and national STEAM efforts.
2. Governing bodies on the national, state, and local levels need to strategically decide on
enforcing STEAM or not so that the city and county public libraries can establish
collaborative relationships across borders. Three of the participants have developed
partnerships with other higher educational entities that provide support in the areas of
funding and collaborative efforts to support youth-serving organizations and learning to
provide visibility of resources that support youth development.
3. An assessment tool needs to be developed to assist libraries with deep, investigative
methodologies on design with growth or expansion, or not, as an option.
4. A guiding tool needs to be developed to assist libraries in forging deep, long-term
partnerships with learning organizations that have the expertise as well as theory to assist
in providing support for evaluation that leads to a presence in the literature on STEAM in
public libraries.
5. The American public library needs to be recognized as a learning support organization
with emphasis on informal learning practices in every community by the ALA, the
leading national association for the development of libraries.

149

6. The public library needs to rethink its service initiative and allow flexibility and full
autonomy to fulfill the needs of the community.
7. Pay scales for libraries need to be reestablished that focus on job readiness and
apprenticeship programs.
8. Strategies need to be developed that create value and add methods of sustainability in
staff retention and teen retention by incentivizing volunteerism and employment for teen
experts.
9. Public libraries with STEAM initiatives need a database that can shared as a resource
for guidance in the establishment of a STEAM program.
Recommendation for Future Research
The purpose of the study was to determine best practices that libraries employ to make
them successful in leading informal learning in the area of STEAM. Future researchers can
contribute to the existing body of knowledge by conducting studies that focus on:
1. a study that focuses on the long-term effects of informal learning experiences in public
libraries and the correlation with school performance,
2. a study that investigates and measures the career pathways of students who elect to
participate in STEAM programs over a defined length of time,
3. a study that postulates the public library as a recognized learning institution and an
apprenticeship program for the general public,
4. a study that investigates the effects of economic stability of students who elect to
participate in long-term STEAM programs at the public library throughout high school,
and

150

5. a comparative analysis of reading interest in STEAM participants versus nonparticipants and career paths taken.
Final Thoughts
In 1917, Arthur Elmore Bostwick authored the book The American Public Library, in
which he spoke of the broadening of the library idea and the ramification of such that caused a
dynamic shift in library services. These services were vastly different and not well received, even
by librarians. Yet again, we are broadening the ideas of the library with technological advances
that have proven to be disruptive and are again forcing librarians to reimagine service,
relationships, and skill sets. The interception of public libraries and informal learning in the areas
of science, technology, the arts, engineering, and math has proven to be a desire of the general
public and one that will assist future generations in their ideals of democracy and service. This
study sought to identify the best practices that current leaders in STEAM have employed in the
public library. As a result, the study identified collaborative involvement, the promotion of
innovative learning, dynamic development through programs, career pathways, structures
strategies, and access and equity as valuable strategies and practices to foster success in public
libraries.