Abstract
School librarians occupy a unique position to offer supports for first year teachers to
build resilience, reduce burnout, and ensure retention. The researcher used the psychology theory
of resilience to develop the Continuum of Care model which initiates in mentoring and moves
toward a collaborative partnership. Fifteen school librarians in one urban district recruited 26
new teachers in their schools to form the treatment group. All new teachers in the district were
surveyed to establish their initial level of resilience and collect demographics. A comparison
group of 26 new teachers were matched by scores on a resilience scale at the start of the school
year, by school level and by Title I status of the school. The treatment group received
interventions using the Continuum of Care model over the course of the following four months.
Post-treatment, the comparison group and treatment group were surveyed for level of resilience,
burnout, and retention. ANOVA was used to find change in resilience over time for the treatment
group. ANCOVA was used to compare resilience and burnout scores for the comparison and
treatment groups. Binary logistic regression was used to compare retention of the comparison
and treatment groups. Interviews of three school librarian-new teacher pairs brought forth the

iii
lived experiences of participants. Findings show that new teachers in the treatment group
received significantly higher levels of mentoring and collaboration than new teachers in the
comparison group. There was a significant effect for the interaction between level of resilience
for the treatment group and age. School librarians and new teachers valued their relationship and
voiced the effect on resilience, burnout, and retention. Reaching out to new teachers to bridge the
gap between the library and classroom may be considered as best practice for school librarians.
This exploratory research study laid the groundwork for further study of the role of the school
librarian to support new teacher resilience in the authentic school setting.
It takes a city to write a dissertation. The overwhelming support I have received from my
family, friends, neighbors, teaching colleagues, administrators, and university faculty has
certainly contributed to my resilience throughout the doctoral journey. So many have served as
mentors and collaborators. So many more have been cheerleaders, counselors, consultants,
advisors, and listeners.
My husband, Jonathan, has taken on the doctoral process and this dissertation with
patience, tolerance, and love. My children, Grace, Jack, and Chipper, who have grown during the
process from teenagers to lovely young adults, have informed my research and established
themselves as scholars and researchers in their own right. The school librarians who served as
interventionists for this study deserve special recognition. They understood the need to care for
our new teachers, and willingly offered their expertise.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

The importance of resilience in retention of teachers has been a recurring topic in the
recent professional literature (Beltman, Mansfield, & Price, 2011; Day & Gu, 2014; Early Career
Teacher Resilience, 2012). Early career teachers who are in the process of induction into the
field may be better able to survive and thrive in their first years as educators by adapting well in
the face of work-related stressors (Beltman et al., 2011; Johnson & Down, 2013) and by
bouncing back from difficult experiences (APA, 2017). The American Psychological Association
presents practical ways to build resilience (APA, 2017). New teachers can learn to be resilient in
order to meet the challenges inherent to the working life of the classroom (Doney, 2013;
Greenfield, 2015). There are many experienced educators in the school who can expertly guide
the new teacher through the process of building resilience (Beltman, Mansfield, and Harris,
2016). The school librarian, who has convenient access to diverse resources and works with the
entire faculty, is situated in a unique position to provide support to new teachers (Morris, 2015).
By partnering in a relationship which initiates in mentoring and moves toward collaboration
(Montiel-Overall, 2008), the school librarian may provide supporting structures to build
resilience of teachers in their first year. Through implementing a continuum of care using
defined interventions, the school librarian can support the new teacher to build resilience. In turn,
this resilience may increase the likelihood that the new teacher will remain in the teaching
profession (Bobek, 2002; Tait, 2008).
The American Psychological Association (APA) defines resilience as “the process of
adapting well in the face of adversity” by “bouncing back” from difficult experiences (APA,

2
2017). Resilient behaviors, thoughts and actions can be learned and developed (APA, 2017), and
people commonly demonstrate resilience in response to emotional distress. When applied to the
field of education, resilience is “the dynamic and complex interplay between individual,
relational, and contextual conditions that either enable or constrain teachers’ power and agency”
(Johnson et al., 2016, p. 7). Resilience is essential to teacher commitment. Therefore, efforts to
build, sustain, and renew teacher resilience should be promoted during the first year of teaching
to increase the quality of teaching, increase retention, and raise standards for learning and
achievement (Day & Gu, 2014).
Teacher attrition is of concern for public schools. The research suggests that the loss of
teachers from the profession can be disruptive to the learning environment, undermines school
performance, and has a negative effect on student learning (Ronfeldt, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2013).
High teacher attrition rates also redirect resources to recruitment, hiring, and training while
undermining the sense of community in the school ecology, which has a negative impact on
student achievement (Raue & Gray, 2015). Overall, the percentage of teachers leaving the
profession has been increasing. Between school years 1987-1988, 6 % of teachers left the
profession, while between school years 2011-2012, 8% of teachers left the profession. For high
poverty schools, the percentage of teachers leaving the profession was higher (10%) than for
mid-high (7%), mid-low (8%), or low (6%) poverty schools (Kena et al, 2016). High school
teachers left at slightly higher rates (7.8%) than middle (7.0%) or primary (7.4%) school teachers
(Goldring, Taie, & Riddles, 2014).
Rates of attrition are particularly troubling for teachers in their first five years. For
teachers new to the profession in 2007-2008, 10 % did not teach in 2008-2009, 12% did not
teach in 2009-2010, 15% did not teach in 2010-2011, and 17% were not teaching in 2011-2012

3
(Gray & Taie, 2015). As a category, attrition of teachers in their first three years is surpassed
only by attrition of older teachers reaching retirement (Ingersoll, 2001a; Kelly, 2004; Marvel,
Lyter, Peltola, Strizek, & Morton, 2007). The five-year career path of 2007-2008 beginning
public school teachers included 6% who did not teach all years and were not expected to return,
plus 4% who did not teach all years and their return status was undetermined. For those who did
not teach in all five of their first years, 26% were not expected to return. Among teachers who
did not teach in all five of their first years, 51% most recently taught in schools with 50% or
more of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Among beginning teachers who left
during the five years, a larger percentage of primary teachers returned or are expected to return
(79%) compared to middle (44%) or high (46%) school teachers (Raue & Gray, 2015).
Reversal of these trends may be possible. Research does show that mentoring in the first
years makes a difference (Gray & Taie, 2015), and that teachers who experience success in their
work build personal beliefs about their capabilities, exercising influence over life events
(Bandura, 1998), which interacts with the growth of resilient qualities (Beltman et al., 2011).
Anecdotal evidence suggests that, in practice, school librarians may contribute to a collegial
school environment by welcoming new teachers (Morris, 2015). However, this practice remains
unsupported by scholarly studies. Missing from the research is literature describing the influence
of school librarians on the resilience and retention of new teachers. Models of librarian-teacher
collaboration have been developed, yet the special relationship of the first-year teacher with the
school librarian and the ways the librarian guides the new teacher has not yet been explored in
the literature.

4
Statement of the Problem

First year teachers who are learning to manage the challenges of the classroom can
benefit from collegial support to build resilience, reduce burnout, and ensure retention. As part of
this support structure, school librarians in individual practice may take social responsibility for
the development of new teachers (Morris, 2015). However, the field of school librarianship does
not have a model of care for new teachers as a special population. Furthermore, formal research
investigating how librarians support entering faculty in school communities has not been found
in the literature.

Theoretical Framework

This study is framed in the psychology theory of resilience (Seligman &
Csikszentmihalyi, 2000) applied to an educational institution setting. In the millennial issue of
the American Psychologist, Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) outlined a framework for a
new science of positive psychology, defining this blossoming field which fosters positive
attitudes toward subjective experiences, individual traits, and life events through psychological
interventions. They hoped to catalyze a change in the focus of psychologists from preoccupation
with repairing the worst things in life to building positive qualities.

5
Conceptual Framework

The conceptual framework for this study is constructed around the role of the school
librarian in the space of professional development to mentor and induct the new teacher into the
profession. By developing a collaborative relationship, the school librarian supports the new
teacher to build resilience, reduce burnout, and increase retention. Using the Continuum of Care
model which was developed for this study, the framework initiates in a mentoring role with the
librarian guiding the new teacher to build skills and confidence, moving gradually toward a
collaborative partnership of professional parity. This movement may fluctuate between
mentoring and collaboration but progresses steadily toward a true professional partnership (see
Figure 1).

Measure

Engage

Resilience

Partner

Co-Teach

Interventions
Over
Time
Mentoring toward Collaboration

Demographics

Oct 2017

Empower

Transactional

Interactional

Reciprocal

Interoperable

Coordination

Cooperation

Integrated
Instruction

Integrated
Curriculum

Assess
&
Provide
Information

Mentoring
Induction

Building
Skills
&
Relations

Collegial
Professional
Relationship

Nov 2017

Dec 2017

Jan 2018

Feb 2018

Figure 1. Continuum of Care

Measure
Resilience
Mentoring/
Collaboration
Burnout
Retention

Mar-Apr 2018

6
The socio-cultural, critical perspective of early career teacher resilience (Johnson et al,
2016) is applied in this study through a matched sample design, emphasizing activism to develop
collaborative and trusting relationships that empower teachers. To this end, establishing a
relationship of mentoring which builds toward collaboration through prescriptive interventions of
the school librarian to the benefit of new teachers will be the process, resulting in increased
resilience, reduced burnout, and retention as the measured products.

Purpose and Significance

The purpose of this study is to determine the effectiveness of standardized interventions
performed by school librarians for new teachers to build the resilience necessary to survive and
thrive (Beltman et al., 2011) as classroom teachers and to promote retention. This study is
significant in that actions taken by the school librarian may promote new teacher resilience,
leading to a defined Continuum of Care by school librarians for new teachers and increasing
knowledge of the influence of the school librarian on the professional lives of new teachers.

Research Design

This study took place in fourteen K-12 schools in one urban school district in a midAtlantic state during the school year 2017-2018. Fifteen school librarians were recruited through
the district Office of Media Services by inviting volunteers to serve as interventionists for new
teachers. These librarians, in turn, recruited new teachers in their buildings to participate in the

7
study. These new teachers who made up the treatment group were then matched to other new
teachers within the district who were not involved in the study to form the comparison group.
The study population consisted of 26 new (first year) teachers with a matched sample of
26 new teachers (N=52). All were full-time and in their first contract year of teaching.
Interventions were defined by the researcher and implemented by the school librarian(s) at each
school. These interventions were selected by combing the literature on teacher mentoring,
teacher resilience, teacher retention, school librarian collaboration with teachers, and school
librarian preparation (Lipton & Wellman, 2003; Loertscher, 2000; Montiel-Overall &
Hernandez, 2012; Turner & Riedling, 2003; Morris, 2015). Those interventions which addressed
new teacher support, resilience, burnout, and retention were adopted for use in this study. All
school librarians serving as interventionists were full-time and certified as a school library media
specialist according to state requirements and had at least three years of experience either as a
teacher or as a school librarian.
Data from a questionnaire conducted in October 2017 (see Appendix C) were used to
determine initial levels of resilience of the new teachers. All new teachers in the district who
were in their first full-time, contracted year of teaching were provided opportunity to complete
the October 2017 questionnaire, which consisted of a measure of resilience and demographic
data. The treatment group received defined interventions from their school librarian during the
study while the comparison group did not receive these interventions. The comparison group was
matched to the treatment group first by initial resilience level, then by grade level taught, then by
Title I status of the school. Data from the October 2017 questionnaire were also used to compare
within group levels of resilience of the treatment group at the initiation of the school year to
levels of resilience of this same treatment group at the closure of the study.

8
The school librarians received training for implementation of the interventions and signed
an agreement prior to the start of the study to clarify responsibilities and serve as a blueprint for
mentor-mentee interactions (Lorenzetti & Powelson, 2015). This informal and non-binding
contract served to acknowledge the school librarians’ responsibility to implement the
interventions and to assure confidentiality in the relationship. In return, the school librarians
serving as interventionists received a stipend and were entered into a raffle to attend a national
conference to encourage participation (Lorenzetti & Powelson, 2015). Weekly interventions for
new teachers, defined by the researcher and executed by the school librarians, were implemented
from November 2017 through February 2018. Interventions were rolled out according to a
planned calendar. Formative data and field notes were collected by the researcher to record
interventionists’ input and discussion (Hays & Singh, 2012).
Post-intervention data were collected in March and April 2018 from the new teachers in
the treatment group and the matched sample. The March 2018 questionnaire consisted of
measures for resilience, burnout, retention, and level of mentoring and collaboration between the
school librarian and new teacher. Demographics of the school librarians who served as
interventionists were collected to identify factors which may contribute to resilience and
retention of new teachers.
In addition to quantitative methods, this study used a qualitative examination of school
librarians’ and new teachers’ perceptions and beliefs about mentoring and collaboration
behaviors which increase resilience of new teachers. A phenomenological approach (Moustakas,
1994) was used to explore the lived experiences (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) of the new
teachers in the first full-time, contracted year of teaching and of the school librarians providing
interventions, and to discover and describe the strategies they enacted in practice as they engaged

9
in mentoring and collaboration activities (Hayes and Singh, 2012). Using a small criterion
sample of three school librarians and three new teachers, qualitative data were collected in April
2018 through interviews of pairs who had worked together throughout the study. Each new
teacher and school librarian were interviewed separately to ensure fidelity in reporting. This
analysis provided for thick description (Geertz, 1973) of the mentoring toward collaboration
relationship.
For the qualitative data collection, one school librarian-new teacher pair was randomly
selected at the elementary, middle, and high school levels for semi-structured interviews which
were conducted in April 2018. In total, six participants representing three sites were interviewed
to explore their experiences.
The quasi-experimental design of this study (Leedy & Ormrod, 2016) included a nonrandomized comparison group pre-test/post-test design (see Table 1) to show that the two groups
were equivalent with respect to level of resilience prior to treatment. This was to eliminate initial
group differences as an explanation for post-treatment differences, and to strengthen the design
by identifying matched pairs (Leedy & Ormrod) of new teachers in the treatment and comparison
groups.

10
Table 1. Graphic Depiction of Non-randomized Comparison Group Pre-test/Post-test
Group
Treatment

Time
Observation 1
Oct 2017
Questionnaire
• Resilience scale
• Demographic data

Comparison

Observation 1
Oct 2017
Questionnaire
• Resilience scale
• Demographic data

Implementation of
treatment
Nov 2017-Mar 2018
Standardized
interventions by
school librarians for
new teachers

Observation 2
Mar 2018
Questionnaire
• Resilience scale
• Level of
mentoring/
collaboration
• Burnout inventory
• Notice of intent

Observation 3
Apr 2018
Interviews of
school librariannew teacher pairs

No implementation
of treatment

Observation 2
Mar 2018
Questionnaire
• Resilience scale
• Level of
mentoring/
collaboration
• Burnout inventory
• Notice of intent

No interviews

Table based on Leedy & Ormrod, 2016, pp. 189-90 and p. 198.

Four tools were presented to measure development of resilience and retention of new
teachers (see Table 2). These four scales included The Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale 10
(CD-RISC 10), items to determine level of mentoring/collaboration between the school librariannew teacher pair, the Maslach Burnout Inventory- Educators Survey (MBI-ES), and the district
annual notice of intent.

11
Table 2. Survey Tools Used to Measure Resilience and Retention of New Teachers
Tool
Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale 10
(CD-RISC 10)

Description
10 items to measure resilience of new teachers.

Mentoring/Collaboration Score

2 items to measure the amount of mentoring and collaboration by
school librarians for new teachers.

Maslach Burnout Inventory-Educators Survey
(MBI-ES)

22 items to measure burnout level of new teachers.

Notice of intent

Annual district yes/no survey of all teachers to determine intent to
return to current position.

The CD-RISC 10, which received high psychometric ratings (Connor & Davidson, 2003;
Windle, Bennett, & Noyes, 2011) served as the resilience scale. Items to determine level of
mentoring/collaboration were assessed on a Likert scale from no mentoring/collaboration to high
mentoring/collaboration. The district notice of intent to continue in the current teaching position
served as the measure of retention and is standard annual practice by this school district to
determine preparation of contracts for the upcoming school year. The MBI-ES measured burnout
as the inverse to resilience and was selected from the literature due to its use in other quantitative
studies of teacher resilience (Beltman et al., 2011; Goddard & O’Brien, 2004; Klusmann, Kunter,
Trautwein, Lüdtke, & Baumert, 2008).
To analyze the data, within-subject scores for the treatment group on the pre-test
questionnaire and post-test on the CD-RISC 10 resilience scale were compared to identify
changes over time. Additionally, scores on the resilience scale and the burnout inventory were
compared between the comparison group and the treatment group to determine differences
between groups. To triangulate the data, the rate of intent to return to the same teaching position

12
was also compared between the comparison group and the treatment group.
Mentoring/collaboration scores were compared between the treatment and comparison groups.
The interviews were voice recorded and transcribed, coded, then analyzed for themes and
patterns. This process allowed the researcher to move from significant statements, to meaning
units, to the exploration of subthemes and resulted in detailed description of the lived
experiences of study participants (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
This study, A Continuum of Care: School Librarian Interventions for New Teacher
Resilience, was funded by a $10,000 grant from the American Association of School Librarians
(AASL). The purpose of the grant funding was to support causal research in the field of school
libraries through the AASL Causality: School Libraries and Student Success (CLASS II)
initiative (AASL, 2014). Specifically, this study used a quasi-experimental design approaching
causal explanation to isolate the effects of the work of state-certified school librarians (Soulen,
2016). The study identified and tested a model in the field to further uncover a causal
relationship between best practice of school librarians in the authentic school library context
(Mardis, Kimmel, & Pasquini, 2018) and the development and retention of new teachers.

Research Questions and Hypotheses

RQ1: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school year?

13
H1: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian will
significantly increase their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school
year.
RQ2: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
H2: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian
demonstrate significantly higher scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as
compared to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.
RQ3: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
H3: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian will
demonstrate significantly lower scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year
as compared to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.
RQ4: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their intent to return to their current teaching position as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
H4: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian are
significantly more likely to intend to return to their current teaching position as compared
to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.

14
Operational Definitions

The following definitions operationally identify constructs, characteristics of the sample,
and variables investigated in this study.
Burnout: feelings of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a lack of personal
accomplishment (Maslach, Jackson, Leiter, & Schaufeli, 1996).
Collaboration: working together; creating a space for shared idea generation, analysis and
reflection; participation as equals in planning, reflecting, and problem-solving (Lipton &
Wellman, 2003).
Collegial professional relationship: responsibilities of teaching shared equally between skilled
educators in a balance of powers.
Cooperation: “responsibilities are divided among participants to create a whole project”
(Montiel-Overall, 2008, p. 146).
Coordination: “working together to arrange schedules, manage time efficiently, and avoid
overlap” (Montiel-Overall, 2008, p. 146).
Interactional: influenced by mutual action.
Interoperable: capable of being shared between different systems.
Integrated curriculum: Integrated instruction occurring across a school or school district
(Montiel-Overall, 2008).
Integrated instruction: “Jointly planned, implemented, and evaluated instruction integrates
library curriculum and content curriculum in a lesson or unit” (Montiel-Overall, 2008, p. 146).

15
Intention notice: a formalized agreement at the end of the school year whose signature indicates
willingness to return to the same contracted teaching position for the following school year.
Leavers: teachers who depart the profession (Gray & Taie, 2015).
Mentoring: personal guidance provided by seasoned veterans to beginning teachers in schools
(Smith & Ingersoll, 2004).
Movers: teachers who remain in the profession but move to a new position (Gray & Taie, 2015).
New teacher: a professional teacher in their first full-time, contract year.
Reciprocal: mutual exchange.
Resilience: the process of adapting well in the face of adversity, trauma, tragedy, threats or
significant sources of stress by bouncing back from difficult experiences (APA, 2017).
Retention: signed contract to return to the same teaching position for the following school year.
School librarian: a full-time, certified according to the state standards professional who
administrates a school library program. Also known as media specialist, library media specialist,
or teacher librarian.
Stayers: teachers who remain in the profession for the following school year (Gray & Taie,
2015).
Transactional: transmittal of an item carried out through a relationship, especially as influenced
by assumed roles.

16
Expected Outcomes

There are several expected outcomes of this research. First, results may show increased
resilience of new teachers who received interventions from school librarians over a four-month
period. Secondly, teachers who received interventions from the school librarian may show
greater resilience and lesser burnout when compared to new teachers who did not receive these
interventions. Finally, teachers who received interventions from the school librarian may show
greater intent to return to the current teaching position when compared to new teachers who did
not receive these interventions. This study may direct the field of research in school libraries
toward causal research of best practices for school librarians in the professional development of
new teachers.

Expected Benefits and Impact

This research is expected to benefit the field of school librarianship by outlining a
research-based model of a Continuum of Care for new teachers as best practice for school
librarians. Results of this study may impact the burgeoning field of teacher resilience by defining
the role of school librarians in fostering resilience of new teachers. Results of this study will add
to the knowledge of evidence-based practice in both school librarianship and teacher resilience
using research methods which approach causality.

17
Conclusion
The intent of this study is to better define a Continuum of Care by way of prescriptive
interventions by school librarians to increase new teacher resilience and retention. This first
chapter introduced the importance of building resilience in new teachers through support
activities by school librarians which begin with mentoring and move toward collaboration. The
remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Chapter II, the literature on the theory of
resilience and retention as it applies to new teachers through a Continuum of Care model will be
reviewed. Chapter III will present the methodological framework to be used to examine building
resilience in new teachers by implementing the Continuum of Care for new teachers. Chapter IV
will present the results of analyzing the data collected by the instruments used to measure
resilience, burnout, and retention of new teachers who were exposed to these interventions and
those new teachers in the matched samples. Chapter V will discuss these results in terms of the
broader implications for theory and practice, outline the limitations of the research, and explore
avenues for further study. Taken together, these five chapters will provide a fresh view of new
teacher resilience through the lens of the school librarian.

18
CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Teacher retention is a concern for many public-school districts. New teachers as a fragile
population merit added support from more experienced educators (VDOE, 2017). Without
support, these vulnerable new teachers may struggle to access the personal resilience needed to
avoid burnout and attrition. The purpose of this study is to investigate how the practices of
school librarians influence new teacher resilience and retention and to provide a Continuum of
Care by school librarians for new teachers. This study explores the relationship between the level
of new teacher resilience at the start of the school year and the level of resilience of the same
group of new teachers five months later after receiving interventions from the school librarian. It
also explores the level of new teacher resilience, burnout, and retention for new teachers
receiving interventions from the school librarian compared to new teachers who did not receive
these interventions. A description of the relationship of the school librarian-new teacher pair
provides depth to the study.
This literature review will begin by exploring the construct of resilience as it is traced
through history and situated in positive psychology. The next section describes teacher burnout
and attrition, and the characteristics of resilience, as well as the factors that contribute to
resilience, and recommendations for building resilience. The following section explores teacher
resilience as it relates to retention, burnout, and attrition. The next section addresses a new model
of mentoring and collaboration as professional development, and the need for development of a
Continuum of Care for new teachers by school librarians. The final section explores causal
research in the field of school librarianship.

19
Theory of Resilience

This dissertation is rooted in the psychological theory of resilience as the theoretical
framework to guide the study. Aldwin, Cunningham, and Taylor (2010) described Werner as a
seminal figure in developmental psychology. They attributed a new field of resilience theory to
Werner (1995), who studied children at risk due to chronic poverty, adverse family
environments, and perinatal stress. She and co-author Smith observed that of those children who
faced adversity, the majority developed normally. They described resilience as a function of
internal characteristics of the child and social support provided by family and community,
emphasizing the plasticity of development and a contextual, life-span approach to resilience as a
phenomenon that can unfold over decades (Aldwin et al., 2010). This theory of resilience, as it is
situated in positive psychology, is fundamentally about healing. Through the theory of resilience,
psychologists are beginning to understand not only how to cope with negative life events, but
how to recognize what makes life worth living (Muchinsky, 2006). Although rooted in
experiences of trauma, the concept of resilience can be applied to the general population
(Campbell-Sills and Stein, 2009).
The word “resilience” is rooted in Latin, consisting of ‘salire,’ to jump, and ‘re,’ back,
translating to “jump back”, or return to the original state (Smith, Epstein, Ortiz, Christopher,
Tooley, 2013, p. 167). Resilience has come to be regarded, however, as positive development
beyond mere readjustment (Davis, Luecken, & Lemery-Chalfant, 2009). According to the
American Psychological Association (APA) it is “the process of adapting well in the face of
adversity, trauma, tragedy, threats or significant sources of stress… ‘bouncing back’ from
difficult experiences” (APA, 2017). More broadly, the International Encyclopedia of the Social

20
& Behavioral Sciences defines resilience as “the positive adaptation and sustainable
development of a system to respond to short- or long-term everyday challenges or severe stress”
(Steinebach, 2015, p. 557). By dealing with environmental stressors, the human system defines
new reference values and develops required competencies, improving the ability to cope with
future stresses (Steinebach, 2015). Resilience was somewhat differently defined by Masten, Best,
and Garmezy (1990) as “the process of, capacity for, or outcome of successful adaptation despite
challenging or threatening circumstances” (Masten et al., 1990, p. 426). Powers (2010) defined
resilience as dynamic, a process of positive adaptation in the context of adversity. From this
perspective, protective factors provide the building blocks of resilience, with risk factors being
associated with negative outcomes while increasing protective factors may enable functionality
despite the risks (Powers, 2010).
Resilience involves ordinary behaviors, thoughts and actions that can be learned and
developed in anyone (APA, 2017). Resilience is a combination of internal characteristics, such as
positive problem solving and communication skills, intelligence, and social support (Aldwin et
al., 2010). Powers (2010) used the risk and resilience perspective to suggest that positive and
protective factors may buffer the effects of risk factors to encourage resilience within the social
environment.
Operationalizing and measuring resilience as a construct have been of increasing interest
as it may provide evidence about central factors for regaining and maintaining mental health
(Friborg, Barlaug, Martinussen, Rosenvinge, & Hjemdal, 2005). The APA identified four factors
that indicate resilience. These included the capacity to make realistic plans and take steps to
carry them out, a positive self-view and confidence in personal strengths and abilities,
communication and problem-solving skills, and the capacity to manage strong feelings and

21
impulses (APA, 2017). One measure of resilience, the Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale (CDRISC), measures factors that indicate resilience, such as personal competence, acceptance of
change and secure relationships, trust/tolerance/strengthening effects of stress, control, and
spiritual influences (Positive Psychology Program, n.d.). The Maslach Burnout Inventory has
also been used to measure the negative factors of burnout which can be inversely related to
resilience including exhaustion, detachment, and lack of effectiveness (Maslach Burnout
Inventory, 2017).
The APA offers 10 ways to build resilience based on the factors described above.
Individuals can foster their resilience by making connections, avoiding seeing crises as
insurmountable, accepting change, moving towards goals, taking decisive actions, looking for
opportunities for self-discovery, nurturing a positive self-view, keeping perspective, maintaining
hope, and taking care of the personal self (APA, 2017). In addition, resilience may be
strengthened by writing about thoughts and feelings related to stressful life events, meditation,
and spiritual practices (APA, 2017). Individuals become resilient by learning to adjust to
negative conditions, aided by resources which inform their perspectives and decision making
(Bobek, 2002). In one study of the effect of interventions on resilience, scores on the ConnorDavidson Resilience Scale (CD-RISC) were shown to increase with treatments that were
hypothesized to enhance resilience (Davidson et al., 2005). Thus, the theory of resilience may be
useful to apply in an educational setting through support of new teachers.

22
Burnout and Attrition

Teacher burnout, defined as feelings of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a
lack of personal accomplishment (Maslach et al., 1996), may be one factor which contributes to
the high attrition rates seen in the teaching field (Rumschlag, 2017). In the United States,
national data for 2007-2008 (see Table 3) show that among all beginning teachers, 10% did not
teach in the following year and 17% had left the teaching field just four years later (Gray & Taie,
2015). Attrition rates are high among new teachers, as much as 41 percent within the first five
years, and highest in urban, high poverty, and lower performing schools (Raue & Gray, 2015).
Attrition rates even as high as 50 percent in the first five years of teaching have been found, with
the best and brightest most likely to leave (Smith & Ingersoll, 2004). In a 20 year study of a
cohort of 87 Swedish teachers, Lindqvist, Nordänger, and Carlsson (2014) found that five years
after starting work as teachers, only 72% of the cohort reported that they were actively teaching.
These authors suggested that retention and support of active teachers, rather than training more
and more, would be a better solution to the serious problems of teacher turnover and attrition,
metaphorically patching the holes in the bucket before pouring more water in (Lindqvist et al.,
2014). By addressing teacher burnout, the field may be able to, in part, address the problem of
teacher attrition which negatively affects teacher quality, student learning, and staffing problems
(Raue & Gray, 2015). Additionally, school districts may benefit from a reduction in attrition
rates by expending less resources on recruitment, hiring, and training, which could be better
spent on academic programs and services (Raue & Gray, 2015).

23
Table 3. NCES Beginning Teacher Status
Year

Total Beginning Teachers
Surveyed
2007-2008
156,100
2008-2009
156,100
2009-2010
156,100
2010-2011
155,800
2011-2012
155,600
*Data from Gray & Taie, 2015, p. 6

Percent Currently
Teaching
100.0%
90.0%
87.7%
85.2%
82.7%

Percent Not Teaching
10.0%
12.3%
14.8%
17.3%

New teachers, in particular, may be susceptible to burnout, leading to their higher levels
of attrition. Using the Friedman Scale for Measuring Teacher Burnout, Gavish and Friedman
(2010) found high levels of burnout among 123 teachers in both November and May of their first
year of teaching. Burnout levels among the new teachers in their study were also found to be
higher than a national sample of senior teachers. Similarly, using the MBI-ES, Goddard,
O’Brien, and Goddard (2006) found that beginning teacher burnout increased over a two-year
period. These increases resulted in significant levels of burnout when compared to normative
data on two of three subscales. Higher burnout levels were also found in beginning teachers
compared to an earlier survey of teachers in Victoria, Australia (Goddard & O’Brien, 2004).
New teachers may also be susceptible to burnout levels of their colleagues. Kim, Youngs,
and Frank (2017) in a study of 171 early career teachers and their formal and informal mentors
found a significant association between organizational exposure to burnout and the early career
teachers’ burnout level in the latter part of the school year. Compared to formal mentors, burnout
levels of close colleagues, also known as contagious burnout, had greater influence on burnout
levels of new teachers (Kim et al., 2017). Thus, burnout of new teachers may be molded by
attitudes of other teachers with whom they closely interact.

24
Marcoux (2007) maintained that new teachers could maximize their rewards by seeking
advice, guidance, and assistance thereby producing better educational results. Likewise, Kim et
al. (2017) found that the social networks of formal mentors and close colleagues, which impacted
socialization of early career teachers, provide a process to acquire resources such as curricular
knowledge, materials for lesson planning, and knowledge of student behavior. These social
networks influenced new teacher burnout as they reached out to their colleagues to gather
resources to fulfill their teaching responsibilities, particularly in schools with higher percentages
of low SES students where the incidence of burnout in new teachers was greater (Kim et al.,
2017). Similarly, Raue and Gray (2015) found that the effect of teacher attrition was more
significant in schools serving low-performing and majority-minority students. To escape from
this cycle of burnout and turnover, effective provision of resources, such as physical materials,
professional development, and assistance with lesson development at the school level (Kim et
al.) and support for new teachers through induction and mentoring have been shown to be factors
in teacher retention (Raue & Gray, 2015). By putting in place structures to support new teachers,
burnout and attrition may be avoidable.

Teacher Resilience

In the helping professions, measures of burnout and resilience produce inversely
associated results (Taku, 2014), and interventions which promote resilience reduce feelings of
burnout (Jackson-Jordan, 2013; Rushton, Batcheller, Schroeder, and Donohue, 2015). Public
school teachers, who may face demanding work environments with little support, at times
respond by exhibiting physiological, emotional, and behavioral manifestations of stress (Lantieri,
Kyse, Harnett, & Malkmus, 2011). However, the stress of working in a classroom setting may be

25
mitigated by greater resilience of the teacher. Defining career resilience as resistance to career
disruption and the ability to handle poor working conditions, O’Leary (1998) highlighted the
opportunity for growth and challenge to promote thriving and nurturing strengths. Further
defining resilience as “the ability to bounce back from adversity, frustration, and misfortune”
Ledesma (2014, p. 1) found that organizations influence the building of their employees’
resilience capacity and thus must commit to fostering the resiliency of the employee (Ledesma,
2014). Teacher resiliency plays a role in classroom success and teacher retention (Arnup &
Bowles, 2016; Tait, 2008), and depends on fostering productive relationships, a sense of career
competence, personal ownership and advancement in the profession, feelings of
accomplishment, and a sense of humor (Bobek, 2002). Gu and Day (2007) recognized teacher
resilience as necessary for effectiveness and acquirable through provision of relevant and
practical protective factors such as staff collegiality, positive school leadership, professional
learning, and collaborative partnerships (Gu & Day, 2013).
In a review of the research on teacher resilience, Beltman, Mansfield, and Price (2011)
described resilience as complex, dynamic, idiosyncratic, and cyclical involving interaction
between person and environment, evidenced by individual response to challenging situations and
involving both protective and risk factors. School communities that enable teacher resilience
may include the support of other educators in the building, such as school psychologists, who
build relationships in partnership with the broader school ecologies (Beltman et al., 2016).
Models of teacher resilience were found in the literature. New teachers, who are at
greater risk of burnout and attrition, benefit from structures that increase their retention. Castro,
Kelly, and Shih (2010) focused on ways new teachers adapted and implemented strategies as
avenues for coping and sustenance given the realities of teaching context. They acknowledged

26
the fundamental role of the organization of the school and the effect that resilience strategies had
on teachers’ creation of new resources through persistence, effort, and productive energy (Castro
et al., 2010). Doney (2013) developed a model of new teacher resilience (see Figure 2) showing
that mentors can encourage new teacher retention by fostering resilience. Her model of a process
framework showed the interaction of stressors and protective factors that interact to foster
resilience in new teachers to encourage teacher retention. Results of Doney’s qualitative study of
four novice secondary science teachers suggest that stressors and protective factors interact and
stimulate responses that counteract the negative effects of stress (Doney, 2013).

Figure 2. Doney Model of the Process Framework for Teacher Resilience
(Doney, 2013, p. 650)

Based on Doney’s model, Greenfield (2015) proposed a model of teacher resilience (see
Figure 3) which was characterized as a collection of dynamic interactions between thoughts,
relationships, actions, and challenges. He presented the resilience process as protective
relationships and actions which provide a buffer between personal beliefs and external

27
challenges. Greenfield saw the protection and promotion of teacher beliefs, centered at the core
of his model, as the key to sustaining teacher motivation and commitment to the profession
(Greenfield, 2015). Arnup and Bowles (2016) found that low resilience and job dissatisfaction
among teachers with less than 10 years of experience significantly predicted intent to leave the
teaching profession, with resilience explaining additional variation in intent to leave teaching
more than job satisfaction and teacher demographics. High levels of teacher turnover is of
concern as it relates to school cohesion and, in turn, student performance (Ingersoll, 2001b).

Figure 3. Greenfield Model of Teacher Resilience
(Greenfield, 2015, p. 61)

In a case study of new teachers who reported a high incidence of stress and coping
strategies in Australian rural schools, Sharplin, O'Neill, and Chapman (2011) developed a
storyline of common experiences of new teachers. They identified three critical periods for
which interventions were most effective. These included the first weeks of appointment for

28
access to information and support structures; the first semester for support, professional
development, and feedback; and 3-4 months prior to the end of the year for career continuity and
certainty of return. They recommended policies to provide targeted interventions during these
three phases to improve the quality of work life for new teachers.
The Early Career Teacher Resilience project investigated how teachers developed and
sustained their commitment to teaching and provided evidence-based interventions to increase
commitment and reduce attrition. The framework described the importance of promoting a sense
of belonging, acceptance, and wellbeing, fostering professional growth, and promoting collective
ownership and responsibility for professional relationships (Early Career Teacher Resilience,
2012). Policies and practices that create innovative partnerships and initiatives to smooth
transition to the workforce were encouraged to enhance new teacher resilience (Early Career
Teacher Resilience, 2012).
In an effort to understand and represent the experiences of early career teachers, Johnson
and Down (2013) began by critiquing traditional human resilience research but moved beyond
the critique to an emergent critical perspective of teacher resilience. They saw three problems in
mainstream conceptions of resilience, namely reduction to bundles of risk and protective factors,
hyper-individualistic analysis of the causes and amelioration of human problems, and implicit
normativity of Western, middle class values. They re-position new teacher resilience to a critical
perspective linking “private troubles” to “public issues” while focusing on the role of culture to
empower teachers, creating a spirit of optimism, human agency, and health and well-being for
new teachers (Johnson & Down, 2013). But merely understanding and representing new teacher
experiences may not be enough. Actions put in place to create structures which increase
resilience in new teachers may provide the scaffold on which to build a budding career.

29
Resilience has been found to be related to retention. Combes Malcom (2007) found a
parallel between the major attributes of resilience and retention. Both were connected to building
relationships, a sense of purpose, a positive and supportive environment, a sense of agency, an
ability to see difficulties as challenges, and high-quality preparation (Combes Malcom, 2007).
Tait (2008) focused on the relationship between resiliency, personal efficacy, and
emotional competence. She identified capacities of new teachers who strongly demonstrated
social competence, personal efficacy, problem solving strategies, and an ability to rebound after
a difficult experience, learning from experience, setting goals for the future, self-care, and
optimism. Her research showed that beginning teachers need support from mentors, colleagues
and administration at the school level to enhance their commitment to the profession (Tait,
2008). Doney (2013) further supported Tait’s conclusion by identifying the underlying
mechanism as an ability to manage a cycle of shifting stressors, revised protective factors, and
building resilience allied with recovering strength under adverse conditions.
Arnup and Bowles (2016) showed that resilience explained variance in intention to leave
teaching, pointing out that schools may assist teachers in increasing their resilience through
school support and resilience programs. They also identified supportive and highly collaborative
schools as most successful at retaining teachers and recommended implementation of resilience
programs in schools as initiatives to increase resilience of teachers and to decrease the number of
teachers leaving the profession (Arnup & Bowles, 2016).
Resilience may be key to understanding why teachers leave the profession. Thus, efforts
to increase resilience may assist early career teachers to cope with stress and become more
committed to teaching (Arnup & Bowles, 2016). In a randomized control trial of the impact of a
transformational professional development program for teachers, the Inner Resilience Program

30
identified statistically significant and meaningful impact for reducing teachers’ perceived stress
levels, increasing teacher levels of attention and mindfulness, and strengthening relational trust
with colleagues (Lantieri et al., 2011). Teachers in the study learned to nurture their inner lives
by attending yoga classes and participating in reflective approaches to stress management, group
dialogue, contemplative practices, journaling, shared meals, and a weekend retreat (Lantieri et
al., 2011). Teachers who participated in the program adopted a more resilient mindset by
applying stress management and coping skills and by calling on the support of colleagues
(Lantieri et al., 2011).
These studies have shown that resilience is an important contributing factor in
determining new teacher retention. By putting in place practices to support new teachers within
the school ecology, other professionals in the field may have the opportunity to influence new
teacher resilience and retention.

A New Model of Professional Development

The continuum of care model was first developed in the medical profession to track
patient care over time. Evashwick (2007) defined a continuum of care for the field of medicine
as a client-oriented, comprehensive, coordinated system of services and mechanisms used to
guide and monitor patient care to meet their needs efficiently and effectively. For the nursing
profession, the continuum of care was more narrowly defined to include “mechanisms for
organizing those services and operating them as an integrated system” (Donahue, M., &
American Organization of Nurse Executives, 1998, p. 1). Care of an individual patient and care

31
delivered over time distinguished this model from other healthcare models and set guidelines for
measurement (Haggerty et al., 2003).
The Healthcare Continuum of Care used a participatory model to engage patients across
the continuum of care by integrating social media and technology for communication and patient
engagement (Nicholson, 2013). Under this continuum of care model, nurses implemented a
standard set of practices based on patient needs and conditions. The ideal continuum took a
holistic approach, emphasizing wellness to give clients access to services at point of need
(Evashwick, 2005).
Professional development of new teachers as a way to provide support as they enter the
profession takes many forms, including mentoring and collaboration in a collegial community of
practice. Collaboration, defined here as working together to create a space for shared idea
generation, analysis and reflection, allows for participation as equals in planning, reflecting, and
problem-solving (Lipton & Wellman, 2003). School librarians are in a unique position to offer
this mentoring and collaboration as they have better access to more resources than other
professionals in the building and are well-versed in connecting patrons to resources. The
conceptual framework for this dissertation represents a new model of professional development
for new teachers, which combines mentoring and collaboration into a Continuum of Care by
school librarians for new teachers.
When supporting new teachers, the National Center for Education Statistics data suggest
that mentoring does make a difference (Gray & Taie, 2015). These data show that beginning
with the 2007-2008 study, in each successive year those teachers assigned a first-year mentor
remained in the profession at a higher rate than those not assigned a first year mentor (see Table

32
4), 92% and 84%, respectively in the first year and 86% and 71%, respectively, four years later
(Gray & Taie, 2015).

Table 4. Percent Attrition Beginning Teachers Starting 2007-2008 (1st Year)
Attrition
Year
2008-2009
(2nd year)
2009-2010
(3rd year)
2010-2011
(4th year)
2011-2012
(5th year)

Assigned
First Year Mentor
8.4%

Not Assigned
First Year Mentor
16.4%

9.5%

23.0%

12.0%

27.2%

14.5%

28.6%

*Data from Gray & Taie, 2015, p. 7

Mentoring
Mentoring, defined here as personal guidance provided by seasoned veterans to
beginning teachers in schools (Smith & Ingersoll, 2004), is a responsibility of every professional
in the educational setting (Kent, Green, & Feldman, 2012). Concern about the problems faced by
new teachers and subsequent high attrition rates has fueled the implementation of mentoring
programs as a strategy to ease transition to the school setting and improve retention rates
(Evertson & Smithey, 2000). Developing teacher leaders who have the disposition to mentor
must be emphasized for new teacher success and retention (Kent, Green, & Feldman). This
mentoring and collegial support through planning and collaboration with other teachers may
serve to reduce high attrition rates (Beltman et al., 2011; Smith & Ingersoll, 2004).

33
Traditionally, mentoring has been used as professional development practice for new
teachers. Mentoring is an effective method for guiding new teachers through the process of
socialization and fit between the individual and the organization (Landy & Conte, 2004).
Kemmis, Heikkinen, Fransson, Aspfors, and Edwards-Groves (2014) identified three archetypes
of mentoring, determining that how mentoring was understood and enacted created different
types of social relationships between new teachers and others in the profession. The archetypes
of supervision involved surveillance of the new teacher passing through a probationary period,
traditional mentoring as autocratic support with a more experienced teacher assisting a mentee,
and democratic, collaborative self-development where professional growth was achieved through
collegial mentoring (Kemmis et al., 2014). Greenberg (2002) recognized four stages of the
mentoring relationship, which may last five years or beyond. The first year of mentoring consists
of an initiation stage in which the relationship gets started, moving to a cultivation stage in which
the bond develops. In the later separation stage, mentees went out on their own and redefined
their relationship as a friendship of equals (Greenberg, 2002).
Marcoux (2007) contended that new teachers in a supportive mentoring relationship were
empowered to make mistakes which may launch them into alternative, and perhaps better,
teaching. Since relationships that empower human agency are at the core of resilience, the
relationships that new teachers build in their first year may influence their commitment and
intent to remain in the profession.
In an experimental field study, Evertson and Smithey (2000) compared protégés of a
treatment group of mentors who participated in a mentoring workshop to protégés of comparison
mentors who did not receive mentor training. They found that protégés of the mentor treatment
group more effectively organized and managed instruction and established more workable

34
classroom routines. Their content model for mentor workshops focused on the mentoring role,
assisting the beginning teacher with critical tasks of teaching, the process of mentoring, and
developing action plans. Mentor’s knowledge and skills of strategies and a common vocabulary
for mentoring were crucial to enabling new teachers to succeed in their entry year (Evertson &
Smithey, 2000).
Burke, Aubusson, Schuck, Buchannan, and Prescott (2015) used a discrete choice
experimental approach to produce best-worst case scaling of the value placed on different types
of support by new teachers, finding that both “leavers” and “stayers” welcomed formal and
informal collaboration and opportunities to exchange resources with their colleagues (Burke et
al., 2015). In other areas, however, leavers and stayers differed in their preferences for support
(Burke et al., 2015). Leavers placed greater value on shared resources, cooperative teaching and
planning, mentor discussions of classroom management and programming, and establishing
professional voice, while stayers appreciated experienced teacher observation and conversations
about teaching, highlighting the importance of recognizing these group preferences when
developing support mechanisms (Burke et al., 2015). Factors that contributed to retention of
beginning teachers included providing an environment of collegiality, collaboration, and support
(Burke, Schuck, Aubusson, Buchanan, Louviere, & Prescott, 2013).
Mentors advise and shepherd new teachers through their first year, with the mentor who
has more power, status, and expertise willingly using available resources to develop the mentee
(Muchinsky, 2006). Applied to a school culture, the relatively small power differential between
the teacher and the school librarian in this district, because they work under the same teacher
contract, makes mentoring a compatible form of professional development. Thus, the objective
of school librarian-new teacher mentoring is to lessen this power differential to the point that the

35
mentor/mentee become equal as peers, forming a truly collaborative partnership of practice. This
form of mentoring program which stresses peer mentoring collaborations over traditional and
hierarchical program styles, encourages mentor participation (Neyer & Yelinek, 2011).
Since librarians work with the entire faculty, they are in a unique position to offer
mentoring within and outside their own subject field. By providing extra support to incoming
faculty who are not in their own department, school librarians who mentor new teachers may
affect the social climate of the school.

Collaboration
Mentoring may be considered in many ways an initial stage of collaboration for new
teachers. As the profession of school librarianship has grown, the role of the school librarian has
developed from merely a consultant to a true collaborator, who is embedded in the school culture
within and outside the library. Information Power (AASL & AECT, 1988) described the school
librarian role as instructional consultant to teachers. Responsibilities of the school librarian were
described as participating in curriculum design and assessment, helping teachers develop
instruction, providing expertise, and translating curriculum into the library program (AASL &
AECT, 1988). The first Information Power did not mention collaboration as part of the school
librarian’s role. Information Power II (AASL & AECT, 1998), however, brought collaboration
and teaching to the forefront of the school library program. School library standards in place at
the start of this study, Empowering Learners (AASL, 2009), ranked the role of instructional
partner as third for “now”, ratcheting up to rank first for the “future” (AASL, 2009, p. 16).

36
Turner and Riedling (2003) promoted the role of the school librarian as instructional
consultant to plan and develop units of study in collaboration with teachers on four levels to help
teachers teach. At the lowest level of no involvement, the school librarian serves no role in
teacher effectiveness. At the initial level the school librarian who “selects and maintains
materials, equipment, and facilities” (Turner & Riedling, 2003, p. 19) to assist the teaching
faculty, while the moderate level involves limited interaction between the teacher and school
librarian. At the highest level, in-depth interventions by the school librarian with one or more
teachers results in considerable guidance as a member of the instructional team. This leveled
approach was designed to “ease the tension between instructional design consultation…and the
real world of school library media practice…for effective teaching and enhanced learning”
(Turner & Riedling, p. 21).
True collaboration, defined as “a working relationship over a relatively long period of
time” (AASL, 1996, p. 2), should not be confused with informal cooperation or more formal
coordination (AASL, 1996). Rather, true collaboration “applies the principles of instructional
design to develop, implement, evaluate, and revise instruction that meets students’ learning
needs (AASL, 1998, p. 64).
Loertscher (2000) developed a model of collaboration using specific interventions in
which the school librarian meets with teachers, departments, and grade level teams to plan,
execute, and evaluate resource-based instruction. Marcoux (2007) developed a tool to evaluate
levels of collaboration on a grid, with types of collaboration ranging from isolation and
consumption, to connection and cooperation, and finally coordination and ultimate coordination.
Her tool included these types of collaboration alongside the environment, mentoring
characteristics, process and structure, communication, purpose, and resources (Marcoux, 2007).

37
Based on the Loertscher model, Montiel-Overall (2008) developed the Teacher and
Librarian Collaboration Model (see Figure 4) in which teachers and librarians work together on
activities ranging from low to high collaborative endeavors. This construction of collaborative
partnerships through collaboration with classroom teachers to design, implement, and evaluate
lessons is an important role of the school librarian (AASL, 2009). Montiel-Overall (2010)
conceptualized the process of school librarian-teacher collaboration as developing over three
phases. The beginning phase, which is a prerequisite to collaboration, is identified by acceptance
of a common interest and commitment to participation. Next, the relationship phase built a bond
and created a sense of community between collaborators. Passing through these first two phases
were necessary to entering the productive phase of deep thinking, the highest level of
collaboration (Montiel-Overall, 2010).

Figure 4. Montiel-Overall Teacher and Librarian Collaboration Model
(Montiel-Overall, 2008, p. 190)

Forming these collaborative partnerships with teachers and other educators is a basic
tenet of the role of the school librarian (AASL 1988; 1998; 2009). Cultivating the collaborative
relationship for teaching requires time and nurturing (AASL, 1996). Empowering Learners

38
(AASL, 2009) offers generalized guidelines for promoting collaborative partnerships and
relationships among members of the learning community and leadership from a peer level.
School library program guidelines identify building partnerships of teaching for learning which
“promote collaboration among members of the learning community” (AASL, 2009, p. 19) and
recommend that we “model leadership and best practice for the school community” (AASL,
2009, p. 45).
Mentoring can be a means to establish the partnerships that result in collaboration. The
Project on the Next Generation of Teachers, found that new teachers reported more satisfaction,
higher self-efficacy, and showed greater retention when engaged in a collaborative relationship
with experienced colleagues (Allensworth, 2012; Johnson, 2009). Lipton & Wellman (2003)
described mentoring as a continuum of interaction, with mentors flexing between consulting,
collaborating, and coaching roles to enhance the mentees’ capacity to engage in productive
collaborative relationships.
Mentoring may be seen as a springboard toward collaboration (Trees, 2016) and the
combination of the two may be the process with resilience as the product. One study examined
the dynamics of mentoring and subsequent collaborations among mental health scholars and
faculty. (Luke, Baumann, Carothers, Landsverk, & Proctor, 2016). The researchers evaluated
mentoring and subsequent collaborations in new research, grant submissions, and publication.
They were able to demonstrate that mentoring was strongly and significantly related to future
collaboration (Luke et al. 2016).
Mentoring which cultivates professional growth and fosters collaboration (Pitton, 2006)
has a positive influence on new teacher retention (Harris, 2015). Pitton (2006) described
mentoring as a social relationship, in which new teachers should be provided with opportunities

39
to learn collaboratively (Howard, 2006: Lipton & Wellman, 2003). By adopting a collaborative
stance in the mentoring relationship, mutual respect moves forward the expectation of a collegial
relationship. Thus mentoring may be used as a means toward collaborative practice resulting in
mutual generation of information (Lipton & Wellman, 2003).
While integrating technology into the classroom environment may represent a goal for
librarians, collaborative partnerships on broad topics which foster a collegial atmosphere and
build trust and credibility was found to be the key to peer mentoring among academic faculty
(Livingston, 2003). Hickel (2006) argued that new teachers appreciate help and may become
more likely to contact library staff habitually when a collaborative formula of persistence,
patience, and optimism has been set in place. This partnership of mentoring toward collaboration
may be embodied in a Continuum of Care for new teachers by school librarians.
Mentoring and collaboration may be combined to form a new model of professional
development. Models of professional development for new teachers support individual educators
as they draw sustenance from their environments and grow in their career (Joyce & Calhoun,
2010). As these individuals learn, they have more to share as they establish their instructional
repertoires (Joyce & Calhoun, 2010). When independent groups in the school share
collaboratively, their collective knowledge may overlap so group members can learn from each
other’s practice (Joyce & Calhoun, 2010). Such professional learning communities provide an
arena within the school for reflective practice, communities of practice, and inquiry as collegial
conversation leads educators to develop shared mental maps which can then be applied to their
work (Martin, Kragler, Quatroche, & Bauserman, 2014). Wenger (1998) described this collective
learning and attendant social relations as a community of practice.

40
Professional development for school librarians serving as interventionists for teachers
needs to assure that productive change will take place (Joyce & Calhoun, 2010). Training should
provide knowledge, skill, and preparation for any new initiative, and should include elements of
demonstrations, presentations, preparation, and implementation spread out over several months
with opportunities for peer coaching groups to meet and discuss support implementation at the
school level (Joyce & Calhoun, 2010). Effective professional development is instructive,
reflective, engaging, collaborative, and substantive (Martin et al., 2014). Supporting this
professional growth with external resources, such as grants and professional organizations may
be an efficient and effective way to build district-level capacity to implement a new initiative.
Professional development utilizing external resources must be carefully aligned with district
initiatives, consistent with district messages and practices, planned for sustainability, and
evaluated for effectiveness to ensure professional growth for educators and positive outcomes for
students (Martin et al., 2014).
Some librarians have recognized the need to support new teachers, but the field has yet to
develop a model of best practice to provide this support over time. Welcoming newly hired
teachers as a professional gesture of collegial support is an important role played by the school
librarian, opening doors to collaboration for effective teaching, (Morris, 2015). The social
connection of new teachers to the school librarians has been singled out as special because the
school librarian has access to many resources and is in a position to engage in supporting new
teachers. Urging by colleagues for new teachers to visit the librarian as soon as possible
evidenced the importance of new teachers being initiated into the schools’ collaborative culture
through communication with the librarian at the beginning of the year (Montiel-Overall, 2008).
The importance of welcoming new teachers to the school library continues to be a recurring

41
theme in the literature, and targeted interventions performed by the school librarian may serve as
protective factors which promote new teacher resilience. However, the relationship between the
school librarian and the new teacher exists, at the start of the school year, in a state of imbalance.
Recommended actions by the school librarian promote new teacher efficacy (Corrick & Amos,
2000; Hartzell, 2003) on a continuum of collaboration from support to intervention (Loertscher,
2000). The new teacher as a special population, “desperate for help and ideas” (Andronik, 2003,
p. 45) warranted instruction in using the school library for planning, teaching, learning,
presenting, and reading (Emery, 2008) and in collaboration (Freeman, 2014). For partners who
are not familiar with each other’s work, or who are inexperienced in the collaborative process, a
“one designs, one teaches” model may be an easy first step with the school librarian as a
proactive initiator (Kowalsky, 2014, p.113). As partners become more familiar with each other,
they may move to a “both design, both teach” model where lesson design, execution, and
assessment are shared responsibilities (Kowalsky, 2014, p.114).
Both Lipton and Wellman (2003) and Loertscher (2000) described the collaborative
stance in the context of mentoring and school librarian collaboration, respectively. Lipton and
Wellman (2003) identified a continuum of learning-focused interactions of skilled mentors who
flex between consulting, collaborating, and coaching stances. Loertscher (2000) drew together
two continuums of educators’ roles when building a collaborative stance. He saw the
collaborative process of the school librarian as ranging from support to intervention, while the
teaching styles evident in the classroom ranged from behaviorist to constructivist (Loertscher,
2000). Integrating these two collaborative stances into one model of mentoring toward
collaboration resulted in the development of a Continuum of Care by school librarians for new
teachers to increase their resilience and to improve retention.

42
Practitioner research offers an evidence-based framework for professional development
and opportunity for classroom teachers and school librarians to engage in sustained collaboration
with the aim of disrupting existing power structures to challenge inequities in schools (Curwood,
2014). Curwood (2014) identified core features of professional development which included
focus on a content area, hands-on active learning, alignment with professional experience,
involvement with close colleagues, and duration throughout the school year (Curwood, 2014).
New teachers in collaboration with the school librarian may at first engage in legitimate
peripheral practice as they learn about practitioner research, moving toward a community of
practice as the collaborative partnership develops (Curwood, 2014) on a Continuum of Care.
The continuum of care is, at heart, a series of interventions with a well-defined goal.
Trees (2016) identified interventions used by top organizations under the one-on-one mentoring
structure. For example, mentors were tasked with connecting their mentee to three other new
professional contacts and participating in face-to-face social events with other mentor-mentee
pairs (Trees, 2016). As an example of a model from the nursing profession, Tomlinson, PedenMcAlpine, and Sherman (2012) detailed the development of a family systems intervention
designed to decrease family stress at the family-provider interface. They developed a family
health systems model (see Figure 5) with an intervention protocol to operationalize policies of
family centered care and promote family control. The four realms of the family health system
converged, providing a platform for developing the intervention into nursing actions that could
directly affect family stress (Tomlinson et al., 2012).

43

Figure 5. Family Systems Nursing Intervention Model for Paediatric Health Crisis
(Tomlinson et al., 2012, p. 708)

In a case study of pre-service classroom teachers, Moreillon (2008) used interventions to
understand the influence on classroom-library collaboration in practice and to shed light on the
supports and barriers to this partnership. Her pre-service interventions included deconstructing a
classroom-library lesson plan and unit, a panel discussion of classroom teachers, school
librarians, and principals, a simulation of a classroom teacher/school librarian planning session,
and demonstration of the resulting co-taught lesson. Findings suggested that these interventions
positively influenced later classroom-library collaboration. One way this classroom-library
collaboration may be of service to new educators is the school librarian’s opportunity to impact
the practice of colleagues while improving their own practice (Moreillon, 2008).

44
Lipton and Wellman (2003) developed a calendar of mentoring activities correlated to the
time of the school year, developmental phases of new teachers, and stages of concern of new
teachers. A menu of interventions were offered per month, associated with the development of
new teachers as they moved through the school year through feelings of anticipation to survival
through disillusionment to rejuvenation and anticipation and with phases of concern from self to
task to impact. The calendar guides the mentor through the school year and provides structured
mentoring behaviors to be implemented over the course of the school year (Lipton & Wellman,
2003).
Interventions have been used to increase resilience and retention of new teachers. The
Inner Resilience Program (Lantieri et al., 2011) used quantitative methods to investigate
implementation of interventions to increase resilience of teachers. Participants were randomly
assigned to treatment and control groups, with the treatment group receiving transformational
professional development interventions to build resilience. Teachers completed a battery of
surveys in the fall and spring of the school year to determine participants’ perceptions of selfwellness (Lantieri et al.). The Project on the Next Generation of Teachers found that new
teachers reported more satisfaction, higher self-efficacy, and showed greater retention when
engaged in a collaborative relationship with experienced colleagues (Allensworth, 2012;
Johnson, 2009). Establishing a Continuum of Care as a series of interventions to promote
resilience in new teachers may effect a change in the rates of burnout and attrition and increase
resilience.

45
Causal Research in the Field of School Librarianship
In 2014, AASL held a forum to articulate “a national research agenda to investigate
causal phenomena” in school libraries (AASL, 2014, p. 3). The forum was guided by Dr.
Thomas Cook, an influential methodologist in education research. The result of this meeting was
a white paper, Causality: School Libraries and Student Success (CLASS) which, in part,
recommended a plan of action moving toward studies which use rigorous research designs
(AASL, 2014; Little, 2015).
Both education and nursing share the problem that phenomena are often complex, and
randomized control trials may not be feasible or ethical. Research in the field of nursing has
undergone transformation, moving from correlational to causal studies (Costa & Yakusheva,
2016). These causal research methods used in the field of nursing may be applied to the field of
school librarianship (Mardis et al., 2015). To study these complicated, real life situations it
becomes necessary to engage in real world interventions with intended effects which “twist the
lion’s tail” to develop a dimension of knowledge and find causal truths (Persson & Sahlin, 2009,
p. 548). Practical study designs which strengthen causal inference are possible (Costa &
Yakusheva, 2016).
Cook advocates for nonexperimental alternatives to randomized experiments “so that we
have multiple arrows in our causal method quiver” (Cook, Scriven, Coryn, & Evergreen, 2010, p.
107). Under conditions in which randomized experiments are not feasible, a quasi-experimental
design which includes manipulation of the independent variable and a comparison group may
best approach causal modeling (Youngblut, 1994). One design suggested by Cook uses a
comparison group that is geographically local and intact. This comparison group would be
matched on pretest scores to the treatment group, leading to minimal differences on a highly

46
stable measure, and reducing hidden bias. This quasi-experimental design is appropriate in fields
such as education that seek to bring about positive change (Cook et al., 2010).
The passage of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) brought forward support of
innovations developed by local leaders and educators, including evidence-based interventions
(ESSA, 2018). ESSA made more evident the need to create a foundation for causal research in
school libraries and school librarianship. As a result, the U.S. Department of Education released
guidelines which describe study designs meeting a range of levels of evidence for effective
educational studies (Mardis et al., 2018). AASL has put in place a process to advance the field of
causal research by codifying theory, testing best practices, and measuring impact of school
librarians and school library programs (Soulen, 2016). The original ideas developed at the first
CLASS forum have since been implemented in the CLASS II: Field Studies using the top two
tiers of the ESSA levels of evidence. These include strong studies using randomized control
trials and moderate studies using quasi-experimental designs (Mardis et al., 2015).

Conclusion

The literature shows that resilience can be nurtured in the working lives of teachers, and
that stress management and coping skills can be taught to increase teacher resilience (Lantieri et
al., 2011). For teachers just entering the profession, practices which promote resilience can be
put in place to support them as they face the many challenges of the classroom. Other, more
experienced professionals, including the school librarian, may provide this support through
building a collaborative partnership. Causal research methods being tested may show how to best
plan, implement, and measure the work being done in school libraries.

47
There exists no research exploring the relationship between new teacher resilience and
the role of the school librarian in caring for new teachers. The above related studies of teacher
mentoring and teacher-librarian collaboration shed some light on topics of mentoring and
collaboration. However, while the field of school libraries does emphasize the collaborative
partnership of shared expertise between the teacher and the school librarian, the disposition
toward new teachers is different. Providing a Continuum of Care for new teachers would clarify
the role of the school librarian in building new teacher resilience and retention and bring forward
an equal, balanced, truly collaborative partnership.
Several questions arise in developing this Continuum of Care for new teachers. First, how
is working with new teachers different than working with more experienced teachers for the
school librarian? Research into the mentoring role of the school librarian toward new teachers
may provide a basis for developing a closer association between these educators. Secondly, how
does mentoring combine with collaboration in the school librarian-new teacher pairing? Study of
the intersection of mentoring with collaboration to develop new teacher resilience and retention
is an important area of interest. Thirdly, how can school librarians provide a Continuum of Care
to best develop the collaborative partnership between the school librarian and new teacher? This
study proposes to determine the effectiveness of implementing a Continuum of Care by school
librarians for new teachers to build the resilience necessary to survive and thrive as classroom
teachers and to promote retention.
This chapter has reviewed the literature related to the theory of resilience as applied to
the educational setting by way of burnout, attrition, and resilience of teachers, models of
mentoring and collaboration, and interventions for developing a continuum of care for new

48
teachers. In the next chapter, the research methodology for this study of a continuum of care by
school librarians is delineated.

49
CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY

This chapter reviews the methodology of the study, beginning with the research
questions, followed by the model to be tested, the population, sample, and setting, and a
description of the interventionists. The three phases of the study are then defined. Data collection
procedures, both formal and formative, are delineated. Next, the interventions used in the study
are described. Chapter III concludes with an explanation of the methods used for data analysis,
as well as assumptions, limitations, and delimitations.
This study used a Continuum of Care model to provide interventions by school librarians
for new teachers. The interventions were intended to increase resilience of new teachers, and in
turn increase retention. Initially centering on mentoring, the interventions moved toward
collaboration over a four-month period. This study used a pre-test/post-test and a quasiexperimental matched sample design to measure resilience and retention of new teachers.
Quantitative data were collected at the initiation of the study and after the termination of the
interventions. Patterns identified through the quantitative data were supported by qualitative data
to further explain the meaning behind these patterns.

Research Questions

Four research questions guided this study. The first two focus on new teacher resilience.
The third and fourth research questions center on new teacher burnout and retention,
respectively.

50
RQ1: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school year?
H1: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian
significantly increase their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school
year.
RQ2: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
H2: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian
demonstrate significantly higher scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as
compared to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.
RQ3: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
H3: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian
demonstrate significantly lower scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year
as compared to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.
RQ4: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their intent to return to their current teaching position as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?

51
H4: New teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school librarian are
significantly more likely to intend to return to their current teaching position as compared
to new teachers who do not receive these interventions.

The Continuum of Care:
School Librarian Interventions for New Teacher Resilience

This study tested the Continuum of Care Model of School Librarian Interventions for
New Teacher Resilience (see Figure 6), which merged a continuum of care model used in the
field of medicine (Nicholson, 2013) with the Teacher and Librarian Collaboration Model
(Montiel-Overall, 2008) used in the field of school libraries. In the Continuum of Care model
implemented in this study, the school librarians provided interventions for new teachers over a
four-month period. The interventions were book-ended by a measure to determine levels of
resilience of new teachers and followed by measures to determine levels of
mentoring/collaboration and levels of new teacher burnout and retention.

52

Measure

Engage

Resilience

Partner

Co-Teach

Interventions
Over
Time
Mentoring toward Collaboration

Demographics

Oct 2017

Empower

Transactional

Interactional

Reciprocal

Interoperable

Coordination

Cooperation

Integrated
Instruction

Integrated
Curriculum

Assess
&
Provide
Information

Mentoring
Induction

Building
Skills
&
Relations

Collegial
Professional
Relationship

Nov 2017

Dec 2017

Jan 2018

Feb 2018

Measure
Resilience
Mentoring/
Collaboration
Burnout
Retention

Mar-Apr 2018

Figure 6. Continuum of Care Model of School Librarian Interventions for New Teacher Resilience

Each of the four months of interventions was guided by a theme. In the first half of the
interventions, the school librarians served in a mentoring role. In the second half of the
interventions, the role of the school librarian turned toward a more collaborative stance. The aim
of the interventions was first to engage the new teachers by assessing and providing information,
then to empower them through mentoring and induction activities. Later interventions were
meant to partner with the new teachers to build skills and relations, and finally co-teach as
collegial partners. Interventions were laid out on a prescribed calendar from October to February
of one school year. This calendar of interventions also developed the collaborative relationship in
accordance with the Montiel-Overall model of collaboration. The ultimate goal of these
interventions was to increase resilience of new teachers, and in turn improve retention. Figure 7
lays out the Continuum of Care model in more detail, which will be discussed throughout the rest
of this chapter.

53
Methodology
Mentoring toward Collaboration
PreIntervention
Measures

Interventions over Time

Post-Intervention
Measures

Treatment Group (n = 26)
Matched Comparison Group based on initial level of
resilience, school level, Title I status of school (n = 26)
Mentoring

Collaboration

Empower

Partner

Co-Teach

Demographics

Transactional
Coordination

Interactional
Cooperation

Reciprocal
Integrated
Instruction

Interoperable
Integrated
Curriculum

Initial
Resilience:
CD-RISC 10

Assess &
Provide
Information

Mentoring &
Induction

Building Skills
& Relations

Collegial
Professional
Relationship

Weekly
Focus
1. Welcome
(w/Needs
Assessment)
2. Resilience
Resource
3. Schedule
Library
Activity
4. Quick
Check-In
5. Connection

Weekly Focus
6 Resources at
the Ready
7. Gather
Instructional
Resources
8. Celebrate
Success!

Weekly Focus
9. Plan
10. Co-Analyze
Student Data
11. Gather
Resources
12. Write
Lesson Plan(s)

Weekly Focus
13. Curriculum
Co-Planning/
Student CoAssessment
14.–15. Coteaching
16. Student CoAssessment
17. Reflect

Formative Measures; School Librarian Demographics

Engage

Oct 2017
Nov 2017
Dec 2017
Jan 2018
Feb 2018
Figure 7. School Librarian Interventions for New Teacher Resilience

Resilience: CD-RISC 10
Over Time/ ANOVA
Between-Groups/ ANCOVA

Retention: Notice of Intent
Between-Groups/ Logistic
Regression

Mentoring & Collaboration
Items
Between-Groups/ T-test

Burnout: MBI-ES
Between-Groups/ ANCOVA

Interviews (6)
Three SL-NT Pairs/
Phenomenology/
Horizontalization
Mar-Apr 2018

54
Population, Setting, and Sample

The population under study was new teachers, defined as teachers in their first year of
full-time contracted work in a teaching position. This study took place in fourteen K-12 schools
in an urban school district in the mid-Atlantic United States. According to the National Center
for Educations Statistics (National Center for Education Statistics, 2018) in school year 20162017 this district employed approximately 2,300 teachers for 32,000 students. Of these, 42 were
library media specialists, also known as school librarians. Of the 52 schools grades PreK-12 in
the district, 34 were designated Title I (Early Learning and Title I, 2018).

School Librarian Interventionists
Fifteen school librarians were recruited through the district Office of Media Services by
inviting volunteers. Demographic data (see Table 5) were collected for school librarian
characteristics to describe the interventionists. A Qualtrics questionnaire was disseminated via
district email in January 2018 to the school librarians serving as interventionists. Responses were
stored in a password protected file. Demographic questions included highest educational
attainment, teaching certification(s), number of years of teaching experience including library,
number of years of experience as a school librarian, school level, gender, age, and race.

55
Table 5. Demographic Composition of School Librarian Sample
Demographic Variable
N = 15
School Level
PreK-5
PreK-8
3-8
6-8
9-12

School Librarians
Total (%)

6
2
1
2
4

40.0
13.3
6.6
13.3
26.7

15
15

100.0
100.0

4
1
1
3
1
2
1
1

26.7
6.7
6.7
20.0
6.7
13.3
6.7
6.7

Highest Education Attainment
B.A. or B.S.
Masters’ degree(s)
MLIS
PhD, Md, EdD, or JD

1
12
1
1

6.7
80.0
6.7
6.7

Years of Teaching Experience
0-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26+

1
1
3
4
3
3

6.7
6.7
20.0
26.7
20.0
20.0

Years of Experience School Library
0-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26+

4
3
6
2
0
0

26.7
20.0
40.0
13.3
0.0
0.0

14
0
1

93.3
0.0
6.7

0
1
9
3
2

0.0
6.7
60.0
20.0
13.3

Employed Full-time
Certified School Librarian
Additional Certifications
English
Public Speaking
PreK-4
PreK-6
PreK-8
Middle Grades 4-8
Special Education
Gifted Education

Gender
Female
Male
Do not wish to disclose
Age in Years
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

56
Table 5. (continued)
Demographic Variable

N = 15

School Librarians
Total (%)

Race
African American/Black
Asian
Caucasian/White
Native American

5
0
10
0

33.3
0.0
66.7
0.0

These librarians who agreed to serve as interventionists for this study worked in 14
schools, as two (13%) of the librarians worked in the same high school. Six (40%) worked in
elementary schools (PreK-5), two (13%) in PreK-8, one (7%) in 3-8, two (13%) in middle
schools (6-8) and four (27%) were in high schools (9-12). Of these 14 schools, ten were Title I
schools whose students benefit from supplemental funding through specific interventions,
additional resources, and professional development due to low socioeconomic demographics
(Early Learning and Title I, 2018).
For the purpose of this study, all school librarians who served as interventionists were
required to be full-time and certified according to state standards and have at least three years of
experience as either a school librarian or a teacher. Several of the librarians had multiple
additional certifications, including English, Public Speaking, PreK-4, PreK-6, PreK-8, Middle
Grades 4-8, Special Education, and Gifted Education. All of the school librarians had a least a
four year university degree. Eighty percent had earned a master’s degree as their highest
educational attainment. Two (13%) had attained a terminal degree. All had teaching experience,
with 87% having ten or more years in the classroom. Experience in the school library varied
from 0-5 years to 16-20 years.

57
All of the school librarians were female, except one who chose to not disclose gender. All
were at least 30 years of age, with eighty percent being between 40 and 59 years. All were either
African American/Black, or Caucasian, with the majority (67%) being Caucasian.
Structured training and support of the mentors is an important building block of a
successful mentoring program (Evertson & Smithey, 2000; Lorenzetti & Powelson, 2015). For
this reason, a professional development session for the school librarians who served as
interventionists was administered in October 2017 by the researcher. The purpose of this
professional development was to train the school librarians as interventionists. The research
questions, purpose of the study, and measures to be used were reviewed. The researcher
discussed the interventions, and gave directions for implementation, then discussed the
“housekeeping” aspects of the study, such as stipends and drawings. At the end of the meeting
the researcher was available to answer questions and the interventionists signed the mentoring
toward collaboration agreement (see Appendix D).
A second professional development session for the school librarians serving as
interventionists was planned for January 2018, midway through the study. Unfortunately, winter
weather caused disarray to the school calendar, resulting in the professional day being cancelled.
However, communication between the researcher and the interventionists via email and
telephone was ongoing throughout the study. A weekly email from the researcher to the school
librarians served as a reminder and outlined the week’s interventions. Additional emails
managed “housekeeping” items, such as requests that the interventionists remind the new
teachers to complete the measures, announcements of incentive winners, and communications to
motivate the librarians to continue with the interventions. Telephone conversations between the

58
researcher and interventionists provided opportunities to discuss how best to stay on track with
the calendar.
Another important component of this study was motivation of the school librarians to
continue interventions from November 2017 to February 2018. For this reason, a monetary
award was provided to each school librarian implementing the interventions (Lorenzetti &
Powelson, 2015). Each interventionist was awarded $350 for providing interventions to one new
teacher. A $50 bonus was awarded for each additional new teacher. One librarian was also
randomly selected to attend the American Library Association annual conference.

New Teachers
During preservice at the start of the 2017-2018 school year, 252 individuals signed in to
the New Teacher Induction program, conducted by the Department of Professional Development
(personal correspondence). These teachers ranged from 0 to 26+ years of experience. Some were
first year teachers, some were long-term substitutes, others had moved to the area, some were
retired teachers who were returning to fill empty positions. Of the attendees, 87 self-reported that
they had 0 years of teaching experience. Additionally, as of September 30, 2017, the district’s
Department of Human Resources listed 261 faculty new to the district, including teachers, library
media specialists, nurses, school psychologists, and other non-classroom positions (personal
correspondence). These faculty represented both experienced and new to the field professionals.
From these two lists, and with the assistance of school library media specialists and building
level lead teacher mentors, the researcher was able to identify 133 teachers who were in their
first year of teaching as of October 30, 2017. From this master list, the librarians serving as
interventionists then recruited new teachers in their buildings to participate in the study.

59
The purpose of the October 2017 questionnaire was to establish the initial resilience level
of the new teachers to match the comparison group to the treatment group, and to collect
demographic information. This pre-test questionnaire consisted of the CD-RISC 10 plus nine
demographic items. Also within this questionnaire, respondents created a personal identifier to
track respondents anonymously between measures. This questionnaire was sent to 133 teachers
in the district who had been identified as first year. Data were collected in two groups, the
treatment group and those new teachers not in the treatment group. There were 105 total
responses, a 79% response rate. However, several teachers responded multiple times to the
questionnaire, and some responses were not from new teachers according to the parameters of
this study.

Overall New Teacher Demographics
After removing responses from individuals who responded multiple times and those who
did not fit within the parameters of the study, there were eighty new teachers’ responses to the
October 2017 questionnaire (see Table 6). Of these, 95% reported being in their first contract
year. Four of the new teachers who responded to the October questionnaire indicated that they
were not in their first contract year. The researcher was able to ascertain that all new teachers in
the treatment group were first year. However, due to the anonymity of the questionnaire, it was
not possible to ascertain the actual experience level of other respondents, who may have had
some teaching experience in a capacity which did not fit the parameters of this study. Seventy six
percent of respondents reported that their school received Title I support. Respondents were
fairly well distributed across school levels, with 23% teaching in grades K-2, 20% in grades 3-5,
35% in grades 6-8, and 23% in grades 9-12.

60
Table 6. Demographic Composition of October 2017 New Teacher Questionnaire Respondents
Demographic Variable
N = 80
First Contract Year
Yes
No

New Teachers
Total (%)

76
4

95.0
5.0

Yes
No

61
19

76.3
23.8

Grade Level
K-2
3-5
6-8
9-12

18
16
28
18

22.5
20.0
35.0
22.5

Certified in Subject Area
Yes
No

62
18

77.5
22.5

Subject Area
English/Language Arts
Foreign Language
Health/Physical Education
Mathematics
Music/Art
Science
Social Studies
Special Education
Technology
School Counselor
Other Academic
Other Elective

18
1
2
6
5
10
3
14
1
1
16
3

22.5
1.3
2.5
7.5
6.3
12.5
3.8
17.5
1.3
1.3
20.0
3.8

Highest Education Attainment
B.A. or B.S.
Masters’ degree(s)
PhD, Md, EdD, or JD

38
41
1

37.5
51.2
1.3

67
12
1

83.8
15.0
1.3

44
21
12
3
0

55.0
26.3
15.0
3.8
0.0

Title I

Gender
Female
Male
Do not wish to disclose
Age in Years
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

61

Table 6. (Continued)
Demographic Variable
N = 80

New Teachers
Total (%)

Race
African American/Black
Asian
Caucasian/White
Native American
Other
(African American/Black
and Caucasian/White)
(Mixed)

28
3
44
0

35.0
3.8
55.0
0.0

3
1

3.8
1.3

The demographic data collected for teacher characteristics included highest educational
attainment, subject area certification, grade level, subject area, Title I status of the school,
gender, age, and race. Seventy-eight percent of respondents were certified in the subject area
they taught. Forty-eight percent taught in the core content areas. Fifteen percent of respondents
indicated by open-ended response that they taught all subjects or elementary education. Seven
(9%) respondents taught electives, while 2 (3%) taught health and physical education. Eighteen
percent were special education teachers. Other reported academic areas included Naval Science,
Preschool, Special Education, and Speech Therapy. Other electives included Economics and
Personal Finance, Family and Consumer Sciences, and Social Skills. Most respondents (51%)
had earned a Master’s degree. Thirty-eight percent had earned a Bachelor of Arts or Science as
their highest level of educational attainment, with only one percent having attained a terminal
degree.
Women were by far more strongly represented (84%) than men, with one new teacher
choosing not to disclose gender. The new teachers tended to be younger than the school

62
librarians, with the majority (55%) being 20-29 years old and the oldest (4%) being 50-59 years
old. Like the librarians, almost all were either African American/Black (35%), or Caucasian
(55%), or mixed African American Black and Caucasian/White (4%), with three (4%) new
teachers identifying as Asian (4%) and one as unidentified mixed race.
The 80 new teachers who responded to the October 2017 questionnaire were overall
older, reflected more racial diversity, and were more female than expected. Sixty five percent of
these new teachers were more than 30 years of age as compared to National Center for Education
Statistics data which indicate that 29% of first year teachers nationwide in 2007-2008 were more
than 30 years of age. New teachers who responded to the questionnaire were more racially
diverse (45% African American/Black, Asian, or mixed), when compared to national data (22%
not Caucasian/white). There were more than expected new teachers who were female. Eighty
four percent of new teachers in this district were female, compared to 75% nationally. The new
teachers were more educated than the national average. Fifty one percent held a master’s degree,
compared to 18% nationally (Raue & Gray, 2015).

Treatment and Comparison Group Demographics
There were 33 responses to the questionnaire for the treatment group. Using the personal
identifier, the researcher was able to determine that five teachers completed the questionnaire
more than one time. In order to use data entered closest to the beginning of the school year, the
data entered first were retained. One teacher, who was not a new teacher in the first contract
year, was removed from the intervention population. This reduced the number of valid responses
for the treatment group to n = 27. Of these 27 valid cases, 25 replied to the first demographic
question confirming that they were in the first contract year of teaching. However, the researcher

63
was able to independently verify via the school librarians and their principals that all 27 cases
were, indeed, in the first contract year of teaching (personal correspondence). One new teacher in
the treatment group did not complete the October questionnaire. Therefore, the analysis sample
size used for the treatment group was n = 26.
Twenty-three of these new teachers in the treatment group reported that they taught in a
Title I school. However, the researcher was able to independently verify that 21 of these new
teachers (81%) in the treatment group actually taught in schools which received Title I funding.
The setting of the 26 cases in the treatment group was nearly equally divided across grade
levels (see Table 7). Twenty new teachers (77%) were certified in the subject area in which they
were currently teaching. Seven (27%) taught English/Language Arts, six (23%) taught Science,
three (12%) taught Special Education, one (4%) taught Mathematics, and one (4%) taught
Music/Art. Six (23%) respondents also reported teaching in another academic area, including
teachers of multiple subjects. Additionally, two (8%) respondents reported teaching in other
elective areas. Of these 26 new teachers, 10 (39%) reported that they had earned a Bachelor of
Arts or Science degree, while 16 (67%) had attained a Masters’ degree.

64
Table 7. Demographic Composition of Treatment and Comparison Groups
Demographic Variable
n =26

Treatment
Total (%)

Comparison
n =26
Total (%)

Title I School
Yes
No

21
5

80.8
19.2

22
4

84.6
15.4

Grade Level
K-2
3-5
6-8
9-12

7
6
7
6

26.9
23.1
26.9
23.1

5
5
7
9

19.2
19.2
26.9
34.6

20
6

76.9
23.1

20
6

76.9
23.1

7
0
0
1
1
0
6
0
3
0

26.9
0.0
0.0
3.8
3.8
0.0
23.1
0.0
11.5
0.0

5
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
6
1

19.2
3.8
7.7
3.8
7.7
3.8
11.5
3.8
23.1
3.8

6
0
0

23.1
0.0
0.0

1
1
1

3.8
3.8
3.8

1

3.8

0

0.0

1

3.8

0

0.0

10
16
0

38.5
61.5
0.0

14
12
0

53.8
46.2
0.0

25
1
0

96.2
3.8
0.0

18
7
1

69.2
26.9
3.8

16
6
3
1
0

61.5
23.1
11.5
3.8
0.0

12
8
5
1
0

46.2
30.8
19.2
3.8
0.0

Subject Certified
Yes
No
Subject Areas
English/Language Arts
Foreign Language
Health/Physical Education
Mathematics
Music/Art
School Counselor
Science
Social Studies
Special Education
Technology
Other Academic
(Multiple Subjects)
(Naval Science)
(Preschool)
Other Elective
(Economics and Personal
Finance)
(Social Skills)

Highest Education Attainment
B.A. or B.S.
Masters’ degree(s)
PhD, Md, EdD, or JD
Gender
Female
Male
Do not wish to disclose
Age in Years
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

65
Table 7. (Continued)
Demographic Variable

n =26

Treatment
Total (%)

Comparison
n =26
Total (%)

Race
African American/Black
Asian
Caucasian/White
Native American
Other
(African American/Black
and Caucasian/White)
(Mixed)

11
0
14
0

42.3
0.0
53.8
0.0

10
0
14
0

38.5
0.0
53.8
0.0

1

3.8

1

3.8
3.8

0

0.0

1

One (4%) new teacher in the treatment group was male. Sixteen (62%) were 20 to 29
years old, six (23%) were 30 to 39 years, three (12%) were 40 to 49 years, and one (4%) was 50
to 59 years. The new teachers in the treatment group were composed of two races. Eleven (42%)
were African American/Black, 14 (54%) were Caucasian/White, and one (4%) was black and
white.

Overall Initial Resilience

The CD-RISC 10, which constituted the first ten questions of the October 2017 New
Teacher Questionnaire, measures resilience on a scale of 0 to 40 by a simple sum of responses.
The 80 new teachers who responded to the October 2017 questionnaire (see Table 8) ranged in
scores from 18 to 40. These new teachers evidenced a mean resilience score of 30.8, SD = 4.98.
This compares to a mean score of 31.78 (SD = 5.41) found in a broad study of 764 residents of
metropolitan Memphis (Campbell-Sills et al., 2009) whose scores on the CD-RISC 10 raged
from 9 to 40. Similar results were also obtained in another population (N = 238) of women who

66
had been exposed/not exposed to breast cancer (Scali et al., 2012). In their sample the median
score on the CD-RISC 10 was 27 (range 22–32), and scores were classified in three categories, 
23 (low), 24-29 (medium), and  29 (high). Responses in the current study showed both negative
skew (-0.40) and somewhat negative kurtosis (-0.15), far under the cautionary threshold of 0.7.

Table 8. Overall New Teacher Initial Resilience
CD-RISC 10
Mean
Standard Deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Skewness
Kurtosis

N = 80
30.75
4.98
18.00
40.00
-0.397
Std. Error 0.27
-0.151
Std. Error 0.532

A nearest neighbor matched sample of 26 new teachers was selected for the comparison
group from those new teachers who completed the October 2017 questionnaire but were not in
the treatment group. Initial resilience levels of the comparison group and the treatment group
were used as the primary mechanism to define the matched sample.
Over the course of the study, formative data indicated that high school librarians had the
faced greater barriers to implementing the treatment than did elementary and middle school
librarians. The formative data showed that this may be due to the size of the schools, the
geographic distance from the new teacher’s classroom to the school library (Freedman & Jaffe,
1993), additional responsibilities assigned to the high school librarians, or a combination of the

67
three. Therefore, grade level was used as the secondary mechanism to define the matched
sample.
Gu and Day (2013) found that teachers working in socioeconomically disadvantaged
schools were “more likely to report unstable, fluctuated personal, situational, and professional
scenarios” which required more energy for the teacher “to sustain their capacity to be resilient”
(p. 29). Additionally, the literature indicated that early career teachers in schools serving high
percentages of students of low socioeconomic status (SES) were more likely to burn out than
their counterparts in high-SES schools (Kim et al., 2017). Retention rates have also been found
to be higher for teachers in schools with less than 50% of students receiving free or reducedprice lunch (Raue & Gray, 2015). For these reasons, Title I status was used as the tertiary
mechanism to define the matched sample. Twenty-two of these new teachers in the comparison
group (85%) reported that they taught in a Title I school.
The treatment and comparison groups were similar. Each group consisted of 26 first year
teachers in one urban public-school district. Socioeconomic status of the schools in which these
teachers worked was comparable. Eighty five percent of new teachers in the comparison group
worked in a Title I school, while 81% of new teachers in the treatment group worked in a Title I
school, a difference of only one teacher. Certification in the subject area being taught was
exactly equal, at 77% for both the comparison and treatment group. New teachers in the two
groups were also similar by race. Thirty nine percent of new teachers in the comparison group
were African American/Black while 42% of new teachers in the treatment group were African
American/Black, a difference of only one teacher. The Caucasian/White race was equally
represented in both groups (54%), as was Mixed African American/Caucasian at 4%.

68
The grade levels taught by the comparison group respondents weighted somewhat toward
the secondary level, with high school more highly represented in the comparison group (35%)
than in the treatment group. Similar to the treatment group, twenty new teachers in the
comparison group (77%) were certified in the subject area in which they were currently teaching.
Five (19%) taught English/Language Arts, one (4%) taught Foreign Language, two (8%) taught
Health/Physical Education, one (4%) taught Mathematics, two (8%) taught Music/Art, one (4%)
was a School Counselor, three (12%) taught Science, one (4%) taught Social Studies, six (23%)
were Special Education teachers, one (4%) taught Technology, and three (11%) taught in other
academic disciplines, including multiple subjects, Naval Science, and Preschool. Of these 26
new teachers in the comparison group, 14 (54%) reported that they had earned a Bachelor of Arts
or Science degree, while 12 (46%) had attained a Masters’ degree.
There were more male teachers in the comparison group (27%) than in the treatment
group. The comparison group was somewhat older than the treatment group. Twelve (46%) were
20 to 29 years old, eight (31%) were 30 to 39 years, five (19%) were 40 to 49 years, and one
(4%) was 50 to 59 years. Almost all the new teachers in the treatment group were composed of
two races. Ten (39%) were African American/Black, 14 (54%) were Caucasian/White, one (4%)
was African American and Caucasian, and one (4%) was mixed race.
An important component of this study was motivation to continue participation through
the four-month time period. For this reason, a drawing for a $50.00 gift card was attached to each
new teacher formal measure, and a drawing for a $25.00 gift card was attached to the formative
measure. In addition, one participant from the treatment group was randomly selected each
month during the treatment phase to receive a $50 gift card.

69

The Study in Phases

This quasi-experimental study (Leedy & Ormrod, 2016) progressed in three phases. The
first phase consisted of initial data collection from all responding district new teachers. The
second phase comprised the interventions by school librarians for the new teachers in the
treatment group only. The third phase consisted of final data collection from all responding
district new teachers.

Phase I: Initial Data Collection
Initial data were collected in the first phase of the study (see Figure 8) during October of
2017. The measure used to collect data in Phase I consisted of a Qualtrics questionnaire which
included the CD-RISC 10 and nine demographic items. The questionnaire was disseminated via
district email to all district new teachers, who were reminded to complete the measure by the
researcher, their school librarian, their lead teacher mentor, the district Senior Coordinator of
Professional Development, and/or a representative from Assessment, Research, and
Accountability. Data for each group were collected separately and stored in passcode protected
files for later comparison of matched samples.

70

Phase I
October 2017
All district new teachers
Initial data collection:
• CD-RISC 10
New Teacher
Demographics
Figure 8. Phase I

Phase II: Interventions
Interventions were implemented by the school librarians for the new teachers in the
treatment group during the second phase of the study (see Figure 9), from November 2017 to
February 2018. The interventions were defined by the researcher and rolled out weekly over a
four month period via a prescribed calendar. Formative assessments of intervention
implementation, and response by new teachers to interventions also took place during this phase.
Additionally, school librarian demographics were collected during Phase II.

Phase I
October 2017
All district new teachers
Initial data collection:
• CD-RISC 10

Phase II
November 2017-February 2018
Treatment group
Interventions with Formative Assessment

New Teacher
Demographics

School Librarian Demographics

Figure 9. Phase I-II

71
Phase III: Final Data Collection
Final data were collected in the third phase of the study (see Figure 10) during MarchApril 2018. The measure used to collect data in Phase III consisted of a Qualtrics questionnaire
which included the CD-RISC 10, questions to determine the level of mentoring and collaboration
between the school librarian and new teacher, a notice of intent, and the MBI-ES. As in Phase I,
the Phase II questionnaire was disseminated via district email to all district new teachers, who
were again reminded to complete the measure by the researcher as well as representatives from
various district departments. Data for each group were again collected separately and stored in
passcode protected files for later comparison between matched samples. Additionally, interviews
of school librarian and new teacher pairs took place during Phase III.

Phase I
October 2017
All district new teachers
Initial data collection:
• CD-RISC 10

Phase II
November 2017-February 2018
Treatment group
Interventions with Formative Assessment

Phase III
March-April 2018
All district new teachers
Final data collection:
• CD-RISC 10
• Mentoring/Collaboration
items
• Notice of intent
• MBI-ES

New Teacher
Demographics

School Librarian Demographics

Six Interviews:
Treatment Group (3) and
School Librarian Interventionists
(3)

Figure 10. Phases I-III

72
Formal Data Collection

Formal data collection for this study consisted of both quantitative and qualitative data
(see Table 9). Demographic items were used to produce a description of the new teachers and
school librarians. The CD-RISC 10 and the MBI-ES were quantitative measures to assess new
teacher resilience and its inverse, burnout. Two items were used to determine the level of
mentoring and collaboration between the school librarian and new teacher. The notice of intent
served to represent retention. Qualitative data included interviews of school librarian-new
teacher pairs.

Table 9. Survey Tools Used to Measure Resilience and Retention of New Teachers
Tool
Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale 10
(CD-RISC 10)

Description
10 items to measure resilience of new teachers.

Mentoring/Collaboration Score

2 items to measure the amount of mentoring and collaboration by
school librarians for new teachers.

Maslach Burnout Inventory-Educators Survey
(MBI-ES)

22 items to measure burnout level of new teachers.

Notice of intent

Annual district yes/no survey of all teachers to determine intent to
return to current position.

Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale 10 (CD-RISC 10)
The CD-RISC 10 was used in this study as the measure of new teacher resilience.
Originally developed in a longer version, the self-report CD-RISC measures stress coping ability

73
on a 5-point scale (Connor & Davidson, 2003), and change in response to intervention (Windle
et al., 2011). The later-developed 10-question short version of the CD-RISC (Windle et al.,
2011) was selected for use in this study due to its combined brevity and psychometric ratings
(Windle et al., 2011). The shorter version allows for valid, reliable (α = .85), and efficient
measurement of resilience as a single factor (Campbell-Sills et al., 2009; Madewell & Garcia,
2016).
Mentoring and Collaboration Items
Two items on the March questionnaire measured the level of mentoring and collaboration
between the school librarian and the new teacher. Respondents answered these two items on a 6point scale from “Strongly Disagree” to “Strongly Agree.”
“My school librarian has provided for my needs through mentoring.”
“My school librarian has worked closely with me through instructional collaboration.”
The purpose of these two questions was to collect quantitative data to validate the relationship
between the school librarian and the new teacher. Values for these two items were summed
during data analysis to provide an overall mentoring/collaboration score.

Maslach Burnout Inventory-Educators Survey (MBI-ES)
The MBI-ES was used in this study as the measure of new teacher burnout, assumed to
be the inverse of resilience. The 22 item self-report MBI-ES was selected from the literature as a
measure used in other studies of teacher resilience (Beltman et al., 2011; Goddard & O’Brien,
2004; Klusmann et al., 2008; Lantieri et al., 2011). This instrument has been used as a valid and

74
reliable measure of emotional exhaustion (α = .90), depersonalization (α = .76), and personal
accomplishment (α = .76) (Maslach et al., 1981; Maslach et al., 1996). The MBI-ES uses a 7point scale to evaluate low, average, or high levels of burnout (Maslach et al., 1981; Maslach et
al., 1996).

Notice of Intent
A notice of intent was used in this study to represent new teacher retention. In this school
district, the notice of intent is standard annual practice by the district Human Resources
department to determine preparation of contracts for the upcoming school year. In March of each
school year, all district teachers are asked to complete a notice of intent, which is worded as
follows.
“Please select one of the following.
o I wish to continue my employment for the next school year.
o I do not wish to continue my employment for the next school year.”
The purpose of this notice of intent for the district is to indicate to the Department of Human
Resources that the teacher requests a contract be drawn up for the following school year. Human
Resources then produces contracts for teachers to be signed at the end of the school year
(personal correspondence). For the purpose of this study, the notice of intent is used to represent
retention of the new teachers in the same position for the upcoming school year. For
clarification, this wording was adapted to the following for the March 2018 questionnaire.
“Please select the response that best describes yourself.

75
o I intend to continue my employment in my present position for the next school year.
o I do NOT intend to continue my employment in my present position for the next
school year.”

Interviews
The qualitative section of this study of first year teachers and school librarians
investigated the contributions that school librarians made in building resilience of new teachers
through interviews of school librarian-new teacher pairs (Soulen, 2018). Phenomenology was
appropriate in that the researcher attempted to describe a phenomenon in its natural setting
(Hayes & Singh, 2012), the lived experience of new teachers who had received special attention
from their school librarians. Through the tradition of phenomenology, the researcher attempted
to understand the essence of the participant’s experiences with the process of mentoring toward
collaboration, since each new teacher brought a unique perspective of this process. Additionally,
since the interventionists contributed their own efforts to the process, it was useful to understand
the school librarians’ perceptions of the mentoring toward collaboration experience. Personal
interviews were used to establish the interventionist and participant voices, and to illuminate
resilience strategies (Hayes & Singh). By using a phenomenological approach, the researcher
attempted to understand the essence of the school librarians’ and new teachers’ subjective
experiences and describe the collective experience of these study interventionists and
participants.
Six interviews of school librarians and new teachers informed practice to provide rich
description (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) of the processes of building resilience. First, one

76
school librarian who was serving as an interventionist was randomly selected at each school level
including elementary, middle, and high school. Then, one of her new teachers from the treatment
group was randomly selected. The six possible participants were contacted via email.
Participation in the interviews was voluntary. Both the school librarian and the new teacher in
the pairing consented in order for the interviews to proceed. Interviews were scheduled at the
convenience of the interviewee. In this way, arrangements were made to interview three school
librarian-new teacher pairs.
New teachers and their librarians were interviewed separately to encourage
trustworthiness of description and informed consent documents were provided. The
approximately 40-minute face-to-face interviews took place in the new teacher’s building, either
in the classroom or in a private room in the school library. Digital voice recordings of the
interviews were stored under lock until transcribed, then destroyed. Use of recordings of
interviews was appropriate to mitigate researcher bias, and to allow the researcher to better focus
on the interview, ask probing questions, and be responsive to the participant (Good, 1966;
Patton, 2002). Confidentiality of all interview data was protected.
Personal interviews were used to gain further insight into the process of mentoring
toward collaboration. A semi-structured interview protocol (see Appendix C) which was
developed from a blueprint allowed for participant clarification, elaboration, and explanation.
The purpose of these interviews was to uncover characteristics (Creswell & Singh, 2012) of the
relationship between the school librarian and new teacher.
At the close of each interview, the researcher completed a summary sheet for each
participant to record thoughts and impressions from the interview. Throughout the interview
process, the researcher continued to document thoughts and reflections, and record memos to be

77
integrated into field notes (Hays & Singh, 2012). This use of memoing to create an audit trail
was appropriate in that qualitative research is recursive and data collection occurs simultaneously
with data analysis (Hays & Singh, 2012).

Formative Data Collection

The purpose of collecting the formative data was to track the progress of the school
librarian-new teachers through the calendar of interventions. The new teacher formative
assessment allowed for open response to the interventions. The school librarian formative
assessment tracked the implementation of interventions and allowed for comments on the
process. Additionally, site visits were used to verify implementation of the interventions, and
field notes were used to record the researcher’s reactions and to manage the study.

New Teacher Formative Assessment
A mid-study formative assessment of the response to intervention (see Appendix B) was
distributed to the treatment group using a Qualtrics questionnaire via a link within a district
email. The questionnaire consisted of a single, open-ended question which related back to the
monthly themes for November and December.
“Please describe your engagement with your school librarian over the past six weeks.
How has this empowered you as a new teacher? Examples may include mentoring and
induction, resources, planning, instruction, collaboration, or other related topics.”

78
This formative assessment of new teacher response also included items to build a unique
identifier code to match the respondent anonymously to their October questionnaire responses.
To encourage response, the new teachers also had the opportunity within the questionnaire to
enter a raffle for a $25 VISA gift card. The purpose of this formative assessment of new teacher
response was to record the new teachers’ response to the interventions.

School Librarian Calendar of Interventions Checklist
The school librarians serving as interventionists were requested to keep a checklist to
demonstrate the progression of the school librarians and new teachers through the interventions.
To follow up on this, a mid-study formative assessment of the interventions (see Appendix B)
was distributed to the school librarians via a document attached within a district email. This
consisted of a checklist of the calendar of interventions and open-ended comment opportunities.
The librarians were instructed to enter the date, or approximate date, that the intervention took
place. To return the checklist, the librarians selected to either send via district pony mail to
preserve anonymity, or by attaching in a reply email as a more convenient, but not anonymous,
response. The purpose of this formative assessment was to demonstrate that the interventions
were being implemented as scheduled.

Site Visits
Site visits were made by a representative from the district Department of Assessment,
Research, and Accountability. The purpose of these site visits was to ensure that interventions
were implemented to safeguard the integrity of the study.

79
Field Notes
Field notes were kept by the researcher to create accurate and thorough records of
activities (Hays & Singh, 2012). These field notes took several forms. Many of the field notes
were email correspondence between the researcher, the school librarians serving as
interventionists, and the school district administrators who were overseeing the study. Notes
were also kept of telephone conversations. The researcher also kept a written journal as the study
progressed. Other evidence of the progress of the study was kept in a digital “show and tell”
folder which included photos and images as well as text. The purpose of these field notes was to
manage and record the activities taking place throughout the study.

Interventions

Montiel-Overall’s Teacher and Librarian Collaboration model (Montiel-Overall, 2008)
used four facets of collaboration on a continuum, namely coordination, cooperation, integrated
instruction and integrated curriculum. Based on the Montiel-Overall model, this study focused on
one of Montiel’s facets for each month of interventions. The Continuum of Care which was
developed for this study “starts small and evolves” (Turner, 2014), building over time to develop
both the school librarian-new teacher bond and the resilience of the new teacher.
To test the Continuum of Care Model, interventions were implemented in four stages of
engagement, empowerment, partnering, and co-teaching. Each stage corresponded to one month
of the intervention phase. These interventions initiated with the librarians first engaging the new
teachers in the Continuum of Care. Once the librarian-new teacher connection had been made,

80
the librarian served in a mentoring role to empower the new teacher. As the implementation of
the Continuum of Care model progressed, the librarians’ role turned toward a more collaborative
partnership, culminating in co-taught lesson(s) in a full and equal partnership.
Weekly standardized interventions to build resilience, defined by the researcher and
implemented by the school librarians, progressed on the Continuum of Care from November
2017 through February 2018. These interventions were targeted at augmenting the protective
factors measured by the resilience scales to build resilience in new teachers. The interventions
built a structure of support around the new teacher as the process with the intended products of
increased new teacher resilience and retention.

Engage
The aim of the November 2017 interventions was to engage the new teachers in a
relationship with the school librarian. These interventions set the stage for later mentoring and
collaborative activities. Opening activities (see Table 10) centered on transactional coordination
(Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012) to initiate the school librarian-new teacher partnership,
which represents a different kind of mentoring outside of traditional classroom instructional
mentoring (Morris, 2015). Interventions during November focused on engagement and
coordination between the school librarian (SL) and the new teacher (NT). Assessment of the new
teacher’s needs and provision of information about resilience to the new teacher were key to this
month’s interventions.

81
Table 10. November Interventions
Week 1 October 30-November 3 Welcome (five school days)
• The school librarian (SL) will send a welcome email (Lipton & Wellman, 2003; Morris, 2015) to the new
teachers (NTs) they will be working with in their building. In order to standardize practice, this email will be
developed by the researcher and provided to the SLs to be sent verbatim to the new teachers (see Appendix
D).
• The SL will follow up the email with the first of three classroom visits (Kymes & Gillean, 2014) to each of
the NTs’ classrooms in her building to welcome them to the school. During this visit the SL will perform a
short needs assessment consisting of an informal interview of the NT by the SL (Morris, 2015). The
interview will consist of three questions provided by the researcher. SLs at individual schools will be asked
to respond to the needs assessment to suggest instructional materials in a variety of formats in the NT’s
subject area to help diverse learners (Turner & Riedling, 2003). As needed, the SL will provide library
equipment and instruction in its use.
New Teacher Needs Assessment
Resource
Question
Physical
1. What physical resources do you need to assist you in building resilience?
Human
2. What human resources can I connect you to which will assist you in building resilience?
Digital
3. What digital resources do you need to assist you in building resilience?
Week 2 November 6, 8-9 2017 Resilience (three school days)
• The SL will visit the NTs’ classrooms a second time to share the APA Road to Resilience brochure provided
by the researcher. (APA, 2017).
Tuesday, November 7 Virtual Teacher Workday
•

The SL will send an e-card of encouragement (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) to her NTs during the Virtual
Teacher Workday on Tuesday, November 7, 2017. An example of an e-card tool may be found at
https://www.bluemountain.com.
Friday, November 10 Veterans Day (Schools Closed)

Week 3 November 13- 17 Schedule Library Activity (five school days)
• The SL will coordinate with their NTs either in person, via email, or via phone call to schedule time in the
next two weeks for students to participate in library activities or events (Loertscher, 2000; Montiel-Overall &
Hernandez, 2012) as individuals, small groups (Turner & Riedling, 2003), or whole class. This could be time
to read/check out books, learn to access/read ebooks, book talks, storytelling, speed-dating books, or a
special event in the library such as a Book Fair, etc. Alternatively the SL could provide opportunities for
exhibits or displays of student work (Turner & Riedling, 2003).
• The SL will informally share teaching materials, files, bulletin board displays, etc. which are relevant to the
NT in the context of her subject, grade level, or topics under instruction (Lipton & Wellman, 2003). The SL
may also offer to help the teacher produce instructional materials or locate materials from sources outside the
library (Turner & Riedling, 2003).
Week 4 November 20-22 Quick Check-In (2 ½ school days)
• The SL will check in informally with the NTs in her building (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) to keep the NT
informed of at least one new material or trend or to offer information about at least one of the latest
technologies for instruction and information (Turner & Riedling, 2003). For example, these may include new
books or materials in the library, award winning apps or websites (see AASL Best Apps and Best Websites
(http://www.ala.org/aasl/), or new equipment that is part of the library collection or school.
Wednesday, November 22 Early Release Day
Thursday, November 23-Friday, November 24 Thanksgiving Break

82
Table 10. (Continued)
Week 5 November 27-December 1 Connection (five school days)
• The SL will coordinate with the NTs in her building to connect each to at least three other contacts who can
help support the new teacher’s development (Trees, 2016).
• The SL will connect classroom learning to the school library program by promoting and supporting the
current instructional program by highlighting classroom activities through the school media such as an inhouse news show or newsletter or district-wide or local news media (Turner & Riedling, 2003).

Empower
Moving higher on the collaboration continuum (Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012),
interventions for December 2017 (see Table 11) concentrated on activities of interactional
cooperation between the school librarian and the new teachers(s) at her school. These December
activities further established the mentoring relationship, with greater emphasis placed on
empowering the new teacher in her role as a professional educator.

Table 11. December Interventions
Week 6 December 4-8 Resources at the Ready (five school days)
• The SL will visit the teacher in her classroom a third time to provide resources at the ready (Morris, 2015) in
the form of the school district’s Office of Media Services Reference Resources brochure [brochure not
appended due to district identification] which may be edited by the individual school librarian to include any
extra resources provided by that school. The SL will review these available digital resources with the NT,
either on paper or by accessing the Reference Resources page on the district website. The SL also will make
suggestions for integration of these resources into classroom lessons and encourage the NTs to explore their
use.
• The SL will encourage the NTs to bring a colleague to the library to discuss resources available through the
library and future school librarian-teacher collaboration (Trees, 2016).
Week 7 December 11-15 Gather Instructional Resources (five school days)
• The SL will ask the NTs either in person, via email, or via phone about relevant topics for classroom
instruction, then gather instructional resources in any format to deliver to the NTs’ classrooms or place on
reserve in the library (Loertscher, 2000; Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012; Morris, 2015; Turner &
Riedling, 2003).
• The SL will set up a face-to-face social event (Trees, 2016) with the NTs, such as sharing a coffee or
breakfast biscuit, or meeting after school for a soda. Receipts ($20.00) can be sent to the researcher for
reimbursement.
Week 8 December 18-20 Celebrate Success! (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) (three school days)
• The SL will identify an area of strength of the NT and send an email to an administrator celebrating the
success (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) and CC: the NT.
December 21-January 1 Winter Break

83
Partner
Interventions for January 2018 (see Table 12) focused on reciprocal integrated instruction
(Montiel-Overall, 2010) in which the school librarian-new teacher pairs jointly planned for
instruction to be implemented in February (AASL, 1988; Loertscher, 2000; Montiel-Overall and
Hernandez, 2012). The collaborative partnership was developed and primed for co-teaching,
while at the same time the mentoring role of the school librarian was continued.

Table 12. January Interventions
Week 9 January 2-5 Plan (four school days)
• The SL will attend a planning meeting (Lipton & Wellman, 2003; Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012) with
each NT, and together plan and develop a co-taught lesson or unit (Turner & Riedling, 2003) either for the
classroom or to be taught in the library. The lesson will be designed to meet the needs of the students in the
individual classroom on objectives being taught during that time frame using library resources to enhance
instruction. As part of the planning of the lesson, the librarian will offer to talk to students about using library
materials as a way to encourage life-long learning (Turner & Riedling, 2003).
• The SL and NT together will review the information provided to the NT in November about building
resilience (American Psychological Association, 2017), discuss successes and plan for future resilience
building.
Week 10 January 8-12 Co-Analyze Student Data (five school days)
• The SL and NT together will together analyze student performance data (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) in
preparation for co-taught lesson(s).
• The SL and NT will discuss ways the SL can work with the NT to teach students to locate, utilize, analyze
and produce information (Turner & Riedling, 2003).
Week 11 January 16-19 Gather Resources (four school days)
• The SL and NT will gather resources in preparation for co-taught lesson(s) (Montiel-Overall & Hernandez,
2012).
• As needed, the school librarian will offer to adapt materials to suit diverse student learning (Turner &
Riedling, 2003).
January 15 ML King Day Schools Closed
Week 12 January 22-26 Co-Write Lesson Plan(s)
• The SL and NT will collaboratively write the lesson plan(s) for co-taught lesson(s) (Lipton & Wellman,
2003; Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012).
• The SL will visit the NTs classroom to observe during instructional time to informally assess the NTs’
teaching style in preparation for co-teaching (Loertscher, 2000). The SL will later discuss with the NT any
strategies which may enhance their co-teaching.
January 29 District Professional Development Day
Office of Media Services Share Session. The SL interventionists will meet together at the district
professional development day to share the progress of their mentoring as collaboration partnerships.
January 30 Teacher Records Day

84
Co-Teach
The February 2018 interventions (see Table 13) concluded the Continuum of Care with
an interoperable integration in which the school librarian shared curriculum and student
assessment with the new teachers (AASL, 1988; Loertscher, 2000; Montiel-Overall and
Hernandez, 2012). The February interventions highlighted the collegial professional relationship
in which the school librarians and new teachers practice as equals.

Table 13. February Interventions
Week 13 January 31-February 2 Curriculum Co-Planning/Student Co-Assessment (three school days)
• The SL will attend a curriculum planning meeting with each of the three NTs in her building and participate
in instructional design and student assessment (Montiel-Overall and Hernandez, 2012). The venue for these
meetings will consist of either department meetings, grade level meetings, cluster meetings, or one-to-one
meetings depending on the planning practice in the individual school building. The SL will participate in the
role of a collaborative partner to plan curriculum implementation and student assessment (Montiel-Overall
and Hernandez, 2012).
Weeks 14-15 February 5-9 and 12-16 Co-Teaching (ten school days)
• The SL and NT together will implement co-taught collaborative lesson(s) (Montiel-Overall and Hernandez,
2012).
Week 16 February 20-23 Student Co-Assessment (four school days)
• The SL and NT together will assess student work (Lipton & Wellman, 2003; Montiel-Overall & Hernandez,
2012) from collaborative lesson(s).
• The SL and NT together will note any improvements which could be made to the mentoring toward
collaboration process (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) and forward these suggestions on to the researcher.
February 19 Presidents Day Schools Closed
Week 17 February26- March 2 Reflect (4 ½ school days)
• The SL and NT together will reflect (Lipton & Wellman, 2003) on collaborative lesson(s) through a shared
journal entry.
• The SL and NT will celebrate their mentoring toward collaboration partnership (Lipton & Wellman, 2003)
by sharing their experience at a faculty meeting, through the school newsletter, on the school website, or any
other public venue.

This calendar of interventions tested the Continuum of Care model in four stages of
engagement, empowerment, partnering, and co-teaching. These interactions between the school
librarian and the new teacher initiated in mentoring, then progressed on a scale ranging from low

85
to high collaborative endeavors (Montiel-Overall & Hernandez, 2012). The purpose of providing
these interventions to new teachers by the school librarian was to provide mentoring
opportunities and to develop planning and instructional skills of new teachers in a collaborative
partnership. This structure of support aimed to increase both the efficacy and self-efficacy of
new teachers, and in turn increase the resilience of these new teachers.

Data Analysis

Data collected included a summed mentoring/collaboration score, scores on the CD-RISC
10 and MBI-ES, the notice of intent, and interview data. Each category of data was analyzed in a
distinct way (see Table 14). A phenomenological approach was used to analyze the textural
interview data in order to understand the lived experiences of a representative selection of the
school librarians and new teachers who participated in this study. ANOVA and ANCOVA were
used to analyze the continuous CD-RISC and MBI-ES data. A t-test was used to compare the
mentoring/collaboration scores. Logistic regression was used to analyze the categorical notice of
intent data.

86
Table 14. Data Analysis
Measure

Month

Category of Data

Comparison

Analysis

Mentoring/
Collaboration
Score

Mar 2018

Continuous

Comparison Group to
Treatment Group

T-test

CD-RISC 10

Oct 2017/Mar 2018

Continuous

Treatment Group (Oct) to
Treatment Group (Mar)

ANOVA

CD-RISC 10

Mar 2018

Continuous

Comparison Group to
Treatment Group

ANCOVA

MBI-ES

Mar 2018

Continuous

Comparison Group to
Treatment Group

ANCOVA

Notice of
intent

Mar 2018

Categorical

Comparison Group to
Treatment Group

Logistic regression

Interviews

Mar-Apr 2018

Textural

Description of lived
experiences

Phenomenological

Mentoring/Collaboration Score
The purpose of collecting the mentoring/collaboration score was to compare the
treatment group to the comparison group as a check for fidelity to the model. A t-test was used to
compare the comparison group to the treatment to group for the summed mentoring/collaboration
scores.

CD-RISC 10
RQ1: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school year?
The analysis of treatment group within-subject scores on the CD-RISC 10 from October
2017 to March 2018 was compared to identify changes in resilience over the course of the study.

87
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine whether treatment group means differed
significantly (Field, 2013), from October to March, p < .05.

RQ2: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
First, the new teachers in the comparison group and the new teachers in the treatment
group were matched on their initial resilience levels, grade level taught, and Title I status of the
school. The two groups were compared based on scores on the CD-RISC 10 in March 2018.
Analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) was used to determine whether group means differed
significantly for resilience as measured by the CD-RISC 10 (Field, 2013), p < .05.

MBI-ES
RQ3: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Using the same matching criteria as for Research Question 2, the comparison group and
the treatment group were compared for burnout. Scores on the MBI-ES were compared to
determine differences in resilience as inversely evidenced by feelings of burnout. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to determine whether group means differed significantly (Field,
2013), p < .05.

88
Intent to Return
RQ4: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their intent to return to their current teaching position as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
To triangulate the data, the comparison group and the treatment group were also
compared using the notice of intent data to represent retention. Binary logistic regression was
used to determine whether group means differed significantly, p < .05.

Interview Data
The researcher, who has personal experience of mentoring and collaboration with new
teachers, wished to gain multiple perspectives leading to generalizations about this experience
(Leedy & Ormrod, 2016). To establish trustworthiness, the researcher used bracketing as a first
step to mitigate researcher bias, examining preconceived beliefs, values, and assumptions about
the research topic by putting aside prejudgments (Hayes & Singh, 2012; Leedy & Ormrod, 2016;
McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) and focusing on analysis of experience. In this way the
researcher attempted to view the phenomenon with a fresh perspective, allowing the voices of
the participants to direct the findings while searching for commonalities across participants.
The researcher conducted, recorded, and sent out for verbatim transcription all participant
interviews. To prepare for analysis, the original audio files were sent to Verbal Ink online
transcription service. The researcher reviewed the returned transcriptions to check for authentic
translation and integrity to the recording. Appropriate edits were made to the transcriptions. The
transcriptions were then organized into six digital files. Confirmability and authenticity of these

89
files was established through member checking in which the researcher provided a copy of each
participants’ transcript and allowed the opportunity for clarification and extension.
Inductive analysis of the qualitative data began with these large domains of raw data to
be generalized to themes. The researcher first conducted a preliminary read-through scan of the
database to develop an overview, while making margin notes, and beginning to form initial
codes. Next, the researcher highlighted edifying chunks of data on the transcripts and set aside
data not related to the research questions.
The researcher then created a matrix and began to sort data by moving chunked data as
variables of interest to the matrix in original format. While doing so, the researcher grouped
related new teacher and school librarian data that clustered due to similar characteristics (Hays &
Singh, 2012) by placing patterns of data together as rows on the matrix.
These sorted data were next assigned codes and the codes were condensed, thus reducing
data into meaningful named segments. The researcher coded these transcriptions through the
process of horizontalization. The researcher identified “nonrepetitive, nonoverlapping statements
in participants’ transcripts” (Hays & Singh, 2012, p. 354) then listed significant relevant
statements and assigned equal value to these statements. These systematic procedures were used
to move from significant statements to meaning units (Cresswell & Poth, 2018).
These coded data were then analyzed for themes and patterns. The data were grouped by
related codes then assigned salient sub-themes. Finally, the grouped data were again sorted and
four overarching themes were assigned. Decisions regarding coding, sorted/grouped sub-themes,
and themes were made in a recursive fashion, with the researcher returning to re-sort and regroup as new data were reviewed, and re-reviewed, and new meanings brought to light. This

90
process continued until the researcher felt satisfied that the representation of the data was
thorough and accurate.
As a final step, a peer reviewed the audit trail to evaluate the comprehensiveness and
rigor of the interview analysis (Hays & Singh, 2012). Consensus coding was used to establish
trustworthiness. The researcher and a peer reviewed the transcripts then discussed and arrived at
a shared operational definition for codes, in this way “co-creating new knowledge about the
phenomenon at hand” (Hays & Singh, 2012).
Thus, by sieving through the participant descriptions, the researcher attempted to thickly
describe and authentically condense the lived experience into its essence (Creswell & Poth,
2018; McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). Knowledge gained through this phenomenological data
analysis may identify the social relationships within the school and aid in understanding
improvement of the school community, leading to greater resilience of new teachers (Creswell &
Poth, 2018).
To interpret the data, the researcher aimed to describe the essence of new teacher
resilience, representing the data in text through discussion. The conclusions drawn were also
related to the quantitative data and compared to relevant literature. By developing textural and
structural descriptions, the researcher sought to form a composite description to answer the
questions “What happened?” and “How was the phenomena of new teacher resilience
experienced?” (Creswell & Poth, 2018).
The aim of the data analysis was to establish a systematic and procedural, evidence-based
description of school librarians and new teachers who engaged in a relationship using the

91
Continuum of Care. This analysis will be used to develop credible conclusions about the
mentoring toward collaboration experience.

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations

For this study, it is assumed that the role of the school librarian includes a unique
collaborative relationship with teachers. It is also assumed that resilience is a dynamic capacity
which may be influenced by socio-cultural factors (Johnson et al, 2016), and that resilience is a
single phenomenon which can be measured, and which impacts teacher retention. The
assumption is made that the psychological theory of resilience can be applied to educational
settings. Use of the MBI-ES as a measure of resilience assumes that burnout is inversely related
to resilience. Standard administration protocols are assumed to be followed for all measures.
The quasi-experimental design of this study meant that the researcher could not control
for confounding variables, rule out other environmental influences that may affect new teacher
resilience, or reject alternative explanations for the results, and thus cannot draw causal
inferences. Because of the size of the sample and the location in one school district in one
geographic location, the results have limited generalizability. Use of multiple intervention
strategies present difficulties when attempting to parse out which intervention(s) actually
influenced the results. The study lacked follow-up for new teachers who left the district during
the school year. Two of the instruments used are self-perception surveys which could introduce
bias into the study. The study has limited statistical power due to sample size.

92
This study was delimited to investigating teacher resilience and retention. It did not delve
into the effect of the interventions on student academic achievement. This study will inform the
development of the Continuum of Care model for building resilience of new teachers. More
research will be needed to reach any definitive conclusions.

Conclusion

The Continuum of Care model tested in this study provided interventions for new
teachers by school librarians to build resilience, reduce burnout, and in turn increase retention.
The prescriptive nature of the interventions defined the Continuum of Care which was rolled out
on a calendar of actions taken by the school librarian. The purpose of standardizing these
interventions was to engage in evidence-based research to account for the roles of the school
librarians across the district in the professional development of new teachers.
The use of initial and final measures provided the opportunity to measure growth of
within-group resilience over a four-month period and allowed for between-group comparison of
resilience, burnout, and retention using matched samples. Matched sampling created an opening
to study the influence of a full-time, certified school librarian on new teacher resilience, burnout,
and retention. Additionally, interviews provided thick description of the mentoring toward
collaboration relationships of the school librarian-new teacher pairs.
This chapter has reviewed the methodology of the study. It began with the research
questions, followed by the model to be tested, the population, sample, and setting, and a
description of the interventionists. The chapter defined the three phases of the study and

93
delineated data collection procedures, both formal and formative. Then the chapter described the
interventions used in the study. The chapter concluded with an explanation of the methods used
for data analysis as well as assumptions, limitations, and delimitations. The results of the data
analysis will be presented in Chapter IV.

94
CHAPTER IV
RESULTS

Chapter IV describes the findings for the research questions investigated for this
dissertation. The chapter presents the effects on resilience, burnout, and retention when
implementing the Continuum of Care for new teachers by school librarians. In the first section,
data are presented to establish that the comparison group and treatment group were equivalent on
resilience level prior to treatment. Then, data are presented to establish that the treatment group
did receive higher levels of mentoring and collaboration than the comparison group.
The second section presents the results for each of the four research questions. First, the
chapter presents findings for Research Question 1 and Research Question 2 based on data
obtained from the October 2017 and March 2018 CD-RISC 10, followed by results of the
interviews relating to resilience of new teachers. Next, this chapter presents findings for
Research Question 3 based on data obtained from the March 2018 MBI-ES, followed by
interview results relating to burnout. Finally, the chapter presents findings for Research Question
4 based on data obtained from the March 2018 notice of intent, followed by interview results
relating to retention. Significance levels are set at p < .05 for all tests, except as noted.
Interviews of three new teachers in the treatment group and their school librarians
provided the data for the qualitative analysis. These interviews took place at one elementary
school (K-5), one middle school (6-8), and one high school (9-12). There were four themes
developed by the researcher from the interview data, including Isolation/Connection, Provision
of Resources, Modeling Teaching Behavior, and Looking Back/Looking Forward.

95
Preliminary Analysis

In order to establish that the two groups were equivalent on resilience level prior to
treatment, an independent t-test was used to examine scores on the October 2017 CD-RISC 10
for the comparison group and treatment group (N = 52). To investigate for potential outliers, the
October 2017 CD-RISC 10 scores were first converted to z-scores, then analyzed for any scores
exceeding |3.29| (Field, 2013). The analysis revealed no outliers for the October 2017 CD-RISC
10 scores.
Application of the independent t-test assumes that the dependent variable is measured at
least at the interval level, scores are independent of one another, the populations from which the
samples are taken are normally distributed, and that samples are obtained from populations of
equal variances (Field, 2013). October 2017 CD-RISC 10 scores for the comparison and
treatment groups were measured at the interval level and were independent of one another. Thus
the first two assumptions were met. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test indicated that the October 2017
CD-RISC 10 scores did not deviate significantly from normal, D(52) = 12, p = .07.
Scores on the October 2017 CD-RISC 10 were similar for the comparison group, M =
31.04, SD = 4.266 and the treatment group, M = 30.77, SD = 5.109 (see Table 15). An
independent samples t-test confirmed that the treatment group and comparison group means (see
Table 16) were not significantly different t(50) = -.206, p = .837, d =0.06, representing a medium
effect size. This showed that in October 2017, the resilience levels of the comparison and
treatment groups were not significantly different. Levene’s test was not significant, F(1, 50) =
1.24, p = .27. Therefore equal variances were assumed.

96

Table 15. Group Statistics October 2017 CD-RISC 10
n

Mean

Std. Deviation

Std. Error Mean

Comparison

26

31.04

4.266

.837

Treatment

26

30.77

5.109

1.002

Table 16. Independent Samples T-test October 2017 CD-RISC 10 (Equal Variances Assumed)
T-test for Equality of Means
Levene’s Test for
Equality of Variances
F
Sig.
1.240

.271

Sig.
(2-tailed)
t

df

-.206

50

.837

95% Confidence Interval
of the Difference
Mean
Difference

Std. Error
Difference

Lower

Upper

-.2692

1.3054

-2.8911

2.3527

To establish that the treatment group did receive higher levels of mentoring and
collaboration than the comparison group, data were collected as part of the March 2018
questionnaire. Two items were included to evaluate the level of mentoring and collaboration
received by new teachers from their school librarian, for both the comparison group and the
treatment group.
“My school librarian has provided for my needs through mentoring.”
“My school librarian has worked closely with me through instructional collaboration.”

97
Respondents were offered a six-point Likert scale ranging from Strongly Disagree (1 point) to
Strongly Agree (6 points), with zero indicating “No librarian in my school”. Scores for the two
questions were summed to produce a total mentoring/collaboration score on a range of 0 to 12.
For the comparison group, mentoring/collaboration scores ranged from 0 to 7, with a
mean of 6.35 (SD = 4.185) and a median of 6.5 (see Table 17). For the treatment group, scores
ranged from 7 to 12, with a mean of 10.85 (SD = 1.666) and a median of 12.

Table 17. New Teacher Mentoring and Collaboration Score Descriptives
n

Median

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Std. Deviation

Std. Error Mean

Comparison

26

6.5

0

7

6.35

4.185

.821

Treatment

26

12.0

7

12

10.85

1.666

.327

A divergent bar graph (see Figure 11) shows that the perceived levels of both mentoring
and collaboration provided by the school librarians for new teachers in the treatment group were
greater than for the comparison group. Additionally, the summed mentoring/collaboration scores
(see Figure 12) present evidence that the treatment group did receive more total mentoring and
collaboration from their school librarians under the Continuum of Care model.

98

Levels of Mentoring and Collaboration
Comparison and Treatment Groups
Comparison: My school librarian has provided for my
needs through mentoring.
Treatment: My school librarian has provided for my needs
through mentoring.
Comparison: My school librarian has worked closely with
me through instructional collaboration.
Treatment: My school librarian has worked closely with
me through instructional collaboration.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Buffer 1
Strongly Disagree
SomewhatDisagree
Agree
Buffer 2

No Librarian in School
Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree

Figure 11. Levels of Mentoring and Collaboration, Comparison and Treatment Groups

Summed Mentoring/Collaboration Scores
Comparison and Treatment Groups

Comparison: Summed Score for Mentoring/Collaboration

Treatment: Summed Score for Mentoring and
Collaboration

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Buffer 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Buffer 2

Figure 12. Summed Mentoring/Collaboration Scores, Comparison and Treatment Groups

99
These mentoring/collaboration scores indicate that new teachers in the treatment group
did receive higher levels of mentoring and collaboration from their school librarian. Twenty two
of 26 new teachers in the treatment group registered a mentoring/collaboration score of at least
10 on a scale of 0-12. However, the three new teachers in the treatment group who scored a 7 on
the mentoring/collaboration scale apparently did not receive the full treatment as outlined in the
Continuum of Care model. Additionally, nine new teachers in the comparison group did appear
to have received some form of mentoring and collaboration from their school librarian.
An independent samples t-test was conducted to establish differences between
comparison group and treatment group means. Assumptions for performing the t-test were met.
Mentoring/collaboration scores were independent, and the data were measured at the interval
level. To investigate for potential outliers, mentoring/collaboration scores were converted to zscores and examined. The analysis revealed no outliers for the mentoring/collaboration scores.
Levene’s test showed that the assumption of equal variance was violated. Therefore, equal
variances were not assumed.
Results of the t-test (see Table 18) indicate that on average, participants in the treatment
group received significantly more mentoring and collaboration, t(50) = 5.094, p < .001, d = 1.42,
a very large effect size, the difference between the two means being larger than one standard
deviation (Rovai, Baker, and Ponton, 2013).

100
Table 18. Independent Samples T-test for Mentoring/Collaboration Scores
Levene's Test for
Equality of
Variances

t-test for Equality of Means
95% Confidence Interval
Sig. (2-

Equal

Mean

F

Sig.

t

df

tailed)

37.920

.000

5.094

50

.000

4.50000

.000

4.50000

Std. Error

Difference Difference

of the Difference
Lower

Upper

.88341

2.72562

6.27438

.88341

2.70212

6.29788

variances
assumed
Equal

5.094 32.729

variances not
assumed

Qualitative Analysis

To analyze the qualitative data, the researcher created a matrix and sorted the data by
moving chunked data to the matrix in original format (see Figure 13 for excerpts from the
matrix). The researcher grouped related new teacher and school librarian data by similar
characteristics (Hays & Singh, 2012), placing patterns of data together as rows on the matrix. To
identify subgroups of participants during the analysis process, new teacher data were romanized
and school librarian data were italicized. Font colors of the data were assigned by school level,
i.e. blue for elementary, red for middle, and orange for high school.
Next, the researcher coded these transcriptions through the process of horizontalization.
The data were grouped by related codes then assigned sub-themes which were identified by
color-coded background shading. Examples of these sub-themes include proximity to the library,

101
shared subject area, and school environment. The grouped data were once more sorted, and four
overarching themes were assigned, including isolation/connection, provision of resources,
modeling teaching behavior, and looking back/looking forward. As with the sub-themes, these
overarching themes were identified by color coded background shading. A peer auditor reviewed
the grid of meaning statements, codes, subthemes, and themes. The result was a thematic matrix
using type style and color to identify cases and color-coded subthemes and themes with detailed
descriptions that summarized the individuals’ experiences.
These textual descriptions were then analyzed to create a structural description in order to
identify multiple potential meanings and relationships, and to fully examine the essence of their
meaning (Hayes and Singh, 2012). The researcher carefully selected and developed significant
statements, grouping these statements by research question to get at the larger meaning of the
data. This text was used to create a narrative of the study findings.

102

Four Overarching Themes to Describe the Essence of New Teacher Resilience
What happened? How was the phenomena of new teacher resilience experienced?
Themes
RQ 1 & 2
Isolation/Connection

Subthemes

Code

Statements
“I worked with all three. They were all three in the
science department. Different schedules, but… close in
proximity. So that helped, number one, because they're
right here on this [hall].” (SL2@---MS)
“She just was always there. She always e-mailed me.”
(NT3@---HS)
“I know that Ms. R--- teaches a lot of digital, internet
skills and computer skills, so in that sense it's [working
with the ITRT] is kind of related.” (NT1@---ES)
“Her experience in special education was definitely very
helpful to me.” (NT1@---ES)
Around that time, she had gotten information from
another colleague to say… you could really go to Mrs. R--- for help because she was a former special ed
teacher… (SL1@---ES)

Proximity to library

Physical
Digital

Provision of
Resources

Type of resource

Digital resources
Human resources

Modeling Teaching
Behavior

Shared subject area

Special
education

RQ 3
Isolation/Connection

Treats

e-card
Sense of humor

“I have a subscription to the American Greetings ECards, and they have the funny tones…these meerkats
hopping up and down and singing this silly song. It was
just have a great day, have a silly time. And then I sent
another one before the winter holidays, just to go out and
enjoy your winter break. And that was penguins just
something lighthearted and silly, and you look at it and
you laugh. It gives you a smile and puts you in a better
mood.” (SL3@---HS)

RQ 4
Isolation/Connection

School environment

Pleasant

“I would just say the mentorship [most influenced intent
to return next year]. It definitely made this environment
more pleasant which is encouraging for me to come back”
(NT2@---MS).

School environment

Non-threatening

“I'm just some lady over here in the library that she can
come to and talk to (SL1@---ES).

Lesson
improvements

If there is a degree of resiliency that they are looking
forward to another year, that they're thinking how can I
improve that lesson and use these [resources]? (SL2@--MS)

Looking
Second year
Back/Looking
Forward
Figure 13. Excerpts from Qualitative Matrix

Results by Research Question
Results of the data analysis are presented here by research question, first for the
questionnaire data analysis, then for the interview data analysis. Results for the first two research
questions are presented together because interview respondents did not discriminate between

103
change in resilience over the course of the study vs. comparing resilience between the
comparison group and treatment group. Next, results for the third research question are
presented. Finally, results for the fourth research question are presented.

Research Questions 1 & 2

Findings for Research Question 1 and Research Question 2 are presented in this section.
Results are first presented for change in resilience of new teachers in the treatment group from
October 2017 to March 2018 as indicated by scores on the CD-RISC 10. Next, results are
presented comparing resilience of new teachers in the treatment group to resilience of new
teachers in the comparison group as indicated by scores on the CD-RISC 10 in March 2018.
Results of the interview data regarding new teacher resilience for Research Questions 1 and 2 are
presented together.
In general, qualitative results show that new teachers appreciated their professional
relationship to their school librarians. At the high school level, a new English teacher praised her
school librarian, saying “I don't know what I would do without her… [She] went above and
beyond” (NT3@---HS). An elementary school special education teacher expressed that the
process of mentoring and collaboration “definitely made a huge impact” on her resiliency as a
new teacher (NT1@---ES). “Just saying you’re doing a good job” (NT3@---HS) provided the
encouragement and positive reinforcement which contributed to her ability to face the challenges
of her first year.

104
RQ1: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school year?
Results show that there was not a significant difference between resilience scores for the
treatment group from October to March of a school year. A significant interaction between
resilience over time and age was found.
Quantitative results were analyzed for Research Question 1 using first a t-test to establish
differences in group means, then analysis of variance (ANOVA) to control for additional
variables which may have influenced the relationship (Pallant, 2016). A paired samples t-test
was conducted to evaluate the impact of the interventions on the CD-RISC 10 scores of new
teachers in the treatment group (n = 26) from October 2017 to March 2018.
Assumptions for scores on the October 2017 CD-RISC 10 have been previously shown to
have been met. Scores for the March 2018 CD-RISC 10 (N = 52) were independent, and the data
were measured at the interval level. To investigate for potential outliers, March 2018 CD-RISC
10 scores were first converted to z-scores. The analysis revealed no outliers for the March 2018
CD-RISC 10 scores.
As an additional assumption for the paired samples t-test, the differences between the
October 2017 and March 2018 CD-RISC 10 were computed, then tested for normal distribution.
(Field, 2013; Pallant, 2016). A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test indicated that the sampling distribution
was normal, D(52) = .10, p = .200.
Table 19 displays descriptive statistics of CD-RISC 10 scores for the treatment group in
October 2017 (M = 30.77, SD = 5.109) and March 2018 (M = 31.23, SD = 5.501). A paired

105
samples t-test indicated that these scores were not significantly different, t(25) = -0.504, p =
.618, d = 0.09, a very small effect (see Table 20).

Table 19. Descriptive Statistics CD-RISC 10, Treatment Group Only
Time period

n

Mean

Std. Deviation

October 2017

26

30.77

5.109

March 2018

26

31.23

5.501

Table 20. Paired Samples T-test, October 2017 – March 2018 CD-RISC 10
Paired Differences
95% Confidence

Oct 2017 CD-RISC 10 –

Std.

Interval of the

Std.

Error

Difference

Mean

Deviation

Mean

-.46154

4.66674

.91522

Lower

Upper

Sig.
t

df (2-tailed)

-2.34648 1.42340 -.504 25

.618

Mar 2018 CD-RISC 10

A one-way repeated measures ANOVA controlling for age, gender, and race was
conducted to compare scores on the October 2017 CD-RISC 10 to March 2018 for the treatment
group (see Table 21). There were no significant effects for time, F(1, 24) = .254, p = .618,
multivariate partial 2 = .01. There were also no other significant effects.

Table 21. Multivariate Tests Controlling for Age, Gender, and Race, Treatment Group Only

Effect
Resilience
Over Time

Wilks' Lambda

Hypothesis

Error

Partial

Value

F

df

df

Sig.

2

.990

.254

1.000

25.000

.618

.010

106

A second one-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted using age, gender, and
race as between-subjects factors and the mentoring/collaborations score as a covariate. There
was a significant interaction between resilience over time and age, using p < .10 due to a onetailed hypothesis, F(3 , 22) = 2.632, p = .081, multivariate partial 2 = .305 (see Table 22). The
results show that resilience over time was dependent on age of the participant. All other factors
were found to be not significant.

Table 22. Tests of Within-Subjects Effects for October 2017 and March 2018 CD-RISC 10, Treatment Group Only
Type III Sum

Mean

Partial

of Squares

df

Square

F

p

2

Resilience Over Time

21.126

1

21.126

2.235

.152

.110

Resilience Over Time *

19.763

1

19.763

2.090

.165

.104

74.637

3

24.879

2.632

.081

.305

.662

1

.662

.070

.794

.004

Resilience Over Time * Race

1.741

2

.870

.092

.912

.010

Error(Resilience Over Time)

170.177

18

9.454

Source

Mentoring/Collaboration Score
Resilience Over Time *
Age
Resilience Over Time *
Gender

RQ2: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Results show that there was not a significant difference between comparison group and
treatment group scores on the resilience scale. Results were analyzed for Research Question 2,
comparing resilience of new teachers in the comparison group to the treatment group on the

107
March 2018 CD-RISC 10. Table 23 displays descriptive statistics of scores for the comparison
group (M = 31.85, SD = 4.593) and treatment group (M = 31.23, SD = 5.501). A t-test indicated
that there was not a significant difference, t(50) = -.438, p = .663, r = .06 (see Table 24).

Table 23. Group Statistics March 2018 CD-RISC 10
n

Mean

Std. Deviation

Std. Error Mean

Comparison

26

31.85

4.593

.901

Treatment

26

31.23

5.501

1.079

Table 24. Independent Samples T-test March 2018 CD-RISC 10 (Equal Variances Assumed)

T-test for Equality of Means
Levene’s Test for
Equality of Variances
F
Sig.
.864

.357

95% Confidence Interval
of the Difference
t

df

Sig.
(2-tailed)

Mean
Difference

Std. Error
Difference

Lower

Upper

-.438

50

.663

-.61538

1.40548

-3.43838

2.20761

Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was then performed on the scores for the March
2018 CD-RISC 10 to compare the level of resilience of the treatment and comparison groups,
controlling for gender, age, and race. In addition to the assumptions of ANOVA reported
previously, assumptions for ANCOVA include the influence of the treatment on the covariate
measurement, reliability of covariates, a lack of strong correlations among covariates, a linear
relationship between the dependent variable and covariate, and homogeneity of regression
slopes. The first and second assumptions were addressed in the study design by matching the

108
groups and by selecting measurement tools that show high reliability and validity. For the third
assumption, the Pearson correlation coefficient between MBI scores and the
mentoring/collaboration summed score (r = .10) was low, indicating that these two covariates did
not strongly correlate with one another. Grouped scatterplots for the March 2018 CD-RISC 10
showed a linear relationship to the MBI-ES and to the mentoring/collaboration summed scores.
Finally, the interaction between the grouping variable and the MBI-ES indicated that the
assumption of homogeneity of regression slopes was not violated, F(1, 50) = .709, p = .404 (see
Appendix E). The interaction between the grouping variable and the mentoring/collaboration
summed scores indicated that the assumption of homogeneity of regression slopes was not
violated, F(1, 50) = .002, p = .968.
Results of the first ANCOVA test (see Table 25) showed no significant differences in
resilience between the comparison group and the treatment group, F(1, 50) = .125, p = .725, 2 =
.003. A second ANCOVA test compared means using gender, age, and race as random factors.
Group means did not differ significantly for gender, F(2, 49) = .549, p = .700, 2 = .556 (see
Table 26). Group means also did not differ for age, F(3, 48) = .763, p = .650, 2 = .659. Neither
did group means differ for race, F(2, 49) = .036, p = .965, 2 = .035. Levene’s test was not
significant, F(23, 28) = 1.189, p = .328, therefore the assumption of homogeneity of variances
was not violated. A third ANCOVA, adding the mentoring/collaboration score as a covariate (see
Table 27) resulted in no significant effects for mentoring and collaboration, F(1, 51) = .359, p =
.554, 2 = .014.

109
Table 25. Tests of Between Subjects Effects, Comparison and Treatment Groups
Dependent Variable: March 2018 CD-RISC 10
Type III Sum of

Partial
F

Sig.

2

17.055

.666

.518

.026

1

2240.914

87.507

.000

.641

29.188

1

29.188

1.140

.291

.023

3.210

1

3.210

.125

.725

.003

Error

1254.812

49

25.608

Total

53012.000

52

Corrected Total

1288.923

51

Source

Squares

df

34.111

2

Intercept

2240.914

MBI-ES

Corrected Model

Treatment/

Mean Square

Comparison

Table 26. Tests of Between-Subjects Effects with Gender, Age, and Race as Factors
Dependent Variable: March 2018 CD-RISC 10
Type III Sum

Mean

Partial

of Squares

df

Square

F

Sig.

2

703.025

1

703.025

30.328

.000

.746

MBI

31.858

1

31.858

1.224

.278

.043

Treatment/Comparison

63.777

1

63.777

.477

.701

.515

Gender

89.176

2

44.588

.549

.700

.556

Age

30.587

3

10.196

.763

.650

.659

Race

6.162

2

3.081

.036

.965

.035

73.910

1

73.910

1.794

.274

.378

55.331

3

18.444

.195

.893

.191

169.459

2

84.729

1.829

.372

.676

105.233

2

52.617

3.300

.370

.872

19.450

1

19.450

1.227

.477

.567

231.870

5

46.374

4.228

.705

.990

Source
Intercept

Treatment/Comparison
* Gender
Treatment/Comparison
* Age
Treatment/Comparison
* Race
Treatment/Comparison
* Gender * Age
Treatment/Comparison
* Gender * Race
Treatment/Comparison
* Age * Race

110
Table 27. Tests of Between-Subjects Effects with Mentoring/Collaboration Score as Covariate
Dependent Variable: March 2018 CD-RISC 10
Type III Sum

Mean

Partial

of Squares

df

Square

F

Sig.

2

Intercept

392.634

1

392.634

15.388

.001

.494

MBI-ES

33.754

1

33.754

1.266

.271

.046

9.562

1

9.562

.359

.554

.014

Treatment/Comparison

63.756

1

63.756

1.048

.604

.687

Gender

92.594

2

46.297

.869

.619

.664

Age

39.479

3

13.160

.746

.630

.576

Race

6.373

2

3.187

.035

.966

.035

Source

Mentoring/Collaboration
Sum Score

These quantitative data show that new teacher resilience of the treatment group did not
increase significantly from October 2017 to March 2018, and that there were no significant
differences between the comparison and treatment groups on resilience at the close of the study.
However, qualitative results of the interviews evidenced that not only did the mentoring and
collaboration provided by school librarians for new teachers impact the new teachers’ resilience,
but also that they were able to articulate how.

Isolation/Connection
The three librarians who were interviewed followed flexible schedules, giving them
freedom to interact with their colleagues. This availability of the school librarian provided a
dependable connection that could counteract the isolation of the classroom for the new teacher.
One new teacher expressed her librarian’s attitude as “I'm always here if you need anything... I
got you. You're not alone, I'm here” (NT3@---HS). Another new teacher at the middle school

111
level expressed that her resilience was increased by having “a friendly face who comes and
checks on you, usually at least once a week just saying, 'hey, how are things going?' and
[offering] help and words of encouragement and support” throughout the first months of the
school year (NT2@---MS).
For one school librarian at the middle school level, the personal relationship between the
school librarian and new teacher contributed most to building resilience. “I think that personal
piece helped. I think by partnering, by doing this project, it allowed us to build a stronger
personal relationship [which] increases the ability to come and share the frustrations, instead of
sitting in their room by themselves or going home and crying every night” (SL2@---MS).
Having a connection outside of their department “another person to come to” (SL2@--MS) was a benefit. Each new teacher had an assigned mentor, but the school librarian who was
on a flexible schedule had more freedom to assist. “I gave them another place to go. When you're
always asking the same person, then you feel like you're annoying them or bothering them
(SL3@---HS). Said one new teacher, “I had other mentors, but I happened to really gain from
working with [the school librarian]” (NT1@---ES).
Proximity to the library was a benefit to the relationship. “I worked with all three [new
teachers], close in proximity to each other and to me. I could pop in and say hey, anything you
need, let me know what I can help you with” (SL2@---MS). Visibility was important too.
“Seeing me when I went up and down the hall, I could always stop and say are you doing okay?”
(SL2@---MS). In contrast, the new teachers in a large high school were in classrooms far from
the library. However, this physical distance could be counteracted by digital proximity, as
evidenced by this new teacher, who was three floors above the library, “She just was always
there. She always e-mailed me” (NT3@---HS).

112
Offering snacks, notes, and words of encouragement in a non-threatening atmosphere
provided another opportunity to connect to the new teachers. Answering questions in a
comfortable environment put in place yet another support. The new teacher at the high school
felt that that this was important.
Any questions I have, whether to do with computer lab time, questions that people who've been here a long
time probably don't think about. She never made me feel stupid. She's the only one that I can go to and just
know that there's no judging. She's not my superior (NT3@---HS).

The new teacher at the middle school also appreciated a colleague to lean on.
When I experienced certain challenges, it was definitely good to have someone whom I felt could be just an
objective listening ear…because sometimes you can just feel so alienated because everyone else knows
each other and everyone else seems to have it so together (NT2@---MS).

Having a knowledgeable professional in the school library who was willing to take the time to
listen contributed to the personal connection from the library to the classroom.

Provision of Resources
Being overwhelmed was a frequent theme of the new teacher interview results, at all
three school levels. ”I mean, when you're a new teacher, it can be overwhelming” (NT1@---ES).
“As a first-year teacher, it can be just so overwhelming feeling you have so much on your plate
all the time” (NT2@---MS). For some, this impacted the process of mentoring and collaboration.
“Because we couldn't get together and [the new teachers] were so overwhelmed, like, I don't
even know what to tell you I need right now” (SL2@---MS). Knowing what supports to ask for

113
was important. “A big helpful piece for me from the [school librarian] was knowing what to ask
for” (NT1@---ES).
The role of the school librarian in recommending resources to these overwhelmed new
teachers provided a support to build resilience. The new teachers found it difficult to identify
what supports to request
because it can seem very overwhelming when you're told, ‘we're here to support you’ and ‘let us know
what we can do’, but if you don't even know what to ask for or where to start with so many resources out
there. Just being able to pinpoint resources was very helpful (NT1@---ES).

One new teacher at the middle school level felt that this provision of resources was directly “for
resilience. She did bring over a list of library resources for a topic I was covering at the time”
(NT2@---MS).
The new teachers felt that they lacked the depth of knowledge of the school librarian. At
the same time, they understood that having a close relationship to the school librarian gave them
more access to her resources. “I don't have this huge backpack to go into…She does, and many
resources that I didn't know about, that teachers I'm sure who have been here for years maybe
know about, maybe don't (NT3@---HS). “It's just always handy to have a lot of tools in your
toolbox to pull from” (NT1@---ES). By identifying useful resources, the school librarian was
able to reduce the workload of the new teachers. This provision of resources was “one less thing
I had to do as a new teacher, one less thing I had to think about, something off of my plate which
is a big part of resilience if you don't know anything” (NT3@---HS).
This provision took the form of physical, digital, and human resources. The high school
librarian, who was formerly an English teacher, “would come into my [English] classroom and
observe me and she would suggest materials and resources” (NT3@---HS). This new English

114
teacher “was very receptive to any time I [school librarian] had any kind of resource or idea or
link” (SL3@---HS).
The school librarian retained a practical expertise that the new teacher lacked. For
example, she was able to identify, using research in the field, books which would appeal to
student subgroups. As quoted by her new teacher, "this study has shown that boys might like this
and it's related to what you're doing, and girls might like this and they might be more apt to read”
(NT3@---HS). This new teacher appreciated the provision of books for every day Sustained
Silent Reading and timely resources related to her classroom curriculum, such as online
resources and audiovisual materials related to the Holocaust. Access to digital technology was
also important. “I [school librarian] was able to work with her [new teacher] in terms of
scheduling the computers for her classes…We can't get you into the library but here, you can use
this computer lab” (SL3@---HS). A middle school librarian was able to assist with a technology
piece that her new teachers didn't quite know, while a high school librarian was able to
troubleshoot some issues with students doing the practice items for standardized testing.
The school librarian, working in collaboration with the Instructional Technology
Resource Teacher (ITRT), provided an added benefit to the new teachers. Said one new teacher,
I've been working a lot also with the ITRT, and I've been trying to identify good digital resources for
special ed[ucation]. I know that [the librarian] teaches a lot of digital, internet skills and computer skills, so
in that sense [working with the ITRT] is related [to the library] (NT1@---ES).

At the middle school level, the school librarian
…was able to introduce a few more pieces of equipment along with the ITRT, who is very active in here
[the library] with me. [The ITRT] knows what I have, she works with me, and she's very active with the

115
teachers. I felt like [the new teachers] were very comfortable after me reaching out to them” to provide
necessary equipment (SL2@---MS).

Modeling Teaching Behaviors
In addition to providing resources, one school librarian was able to model authentic
integration of technology resources within a collaborative lesson, specifically for management of
student behavior. At the elementary school level, providentially the school librarian and new
librarian shared a subject area. Another colleague had recommended to the new teacher that she
could go to [the librarian] for help because she was a former special education teacher. This
special relationship was brought forth by the school librarian:
When I talked about having to collaborate, it really came at a good time, because [the new teacher] was
trying to figure out what she should do in reading groups, and how she should utilize her time based on
what the IEP requires. I modeled a lesson for her, and then we collaborated on what she could do to
improve her lessons with the children. She was really receptive to that, and I think she started to try some
of the strategies, but she felt a little bit better and a little more confident.
There was one student that [the new teacher] considers a difficult student. She didn't have any behavior
plan or anything to monitor behavior and encourage positive behaviors. So when I went in, I had a gumball
machine with some marbles. I explained to him [that] it was a reading lesson. I used the iPads which she
hadn't done, she hadn't incorporated technology, so that helped him want to be more into [the lesson]. [The
difficult student] was really receptive, we didn't have any difficulties and then as I questioned him, he was
even a little bit more into the lesson. And then he was intent, he kept looking to see if he earned a gumball
because I would mention, remember you can earn three gumballs with this lesson. [The new teacher] was
able to see that there was a way to get to him. So that day he read for me, he answered questions for me. It
was a good lesson. (SL1@---ES).

116
Unfortunately, when asked about follow-up, the librarian stated that she offered the
gumball machine to the new teacher, who left without it and never came back for it. However,
the new teacher felt that the librarian’s “experience in special education was definitely very
helpful to me…just learning different strategies, because you don't know what strategy might
speak to what kid” (NT1@---ES).

Looking Back/Looking Forward
This growth in resilience was brought forth by one new teacher.
I wanted to be with these kids, and I love the kids. Just having one person makes such a difference. [For us]
to look back and both be like, oh, I was good at this and, oh, what was I thinking? I'm in such a different
place now [in March] than I was even in September (NT3@---HS).

One new teacher felt that while she may not have used her school librarian as resource to the
fullest this year, she would in the future. “I think [new teachers without a school librarian to
provide support] are missing out on a resource that's there, particularly in the future” (NT2@--MS).
This future benefit of collaboration with the school librarians was not overlooked by
these new teachers.
I feel like now that I got my sea legs under me after my first year and I already have the lesson plans
written and materials built. Going back and trying to revamp my lessons and make them better, I know that
[my school librarian] is a resource there. I definitely think that collaboration could occur with her, and I
know that she has a bunch of resources for me to use. I think next year I won't feel like I'm drowning. I
think we'll be able to build a better relationship and be able to use more of the resources that she has
available, in the future. (NT2@---MS).

117
This teacher felt that the benefit of the interventions would extend into the following year.
Despite the lack of quantitative evidence of building resilience, these new teachers and
school librarians were able to voice the positive effects of the implementation of the Continuum
of Care model. They understood the isolation of the classroom, and the effect of the connection
to the school librarian, who was able to provide resources and model teaching behavior. Both the
new teachers and the school librarians were able to look back to reflect on their experience
together, and look forward to a future partnership of collaboration.

Research Question 3

Qualitative and quantitative findings for Research Question 3 are presented in this
section. Results are presented comparing burnout of new teachers in the treatment group to
burnout of new teachers in the comparison group at the close of the study. Factors taken into
consideration include level of mentoring/collaboration, gender, age, and race.

RQ3: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Results show that there was not a significant difference between the comparison group
and treatment group scores on the burnout inventory. Results of the March 2018 MBI-ES were
analyzed for Research Question 3, comparing burnout of new teachers in the treatment group to

118
the comparison group at the close of the study. Scores for the March 2018 MBI-ES (N = 52)
were independent, and the data were measured at the interval level. A preliminary analysis
showed that there were no missing data or outliers. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test indicated that
scores did not deviate significantly from normal, D(52) = .070, p = .200. Levene’s test was not
significant, F(50) = .048, p = .828. Therefore, the assumption of homogeneity of variances was
not violated.
Table 28 displays the comparison group mean (M = 11.73, SD = 2.238) and the treatment
group mean (M = 12.08, SD = 2.328) for the March 2018 MBI-ES. An independent samples ttest (see Table 29) indicated that there was not a significant difference between the comparison
and treatment group scores, t(50) = .552, p = .583, r = .10, a small effect size.

Table 28. Group Statistics March 2018 MBI-ES
n

Mean

Std. Deviation

Std. Error Mean

Comparison

26

11.73

2.238

.439

Treatment

26

12.08

2.328

.457

Table 29. Independent Samples T-test March 2018 MBI-ES (Equal Variances Assumed)
T-test for Equality of Means
Levene’s Test for
Equality of Variances
F
Sig.
.048

.828

95% Confidence Interval
of the Difference
t

df

Sig.
(2-tailed)

Mean
Difference

Std. Error
Difference

Lower

Upper

.552

50

.583

.350

.633

-.923

1.622

119
An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) test was performed on the scores from the March
2018 MBI-ES to compare the level of burnout of the treatment and comparison groups. As an
assumption for these tests, the covariate and treatment effects were independent. Results of the
ANCOVA (see Table 30) showed no significant differences in burnout between the comparison
and treatment group scores on the MBI-ES, F(1, 50) = .236, p = .629, 2 = .005.

Table 30. Tests of Between-Subjects Effects March 2018 MBI-ES
Dependent Variable: March 2018 MBI-ES
Type III Sum of

Partial

F

Sig.

2

3.758

.723

.491

.029

1

248.683

47.823

.000

.494

5.927

1

5.927

1.140

.291

.023

1.226

1

1.226

.236

.629

.005

Error

254.806

49

5.200

Total

7636.200

52

262.321

51

Source

Squares

df

7.515

2

248.683

March 2018 CD-RISC 10
Treatment/Comparison

Corrected Model
Intercept

Corrected Total

Mean Square

A second ANCOVA tested the differences between the comparison and treatment group
means, adjusting for covariates. Adding the mentoring/collaboration score as a covariate did not
produce significant results, F(1, 50) = .086, p = .771, 2 = .003 (see Table 31). Tests of between
subjects effects for burnout were not significant using gender, age, and race as random factors.
The interaction between treatment/comparison and gender did not produce significant results
F(1, 50) = 2.688, p = .211, 2 = .502. The interaction between treatment/comparison and age also
did not produce significant results F(3, 48) = .964, p = .608, 2 = .728. Additionally, the

120
interaction between treatment/comparison and race did not produce significant results F(2, 49) =
2.115, p = .812, 2 = .974.

Table 31. Tests of Between-Subjects Effects March 2018 MBI-ES, Covariate Mentoring/Collaboration Score
Type III
Sum of

Mean

Partial

Source

Squares

df

Square

F

Sig.

2

Intercept

280.835

1

280.835

38.709

.000

.804

.466

1

.466

.086

.771

.003

4.962

1

4.962

.402

.639

.282

Gender

20.524

2

10.262

1.213

.561

.738

Age

10.407

3

3.469

.549

.682

.351

Race

12.834

2

6.417

2.078

.315

.659

7.892

1

7.892

2.688

.211

.502

18.961

3

6.320

.964

.608

.728

5.763

2

2.882

2.115

.812

.974

8.321

2

4.161

1.377

.515

.732

.079

1

.079

.026

.897

.025

24.124

5

4.825

2.649

.774

.988

3.016

1

3.016

.559

.461

.020

Mentoring/Collaboration
Score
Treatment/Comparison

Treatment/Comparison *
Gender
Treatment/Comparison *
Age
Treatment/Comparison *
Race
Treatment/Comparison *
Gender * Age
Treatment/Comparison *
Gender * Race
Treatment/Comparison *
Age * Race
Treatment/Comparison *
Gender * Age * Race

Results of the qualitative data for burnout were analyzed using the same four themes
which arose from the interview data for resilience. Review of the qualitative data did show that
burnout was seen by the new teachers as the inverse of resilience, as evidenced by one new
elementary school teacher, “resilience, burn out, they kind of go hand in hand” (NT1@---ES).

121
Isolation/Connection
The empathy shown by the school librarian reminded the new teachers that “this feeling
[of burnout] is not unique, but everybody feels like this” (NT3@--HS). Without the school
librarian’s support “just being able to push through for the year, I think would have been a
greater struggle” (NT1@--ES).
One intervention which brought pleasure to both the new teachers and the school
librarians was the sending of an e-card greeting to the new teachers just before the winter
holidays. “I think the e-card probably made a difference” (SL2@---MS). This librarian sent an ecard of meerkats hopping up and down, singing a silly song (SL3@---HS). She felt that this
silliness was important because being in a new work environment may make it difficult to judge
the sense of humor of colleagues.
It makes you laugh and it makes you feel lighthearted. And it makes you feel able to approach that person,
whereas before you might not have. So I really think that those e-greetings really had a good [effect]
because when you know there's somebody that you could maybe laugh about things going on with – that
kind of puts the burnout at bay. (SL3@---HS).

Provision of Resources
The school librarian being available, which led to provision of resources, also was a
factor in reducing burnout for these new teachers because “people are not so approachable or
helpful” (NT3@---HS). The new teacher at the middle school level appreciated the support from
the library.

122
“Without that support [from the school librarian] and without knowing what's available to you can make
you feel like you have to go out and make everything on your own and you have to create all these amazing
manipulatives and different materials that really are there for us to use” (NT2@---MS).

This same new teacher’s school librarian agreed that of all the interventions,
…sharing resources [most influenced new teacher level of burnout positively] because when it was crazy in
their department, [the new teacher] was very grateful for the few extra things we were able to give her. So I
think having the resources available and not having to look for them probably lessened the stress a little
(SL2@---MS).

The depth of knowledge of the school librarian, “knowing that the librarian has so much
background knowledge beyond just books” (NT2@---MS) was seen as helpful. This provision of
resources would reduce the workload of the new teacher, which in turn may affect burnout.
“Prep time can, hypothetically, be cut down in the future because you know that you have that
resource there versus someone who doesn't have that relationship with their librarian” (NT2@--MS).
This sharing of knowledge was particularly effective when the new teacher and the
school librarian shared a subject area background. When asked how her new teacher differs in
burn out as compared to new teachers who lack this support, one school librarian responded:
I'd have to go back to special ed[ucation] because it is a whole different world. She has to get information
from teachers who may not always be forthcoming with the information when she needs it. So I think that
she's more stressed, she's dealing with legal documents and legal papers. I was a special ed[ucation] teacher
before, and I'm a school librarian, so I also have resources to help [her] out. I would send her an e-mail
saying, I can also pull resources from special ed[ucation]. The [special education] connections that we had,
helped. So me being able to connect with her at that level, saying I was a special ed[ucation] teacher
before…reduced burnout (SL1@---ES).

123
Another factor important to avoiding burnout was the development of coping
mechanisms so as “not to lose your brain” (NT3@---HS). Examples of stress relievers to “do for
you today” (NT3@---HS) suggested by the school librarian to her new teacher included putting
down the work and walking away, going for a run, going to the gym, or taking a break for some
food or drink. According to her new teacher, the school librarian advised “Make sure you’re
taking care of yourself first. Put the lifejacket on you first before you put anyone else’s on
because you can’t help anyone if you’re drowning” (NT3@---HS).
One school librarian at the high school level was assigned two new teachers who differed
in their reception of the interventions. She felt that the teacher who was less receptive to
treatment, who had the added responsibility of coaching and fundraising for the softball team,
“looks tired to me, all the time. She looks more burned out than the English teacher [who was
receptive to treatment] for sure.” On the other hand, the English teacher [who was receptive to
treatment], did not show “a dread walking into work,” or burnout, at the end of the school year
“beyond what everybody has” (SL3@---HS).

Modeling Teaching Behaviors
Interestingly, modeling teaching behaviors did not openly arise as a topic for burnout
during any of the six interviews. New teachers and school librarians did skim around this theme
when discussing empathy, provision of resources, and common previous licensure. However,
results did not show that they directly connected the school librarian as a role model to new
teacher burnout.

124
Looking Back/Looking Forward
The new teachers at all school levels felt that the contributions of the school librarian
contributed to their ability to endure the challenges of their first year. One new teacher at the
elementary school level felt that, without the school librarian, “I would have burned out much
more quickly than if I hadn't had the support” (NT1@---ES). A new teacher at the high school
level felt that without the support of the school librarian, “I wouldn't have a lot of the answers,
certainly not easily” (NT3@---HS). At the middle school level, a new teacher summed up her
situation at the closing of the school year, “I'm still here so I guess I haven't burned out. I'm still
kicking” (NT2@---MS).

Research Question 4

Findings for Research Question 4 are presented in this section. Results are presented
comparing retention of new teachers in the treatment group to retention of new teachers in the
comparison group.

RQ4: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their intent to return to their current teaching position as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
No significant differences were found for intent to return between the comparison group
and treatment group. Binary logistic regression was performed to assess the impact of a number

125
of factors on the likelihood that respondents would report their intent to return. The model
contained three independent variables (gender, age, and race). The full model containing all
predictors was not statistically significant, 2 = (3, N = 52) = .779, p = .854, indicating that the
model was not able to distinguish between respondents in the comparison and treatment groups.
The model as a whole explained between 1.5% (Cox and Snell R square) and 3.2 % (Nagelkerke
R squared) of the variance in intent to return, and correctly classified 90.4% of cases.
As shown in Table 32, none of the independent variables made a unique statistically
significant contribution to the model. The odds ratio for gender, age, and race were the same as
none were significant. Since logistic regression is sensitive to high correlations among predictor
variables, multicollinearity was analyzed for gender, age, and race (Pallant, 2016). Tolerance
was analyzed as an indicator of how much of the variability for the specified independent was
not explained by the other independent variables in the model. Calculated tolerances were greater
than .10 for gender (.880), age (.866) and race (.982), indicating that multiple correlation with
other variables was low. Variance inflation factors well below 10 for gender (1.14), age (1.16),
and race (1.02) also indicated that multicollinearity was not a concern.

Table 32. Logistic Regression Predicting Likelihood of Intent to Return
95% C.I.
Odds

for Odds Ratio

B

S.E.

Wald

df

p

Ratio

Lower

Upper

-1.143

1.514

.571

1

.450

.319

.016

6.194

Age

.013

.618

.000

1

.983

1.013

.302

3.400

Race

.082

.417

.038

1

.845

1.085

.480

2.454

4.240

3.750

1.278

1

.258

69.395

Gender

Constant

126
Results of analysis of the qualitative data show that both new teachers and school
librarians felt that the process of mentoring and collaboration between new teachers and their
school librarians could increase retention of new teachers. As one school librarian put it, “If you
want to keep teachers and you want to help mold them, it doesn't have to be just someone on
their grade level” (SL1@---ES).

Isolation/Connection
For retention, the interview data showed that reception of the treatment “definitely
greatly increased my interest level” to return next school year (NT1@---ES). “I would just say
the mentorship [most influenced intent to return next year]. It definitely made this environment
more pleasant which is encouraging for me to come back” (NT2@---MS).
That human relationship and being able to reach out to somebody brings survival. [The new teachers
working with the school librarians] have more support, and they feel like they have more support. I feel like
their survival skills are possibly higher than someone that has no support (SL2@---MS).

Working with the school librarian “influences you in your confidence” (NT3@---HS).
The personal connection made to the school librarian helped to mitigate the new teacher’s
sense of isolation, “just that feeling of loneliness or being on your own in the middle of an
ocean” (NT3@---HS). The new teachers felt this aloneness in the classroom, commenting that “I
don't see everyone, I don't talk to people” (NT3@---HS), and “special ed[ucation] is a very
lonely profession. [It] can be very hard when you feel stuck on an island on your own,” (NT1@--ES). This new teacher felt that connection strongly,

127
You always need – especially in your first year- someone to connect with, someone to talk to, someone to
be able to run ideas by. Someone who understands what you're going through and then someone who can
help you go through what you're going through by providing resources, providing answers to many
questions that you might have as a first-year teacher (NT1@---ES).

Both the school librarians and the new teachers expressed that the process of mentoring
and collaboration helped the new teacher’s intent to return “tremendously” (SL1@---ES), “just
little things. It just makes you feel not alone” (NT3@---HS). “The human connection– it's kind
of a big deal, knowing somebody's there if you need them” (SL2@---MS). For one new teacher
who felt that she did not fit in with her teaching team, “just knowing that I had someone to turn
to. Because [not fitting in] sometimes can be very hard (NT1@---ES).
One new teacher at the high school level appreciated the contribution that the school
librarian made to her decision to return the following school year.
So if I didn't have [the school librarian], I would be thinking about coming back here, or if I want to go to
another school where I am going to be supported. She's just so helpful. Without that, I don't know that I
would teach again (NT3@---HS).

The school librarian was seen as a particularly supportive colleague for the new teachers,
with a role that was different from other teachers. “I have the support, I have this person that I
can go to who's not going to judge me. And it makes a difference when you think about it”
(NT3@---HS). This non-threatening, neutral stance of the school librarian was one factor in
retention. For the new teacher, “I'm just some lady over here in the library that she can come to
and talk to (SL1@---ES).
At the high school, the school librarian was able to influence retention by reaching out
with a “little something, pick me up” (SL3@---HS). She sent cards and emails to say “hey,

128
how’s your day going?” (NT3@---HS) and put candy in their mailboxes for Valentine’s Day.
This helped to bridge the gap between the classrooms on the upper floors and the library on the
first floor. One new teacher had thoughts about moving to another school or district, or even
returning to her former job in curriculum design. But the constant reassurance from the school
librarian was “huge,” helping her to see that she could make a career of teaching (NT3@--HS).
Setting aside time to talk, being “available and approachable” (SL3@---HS) with the new
teachers also influenced retention. When the new teacher felt like she couldn’t go on, she knew
that there was someone to turn to with questions or concerns (NT1@---ES). Having the school
librarian there to say, "don't jump yet, let's talk it through” carried the teacher through the day.
The school librarian taking time to listen resulted in seeing the weight lifted from the new
teacher’s shoulders, leaving her in better spirits for the rest of the day’s challenges (SL1@---ES).

Provision of Resources
Both the institutional knowledge and the professional knowledge retained by the school
librarian helped when providing the necessary supports for the new teachers. Sharing
information about school policies and procedures, such as how to sign up for computer labs,
saved time and energy for the new teachers. One new teacher at the middle school level pointed
out that it was best to provide one or two highly rated resources, such as a website to explore the
ocean layers, rather than overwhelming the new teachers with long lists. Additionally, timely
response to requests for resources was key, as was delivery of the resource that best matched the
teacher’s needs, whether from the library shelf or through interlibrary loan. “It's just the type of
thing that you think about when you're [considering], am I coming back?” (NT3@---HS).

129

Modeling Teaching Behaviors
Several areas of teacher skills development contributed to increase retention. Developing
the ability to assess as an ongoing process and make needed changes to lessons with reassurance
and assistance from the school librarian was an area that one new teacher felt increased her
intention to return to her current position the following year. Another new teacher appreciated
her school librarian’s guidance “to better navigate the world of special education in order that I
can find my way” (NT1@---ES). She felt that scheduling time with her special education
students was “tricky” and that her school librarian gave her “some really useful tips for how to
maximize my short time with my students” (NT1@---ES). A third area that was helpful for her
was parent interactions “because if you're not careful, it could be very easy for a parent to
misinterpret what you say and then it could not be good for you” (NT1@---ES).

Looking Back/Looking Forward
Looking back, the school librarian at the middle school level expressed that the resources
made available to the new teachers influenced retention in that they had a better idea how these
resources could be implemented in the following year. She felt that, while the new teachers may
not have had time in their first year to fully integrate the resources, they looked forward to more
exploration and hoped to make better use of the resources in their second year.
At the elementary level, one new teacher based her intent to continue in the profession on
the interventions that she received from her school librarian. Without this support, she was not
sure that she would been able to continue going in this field. At the high school level, a new

130
teacher felt that the support she received from her school librarian made her rise to a higher level.
Not only did she need to meet to this goal, but she needed to feel that she was “up to par because
that's a whole part of burn out and resilience. If I don't feel like I'm doing a good job and I know
I'm good at something else, I'm going” (NT3@---HS).

Conclusion

This chapter presented the results of analysis of both the quantitative and qualitative data.
The next chapter will discuss these findings as they relate to mentoring and collaboration for new
teachers in the authentic context. Implications for the professional development of new teachers
in practice will be suggested based on these findings. In closing, recommendations for future
research will be presented.

131
CHAPTER V
DISCUSSION

This final chapter discusses conclusions drawn from the findings presented in Chapter IV
by research question. The chapter then discusses implications, recommendations, and comments
on causal research in the field. Next, the chapter delineates limitations and suggestions for
further research. Chapter V ends with conclusions.

Discussion by Research Question

RQ1: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their scores on a resilience scale from October to March of a school year?
Scores on the resilience scale for new teachers who received standardized interventions
from the school librarian did not differ significantly from October to March of the school year.
However, the data indicate that the practices of the school librarians who served as
interventionists did have an effect on new teacher resilience. During the interviews, both the
school librarians and the new teachers spoke to this effect.
Resilience scores show that the new teachers in the treatment group did evidence a slight
increase in resilience. This increase was not significant, and the effect size was small, but the
new teachers’ resilience scores did move in a positive direction. Four months of treatment under
the Continuum of Care model appears to be not enough time to make a statistically significant
difference in resilience scores for the treatment group. However, it was enough time to effect

132
some change in these new teachers’ resilience levels. A similar study of teachers (Lantieri et al.,
2011), who participated in mindfulness activities over twenty seven weeks, produced
statistically significant results, indicating an impact on reduced stress levels, increased level of
attention and mindfulness, and strengthening relational trust with colleagues. For this current
study, given the seventeen week time frame of the interventions, a positive move on the
resilience scale points to the opportunity for a longer time span of interventions, which may then
result in a statistically significant change in resilience.
The new teachers in this study who received interventions from their school librarians
under the Continuum of Care model conceivably would have benefited from a longer time frame
of interventions with more data points over several years. As described in the previous chapter,
one new teacher at the middle school level spoke directly to continuing to build her relationship
with the school librarian, using the provided resources in her second year, and even on into the
future. Her librarian felt that the new teachers did not have time in their first year to fully
integrate the resources, but they looked forward to more exploration and better use of the
resources in their second year. The new teacher at the elementary school level also voiced her
wish that she had more time with her school librarian. All three of these point to time as a factor
for implementing the Continuum of Care model. Given a longer time frame, it may be possible to
move the new teachers’ levels of resilience to a greater degree, and even to make a significant
difference.
Gabi (2015) cited workload and time constraints as the biggest stress risk for a sample of
150 urban teachers. She found that resilient teachers’ time per week spent on work-related
activities was lower than that of at-risk teachers who experienced more frequent emotional
symptoms of stress. The results of this current study also show that time is an important

133
consideration for working with new teachers. Under the current model, two months were allowed
for mentoring and two more months for collaboration. Within this time frame, there were 14
scheduled interventions for mentoring and 14 for collaboration. This set a high expectation for
time allotted by the school librarians and new teachers to work under the Continuum of Care
model. Additionally, an unusual amount of foul weather closed the schools for an unexpected
number of days. Given the unrelenting pace of the school calendar, opportunities for
interventions lost were frequently not recoverable. This may have contributed to the lack of the
treatment reported by several new teachers in the treatment group, which would have impacted
their level of resilience.
The school librarians defined their relationship to their new teachers as extending beyond
the calendar of interventions for this study, and on into the next school year. At the middle
school level, the school librarian identified a “degree of resilience” in looking forward to another
year. “They’re thinking, how can I improve the lesson and use these [resources]?” (SL2@--MS). The high school librarian who had difficulty connecting to one of her teachers, did not feel
that this relationship was completely lost.
I don’t think she fully realizes yet the support that she does have from the media staff… I know that can
change, and I’ve seen it with some teachers over the years where their first year, they’re kind of
standoffish, or they just don’t see the benefit of the library. But then they start to be around enough and see
the benefits of having [the library] and having [the librarians], and we’re able to connect later (SL3@--HS).

The librarian felt that with some work, this new teacher would be more open to collaborating in
the future.

134
This evidence points to opening up the application of the Continuum of Care to early
career teachers in their second, or even third year under contract, which would set a more
reasonable pace for the interventions to occur. The demands of the first year of teaching can be
overwhelming, as stated by the new teachers in this study. Expanding the Continuum of Care
over a longer time frame, perhaps with mentoring in the first year and collaboration in the second
and third, may reduce the short-term stress, resulting in greater collaboration over the long term.
A follow-up program evaluation which is currently under analysis includes questions regarding
timing and the number of interventions in the model. Results of the program evaluation will shed
further light on the effect of time on implementation of the Continuum of Care model and
determine whether extending the time frame would benefit the model.
There was a significant interaction between change in resilience over the course of the
study for the treatment group, and age of the new teacher. However, the magnitude and direction
of this interaction was not determined under this analysis. Teachers in the treatment group did
tend to be older than the national data would predict. Sixty-two percent of the treatment group
was less than thirty years old. In contrast, the Beginning Teacher Longitudinal Study data show
that 71% of new teachers nationwide were less than 30 years of age in school year 2007-2008,
the most recent data available (Raue and Gray, 2015). During the present study, one “not young”
new teacher in the treatment group spoke to age as a factor, as cited in the previous chapter. She
felt that others assumed that she had higher skill levels due to her age, disregarding her lack of
experience. Unfortunately, a search of the literature revealed no studies which analyzed the
influence of age on resilience for any teacher population. The results of this study point to the
need to consider age in years as a factor for new teacher resilience.

135
RQ2: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a resilience scale in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Scores on the resilience scale for new teachers who received standardized interventions
from the school librarian did not differ significantly from scores for new teachers not formally
supported by the school librarian. However, the data indicate that implementation of the
Continuum of Care model did have an effect on the resilience of new teachers in the treatment
group.
Group means for resilience scores did not differ significantly for age when comparing the
treatment to the comparison group in March of the school year. However, the treatment group
did tend to be younger than the comparison group. Sixty-two percent of the treatment group was
less than thirty years old, while 46% of the comparison group was less than thirty years old.
Given that the interaction between resilience over time and age for the treatment group was
found to be significant, further investigation seems warranted. The relative youth of the
treatment group to the comparison group may, in some way, have influenced their resilience
levels. Since recruitment of participants was the responsibility of the school librarians, it is also
possible that age was at play in the assignment of individuals to the treatment group. A
randomized control trial, along with a larger sample size, would minimize these group
differences. It is also possible that growth in resilience may proceed at varied paces among
individuals and over time. Expanding the time frame of this study to several years with more
data points would provide the opportunity to compare the pace of development of resilient
qualities between the two groups.

136
The interview data show that not only did the mentoring and collaboration provided by
school librarians for new teachers impact the new teachers’ resilience, but they were able to
articulate how. The role of the school librarian as the provider of resources “for resilience”
appeared several times in the qualitative data. The new teachers in the treatment group
appreciated those interventions which included gathering materials for their classroom lessons.
They saw this not only as a reduction of their work load, but also as targeted support from an
expert in the field who has a “backpack” or a “toolbox” to pull from, which the new teachers felt
that they lacked. Indeed, the new teachers expressed the overwhelming feeling of not even
knowing what supports were available, or “not knowing what to ask for.”
When curating resources for interventions, the least helpful action by the school librarian
was disseminating a long list of resources, which the new teachers found overwhelming. The
most helpful assistance came from providing one or two carefully selected resources at point of
need. This pinpointed approach was most successful when the new teacher’s needs were met in a
timely fashion to support specific content learning objectives. This provision of resources was
most evident in the mentoring phase in which the school librarian performed a needs assessment
to connect the new teacher to appropriate physical, digital, and human resources.
The Continuum of Care model did not specify how school librarians were to provide
resources in response to the needs assessment. However, the evidence indicates that this is an
important consideration. For teachers already overwhelmed by the demands of their new
positions, offering only a few of the best resources which will be most pertinent to the teacher’s
lesson planning may be established best practice for this special population. As needed, the
school librarian may then follow-up to recommend further resources, which would expand the
new teacher’s repertoire without causing undue stress. Educators of school librarianship can

137
direct the field to better train pre-service school librarians to use this pinpointed approach when
providing resources for new teachers.
The school librarians and new teachers spoke to their belief that their personal connection
under the Continuum of Care made a difference in their professional lives. The middle school
librarian recognized that discovering shared family roles and activities connected her more
closely to one of her new teachers. A strong bond also formed when the school librarian had past
teaching experience in the same subject area as her new teacher and served as a model for
teaching in that area. A close relationship to the school librarian gave the new teachers greater
access to the library’s resources as well as the librarian’s expertise and institutional knowledge,
both during the study and for the future.
In addition, the mentoring and collaboration received made an impact on new teacher
resilience. As one new teacher said, “you need a mentor and you need to collaborate with
others… this is a job that you cannot do on your own” (NT2@---MS). The elementary school
librarian pointed out that “she trusts me more than she did at the very beginning … She comes in
whenever she needs to and asks can she talk … it helped” (SL2@---MS). The new teacher at the
high school also spoke of this personal connection, “I think just the personal things [influenced
resilience], her checking up, sending a card or a little note or a snack here and there, the very
personal things … she just went above and beyond” (NT3@---HS).
This “pivotal role” of relationships is the sustenance new teachers need to maintain
personal wellbeing and professional effectiveness (Johnson et al., 2016). The essence of new
teacher resilience may lie in these personal and professional connections established during the
first year. The “pivotal role” of the school librarian in providing interventions for new teachers
under the Continuum of Care model provides the opportunity to build resilience in new teachers.

138
Relationships developed under the model contribute to the personal welfare and efficacy of the
new teachers who receive these interventions.

RQ3: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in scores on a burnout inventory in March of a school year as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Scores on the burnout inventory for new teachers who received standardized
interventions from the school librarian did not differ significantly from scores for new teachers
not formally supported by the school librarian. However, the qualitative data indicate that the
school librarians who served as interventionists did have an effect on reducing burnout of new
teachers in the treatment group.
Gavish and Friedman (2010) found that the school organizational culture, particularly a
lack of collaborative and supportive ambience, contributes meaningfully and significantly to
predicting burnout for new teachers. Under the Continuum of Care model, the school librarians
sought out new teachers to structure a supportive working environment in which the new
teachers could function effectively. Through mentoring and collaboration, the school librarians
were able to influence burnout in new teachers by sharing their expertise and institutional
knowledge, and through friendly professional interactions. The school librarian reaching out to
the new teachers with extrinsic and intrinsic motivators and a shared sense of humor helped to
mitigate the stresses of the daily life of the classroom teacher.
Provision of resources at the school level has also been noted as an effective structure to
mitigate burnout. Schools that lack resources, such as physical materials and professional

139
development, may become trapped in a cycle of burnout and turnover (Kim et al., 2017). The
school librarian can act to reduce new teacher burnout through the provision of carefully selected
resources which support classroom instruction. Thus the school librarians in this study who
connected their new teachers to physical, digital, and human resources contributed to reducing
the new teachers’ level of burnout.
A shared subject area between the school librarian and new teacher did make a difference
for burnout of at least one new teacher. The elementary school librarian and new teacher who
shared special education as a specialty area were able to connect at this level. The librarian was
able to provide direct subject area support, thus reducing burnout. The impact of sharing a
subject area also surfaced at the high school level, where the school librarian and one new
teacher who shared English as a subject area were able to work well together, but the new
teacher in another subject area was not as accepting of the librarian’s attempts at intervention.
Interestingly, at the middle school level the three new teachers shared a subject area, but their
school librarian, who had difficulty implementing the interventions, did not share this subject
area. Given that all of the librarians in this study were licensed in at least one other subject area,
the educational background and subject area experience of the school librarian may provide even
more opportunity for reducing burnout when implementing the Continuum of Care.
Surprisingly, modeling of teaching behaviors did not directly arise as a qualitative theme
for burnout, perhaps indicating that new teachers and school librarians did not recognize the
effect of modeling on burnout, although they did speak to this factor for resilience and retention.
The school librarian who modeled a lesson for her new teacher recognized this sharing as
resilience building but was not able make the inverse connection to mitigating burnout. A link
between access to a role model and burnout may exist. However, it is conceivable that the bridge

140
between these two concepts is so wide that both the new teachers and their school librarians were
not able to recognize it. Educators in the field of school librarianship may need to scaffold preservice school librarians to connect resilience building to burnout alleviation when mentoring
and collaborating with new teachers.
An inverse relationship of resilience to burnout was a fundamental assumption of this
study. The interview data indicate that burnout was seen by the school librarians and new
teachers as the inverse of resilience. This concept was voiced by one new teacher, who asserted
that resilience and burnout “go hand in hand”. However, analysis of the data to determine
whether this relationship held true for this study population was not within the confines of this
study. Further analysis of the data will determine the relationship between burnout and resilience
for this sample of new teachers.

RQ4: To what extent do new teachers who receive standardized interventions from the school
librarian differ in their intent to return to their current teaching position as compared to new
teachers not formally supported by the school librarian?
Intention data for new teachers who received standardized interventions from the school
librarian did not differ significantly from scores for new teachers not formally supported by the
school librarian. However, the data indicate that the school librarians who served as
interventionists did have an effect on reducing attrition of new teachers in the treatment group.
While the interventions applied under the Continuum of Care model did not make a
statistically significant difference for new teacher intent to return, this difference surmised only
one more new teacher in the treatment group intending to leave, than in the comparison group.

141
Given the small sample size, it is not surprising that little difference was found between the
means. Additionally, retention of new teachers was represented by the notice of intent issued in
March of the school year. This “intent” to return in March may not be a true measure of those
new teachers who actually returned in August and remained in the field for the following school
year. Plans are underway to collect retention data for this group of new teachers. A larger sample
size would also provide a more accurate snapshot of the influence of implementing the
Continuum of Care model on new teacher retention.
Teacher resilience is influenced by the support and recognition of significant colleagues
(Day & Gu, 2014). The school librarian is in a unique position to put in place structures that
bolster and strengthen teacher resilience. The interview data show that school librarians and new
teachers believed that implementation of the Continuum of Care influenced retention. Rather
than being “stuck on an island” of loneliness, the new teachers felt supported through their
personal connection to the school librarian. Through mentoring and collaboration, the new
teachers had a knowledgeable partner to turn to in times of need, which influenced their
decision-making process when considering their future employment status. Teacher attrition can
be disruptive to the school environment and have a negative effect on teacher quality by
undermining the sense of community in the school (Raue & Gray, 2015). School librarians can
play a role in reducing attrition of those new to the field, contributing to a more cohesive school
environment and better quality of teaching.
New teachers should not necessarily be expected to put into practice those skills
generated by the Continuum of Care in their first year. As they reflect on their practice from one
school year to the next, new teachers may revisit the skills and knowledge learned in their first
year, to be applied in following school years. The relationship developed between the school

142
librarian and the new teacher in the first year opens the opportunity for further collaborations in
the years to come. By expanding the Continuum of Care model over several years, school
librarians would have more opportunity to work with new teachers in a mentoring and
collaborative role.

Implications

New teachers in the treatment group received significantly more mentoring and
collaboration than new teachers in the comparison group, indicating that providing a model of
interventions directly affects the professional development of new teachers. In addition,
interview data evidence that new teachers and school librarians saw a mentoring and
collaborative relationship as valuable for new teachers. Mentoring was implemented more
readily than collaboration. Indeed, for the treatment group, the mean mentoring score was higher
(M = 5.50, SD = .989) than the mean collaboration score (M = 5.35, SD = .891). Formative data
indicate that librarians in secondary schools faced greater challenges when implementing the
Continuum of Care. At the elementary level, the school librarian was able to model, but not coteach, a collaborative lesson which skillfully weaved technology and behavior management into
a reading lesson. However, at the middle school level, the school librarian thought the personal
relationship was important, but readily admitted that “the collaboration piece was very
little…there wasn't a lot of collaboration, unfortunately” (SL2@---MS). At the high school level,
making arrangements to collaborate also proved to be difficult, “as far as an out and out
collaboration-that just didn't work out” (SL3@---HS). An investigation of the barriers and
enablers to collaboration at varied school levels seems warranted. Educators of pre-service

143
librarians should consider challenges and enablers in the school ecology as factors in
collaborative practice when supporting new teachers.
The perceived amount of mentoring and collaboration received by new teachers in both
groups influenced the results of the study. Data from the March questionnaire show that in three
cases, new teachers in the treatment group did not receive the full treatment. The data also show
that teachers in the comparison group received some form of mentoring and collaboration from
their school librarian. This is remarkable as this school district’s job description for school
librarians does not mention either mentoring or collaboration, although it does reference
partnership with the classroom teacher (Tidewater City Public Schools Library Media Center
Handbook, 2016). However, national school librarian standards in place at the start of this study
emphasize promotion of collaborative partnerships, and leadership from the peer level (AASL,
2009). This diffusion of the treatment in the comparison group, and lack of intervention in the
treatment group, may have affected the resilience and burnout scores of new teachers. It also
indicates that school librarians in this district view some unidentified form of mentoring and
collaboration as necessary for new teachers in practice, even though it is not an assigned duty.
From the beginning of the study, concerns were raised that non-librarian responsibilities
would create barriers to implementing the Continuum of Care model. One school librarian spoke
openly from the start. She acknowledged that her extra duties as standardized testing chair for
her school left little time in her schedule to mentor her new teachers, and even less time for
collaboration. Both formative and summative data indicate that school librarians in this district
who served as building chair for mandated state testing found connecting with their new teachers
to be more difficult than expected. Additionally, the pressure on new teachers to prepare students

144
for testing presented another barrier to collaboration. Further study to investigate the influence of
standardized testing on the practice of school librarians in the field seems warranted.
One new teacher pointed out that the mentoring and collaboration process would have
been more effective if interventions started during pre-service week in August 2017. This new
teacher felt that by the time the interventions began, she had already fallen behind. While starting
earlier would be possible with specific school librarian-new teacher pairs, it was not an option
for this standardized model due to the scramble of hires and transfers for new teachers across the
district at the start of the school year. Beginning the implementation of the Continuum of Care
model during pre-service week may be seen as best practice for school librarians in individual
practice.

Causal Research in the Field

This study moved the field of school librarianship toward causal research of best
practices in the professional development of new teachers. The study design used a matched
sample as a strategy to control for possible confounding variables (Leedy & Ormrod, 2016). New
teachers in the treatment group were paired with similar new teachers with respect to initial level
of resilience, grade level, and Title I status of the school, all of which were thought to have an
effect on levels of resilience, burnout, and retention.
Causal research in authentic school settings is problematic. This study was situated in the
natural context of schools, classrooms, and school libraries. As such, it describes the relationship
between new teachers and school librarians in their daily work environment, with the aim of

145
creating a research project that makes a difference in the professional lives of new teachers.
Having involved “end user” research partners, the school librarians who served as
interventionists, added a level of complexity to the process (Johnson et al., 2016). It was
unavoidable that these practitioners in the field have their own professional priorities which were
unrelated to the research. As a leader in the school, the school librarian may also be asked to take
on additional responsibilities that are not in their job description. These added duties may serve
as barriers to mentoring and collaboration. Finding a way to move away from these barriers to a
more enabling role would impact the ability of the school librarian to mentor and collaborate
with new teachers.
Selection of school librarian/new teacher pairs was complicated by the lack of a standard
definition for “new teacher,” either in the literature or in practice. For the purpose of this study, a
new teacher was defined as a professional teacher in their first full-time, contract year. However,
the definition of “new teacher” in the literature ranged from first to fifth year and included
student teachers and interns. In this district, “new teacher” included not only first year teachers,
but also retired teachers who were returning to fill empty positions, long-term substitutes, and
even paraprofessionals. As a further complication, there were new teachers who were hired,
severed from their positions, or were transferred from one school to another while the selection
of the treatment group was underway. Unfortunately, sorting out these discrepancies consumed
all of August-September 2017, the critical period when the new teachers needed access to
information and support structures (Sharplin, O'Neill, & Chapman, 2011). Establishing a field
standard definition of “new teacher” to readily identify those most in need of assistance would
smooth out some of these difficulties.

146
Recommendations

From the beginning, the goal of this study was to make a difference in the working lives
of new teachers by increasing resilience. The findings indicate that there are specific strategies in
the Continuum of Care model that can be set in place to make a positive impact on new teacher
resilience. There are also influencers in the social and physical ecology of the school which
create an environment more conducive to implementing interventions for new teacher resilience.
The Continuum of Care model laid out a series of interventions to boost new teacher
resilience. These interventions were based on the literature for mentoring new teachers and
school librarian best practice. The results of this study show that school librarians acknowledge
that supporting new teachers is part of their role. This is evident in the diffusion of the treatment
to the comparison group, as well as the implementation of the Continuum of Care in most cases.
But at least in some cases the barriers present in the authentic school settings impeded
implementation of the model. Whether the interventions outlined in the Continuum of Care
model can realistically be implemented in a standardized fashion across multiple school settings
is an open question. An evaluation of the current study is underway to shed further light on the
practical implementation of the Continuum of Care model in the authentic school setting and to
identify barriers and enablers for mentoring and collaboration.
Several factors in the social ecology of the school made a difference for the new teachers
in this study. Greater accessibility and availability of the school library and librarian allowed for
more flexibility in the relationship. Physical, digital, and metaphorical proximity to the library
contributed to building a closer personal relationship and strengthened the bond between the
classroom teacher and the librarian. Providing a comfortable, non-threatening environment to

147
advise and answer questions benefited new teachers seeking a safe space for mentoring.
Educators of school librarians should encourage pre-service librarians to take these factors into
consideration when working with new teachers.
The role of the school librarian is broad and encompasses all grade levels and subject
areas in the school. Because they provide services to the entire school population, librarians are
seen as leaders in the school (AASL, 2018). While some duties of the school librarian are
administrative in nature, in this district they are not part of the administrative team. Rather they
are contracted as teachers. As such, their formal relationship to all the other experienced teachers
in the building is an equal, collegial partnership. To support this, the qualitative evidence shows
that school librarians who serve in mentoring and collaborative roles would best take care not to
appear as an administrator or evaluator. Stepping over that line may alarm the new teacher, and
set up additional barriers to future mentoring and collaboration.
The allotment of time also makes a difference, whether more time during the school day
to consult, or a planned event for the school librarian to meet with several new teachers together.
Although the Continuum of Care model did not define how much time would be devoted to
mentoring and collaboration, or where or when these meetings would take place, these concerns
did matter to the new teachers. In cases of only one new teacher in the school, flexibility of meet
ups would be more effective, but where there were several new teachers, even in one department,
a more collaborative approach would enhance the experience. Finally, as the research was
situated in the context of schools, integration into the school calendar was also necessary and
affected the collaborative relationship. Timing should be considered for school librarians who
work in a mentoring and collaborative role with new teachers.

148
Limitations

Diffusion of interventions to the comparison group was difficult to control due to the
study being situated in the authentic setting of schools. Some new teachers in the comparison
group did receive some form of mentoring and collaboration. The quantity, quality, or motivation
behind this mentoring and collaboration for the comparison group is unknown.
The school librarians who served as interventionists were not skilled researchers, and had
priorities in their own practice. Training in the implementation of interventions was provided,
weekly emails encouraged the application of the interventions, and the researcher was available
to clarify and answer questions. However, the school librarians’ primary role as practitioners
presented a barrier to fully implementing the full Continuum of Care model. Thus, opportunity to
put interventions in place was lost, and well-intended plans for collaboration were de-prioritized.
Stronger checks to ensure fidelity to the model may help to control for variable
implementation. However, opportunity to implement interventions could not be reasonably
recovered due to the pace of the school year calendar. Additionally, motivating these
interventionists to carve out time in their already busy schedules to attend more training was not
feasible. Additional duties outside of the school librarian’s job description prevented
implementation of the model in several cases.

149
Further Research

A program evaluation survey of the school librarians who served as interventionists is
underway at this time. This research may further bring to light the barriers and enablers to
mentoring and collaboration under the Continuum of Care model by school librarians for new
teachers in the authentic school setting. Results of the program evaluation may explain the effect
of school level and standardized testing on implementation of the model. Collecting retention
data for the study sample to better define the relationship between intent to return and actual
retention is also in the planning stage.
To further define the Continuum of Care model, a randomized control trial with a larger
sample size in more diverse settings with more data points over several school years would shed
light on the role of the school librarian in providing mentoring and collaboration to support
resilience for new teachers. The lack of results for burnout under the theme of modeling teacher
behaviors points to another open area for research. Additionally, an investigation into the
influence of standardized testing on mentoring and collaboration seems warranted.
Several recommendations for further research may be made to define the theory of
resilience, especially as applied to the teaching profession. Investigation into the interaction
between age and teacher resilience, including the magnitude and direction of this interaction,
would open up a new area of study for teacher resilience. Other demographic variables may also
provide a new area of research into the teacher resilience. Further study of the relationship
between resilience, burnout, and teacher retention would also bring more clarity to the theory.

150
Conclusions

The major goal of this study was to make a difference in the professional lives of new
teachers by putting in place a model of mentoring toward collaboration to increase resilience of
new teachers. Interventions focused on the practices of school librarians to engage, empower,
partner, and co-teach with this special population. Results of the study add to the knowledge of
evidence-based practice in school librarianship in the space of teacher resilience using research
methods which approach causality. The evidence collected over the course of this study leads to
several conclusions.
First, school librarians should consider new teachers, at least initially, as a special
population in need of a discrete standard of practice. Working with new teachers differs from
working with their more experienced peers. In order to establish the collaborative relationship,
school librarians should provide specific, targeted interventions that initiate in a mentoring phase
and move toward a collaborative stance. Bearing in mind that new teachers have differently
defined needs, the role of the school librarian in collaboration with this special population should
reflect attentive interactions which move along a continuum from simple coordination to an
integrated curriculum.
Second, school librarians can make a difference in the working lives of new teachers. By
implementing interventions focused on mentoring and collaboration, school librarians may
influence resilience, burnout, and retention of educators new to the field. Mentoring combined
with collaboration in the school librarian-new teacher pairing produces a new model of
professional development for new teachers. This partnership can be steered from a merely
transactional relationship toward a truly interoperable sharing of roles. School librarians who

151
provide a Continuum of Care develop the collaborative partnership between the school librarian
and new teacher.
Third, establishing an understanding of trust requires an investment of time and effort.
Appropriate development of the relationship between the school librarian and the new teacher
from support to intervention requires an outlay of dedicated resources over a considerable length
of time. This expense is justified when it addresses retention of new teachers for the
improvement of the school ecology. The field expects that school librarians are trained to
effectively collaborate with all professionals in their building. The results of this study show that
finding an area of common interest can even more readily move forward the trusting
relationship, whether that be a professional or a more personal connection. Recognizing this
personal connection between significant colleagues may be identified as best practice for the
field of school librarianship to create a more available opening for effective collaboration.
The concept of the Continuum of Care model was born out of the need to share ideas and
build relationships in a community of practice. The role of the school librarian as a colleague
differs from that of other teachers. By reaching out to new teachers, the school librarian bridges
the gap between the library and the classroom, drawing them to a supportive space. The school
librarian is well versed in listening for patron needs, assessing, and providing resources to
support learning. These same skills can be used to support new teachers.
The American Library Association (ALA) Center for the Future of Libraries confirms the
long-term commitment of the profession to the resilience of society, proclaiming that “librarians
are not just educators but activists” (Aldrich, 2018). Indeed, Aldrich identifies three skills as
critical for the resilience of society, namely empower, engage, and energize. She recommends “a
systematic approach that is coordinated across a community, with libraries as part of the

152
strategy” (Aldrich, 2018, p. 42). The Continuum of Care model addresses this societal need with
a proactive systematic approach to new teacher resilience, using engage and empower to initiate
the conversation, and partner and co-teach to energize the relationship.
Likewise, the school librarian is uniquely positioned in the social ecology of the school,
within a framework for dynamic learning leadership (AASL, 2018). School librarians are
instructional leaders, collaborative partners, and facilitate professional learning (AASL, 2018).
National AASL standards show that collaboration and leadership are embedded in the role of the
school librarian as instructional partner, guiding instructional design to integrate criticalthinking, technology, and information skills by working with classroom teachers to establish
learning objectives and goals, develop assignments, and implement assessment strategies
(AASL, 2018).
Best practice for collaboration in school libraries recommends that librarians build
personal trust with colleagues before attempting to collaborate (AASL, 2018). For new teachers,
this may naturally take the form of building a mentoring relationship, as evidenced by one new
teacher in her interview, “I just think mentoring is a given. Like, you need to do that” (NT1@--ES). School librarians should be mindful of this responsibility to reach out to new teachers as a
special population. The Continuum of Care model provides a framework on which to build this
relationship between the school librarian and her new teachers.
Both the school librarians and the new teachers who were interviewed felt that the
process of mentoring and collaboration was valuable, and had some effect on resilience, burnout,
and retention. As one new teacher said, “I think that overall it's been a very positive experience.
Aside from wishing I had more time [with the school librarian], overall I only have good things

153
to say about it” (NT1@---ES). Carving out time to establish a relationship with new teachers
creates the opportunity to develop a collaborative pairing for years to come.
This dissertation study has moved the field of school librarianship by presenting a
research-based model which lays out strategies to care for our new teachers. School librarians as
significant colleagues who provide mentoring for new teachers create an opportunity for further
collaboration in a relationship of professional parity. The Continuum of Care model provides
specific interventions to build resilience of new teachers and reduce burnout and, in turn increase
retention. This exploratory research study lays the groundwork for further study of the role of the
school librarian to support new teacher resilience in the authentic school setting.