WHAT PRACTICES MATTER IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LIBRARIES

TRACY A. LANSER
2018

WHAT PRACTICES MATTER IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LIBRARIES

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this study was to examine elementary school library practices to
determine if particular practices affected student learning. This study described the
circulation practices, collection leveling practices, scheduling practices and collaborative
practices between school librarians and classroom teachers in high performing and nonhigh performing elementary schools in Missouri school districts with an enrollment of
750-1,500. Data was collected via an online survey and analyzed using ANOVA and the
constant comparative analysis method. Results of the study showed only one statistically
significant difference between the high performing and non-high performing schools:
High performing schools are more likely to allow students to visit the library to check out
books during the school day than non-high performing schools.

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
At the moment that we persuade a child… to cross…that magic threshold into a
library, we change their lives forever, for the better. It’s an enormous force for good.
Barak Obama
The researcher and a selection committee of elementary staff members visited a
high performing school in the area as part of the process of selecting new reading
materials for their elementary school. The high performing school was using one of the
reading series the researcher’s staff was considering. After visiting classrooms at the
school and speaking with individual teachers it was apparent to the committee the reading
program was not implemented with fidelity or consistency in every classroom. During
this visit the researcher and selection committee members observed the library had many
large stacks of books on the circulation desk. The librarian explained, “The kids are
reading so many books that we don't have time to get them shelved when they are
returned.” At the end of the visit the committee determined this district's English
language arts scores were not so much a result of the materials used for reading
instruction, but likely the result of the volume of reading their students were doing. The
researcher wondered if the number of books read in this school was related to their high
achievement in communication arts on the statewide assessment. The researcher is
conducting a study to determine if particular practices in the operation of an elementary
library may increase the achievement in communication arts on the statewide assessment
of elementary students.

1

Elementary school libraries have been part of the American education system for
more than half a century. In 1963, Gaver testified before congress about her research
linking student achievement to the presence of an elementary school library and full-time
certified librarian (Loertscher, 2014). Congress voted in favor of funding to encourage
the development of elementary libraries across the nation through the Education
Improvement Act of 1963. In 2015, President Obama signed into law the Every Student
Succeeds Act (ESSA), the first federal education legislation in more than 50 years to
provide federal revenue to enhance school library services and increase resources
(Vercelletto, 2016). This bipartisan law is considered a victory by librarians because in
addition to providing a source of funding, the law recognizes school librarians as
specialized instructional support personnel. Another provision of the ESSA, the
Supporting Effective School Library Programs Act, authorizes the development of
effective library programs through professional development and support for current
library resources. Congress has recognized the importance of effective school libraries by
enacting this legislation (Vercelletto, 2016).
The State of Missouri has also recognized the importance of school libraries
through the Missouri School Improvement Program (MSIP) and the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) publication of the Growth Guide for
School Librarians. Missouri School Improvement Program (MSIP) standards and
indicators outline the following expectations for school library media centers (LMC):
•

The Library Media Center (LMC) and its resources support, enhance and
enrich the school’s curriculum.

2

•

Library Media Center (LMC) staff collaborate with instructional staff to
integrate resources and services into the instructional program

•

Students have access to a full range of information, resources, digital
access, and reading resources and services in the Library Media Center
(LMC).

•

The Library Media Center (LMC) is evaluated annually. (Missouri DESE,
2013)

In April, 2017, Missouri development teams began revising the Missouri School
Improvement Program (MSIP) Cycle 6 resource and process standards and indicators.
Although the MSIP Cycle 6 standards are in draft form and will not take effect before the
2019-2020 academic year, meeting notes and drafts of resource and process standards
indicate school libraries will remain a vital part of elementary schools in Missouri. MSIP
Cycle 6 standards include subtle changes from MSIP Cycle 5. For example, regarding
LMC staff the MSIP Cycle 6 draft document reads, “The LMC staff, if applicable
[emphasis added], collaborates with instructional staff to integrate library media services
(LMS) into the instructional program.”
The Missouri Growth Guide for School Librarians (Missouri DESE, 2017a)
outlines the standards and quality indicators identifying emerging, developing, proficient,
and distinguished librarians through the professional frames of evidence of commitment,
evidence of practice, and evidence of impact. The Growth Guide for School Librarians
also provides possible sources of evidence to those responsible for evaluating school
librarians and rating them on a scale of 0-7 for each of 24 different indicators across the
following standards: teaching for learning, reading and literacy, information and

3

knowledge, leadership and advocacy, program management and administration,
technology integration, and professional development (Missouri DESE 2017a).
The MSIP Cycle 5 and Cycle 6 draft standards and indicators and the Growth
Guide For School Librarians clearly show library practices are expected to support not
only reading instruction, but instruction in all content areas in order to make sure students
have every opportunity to learn and achieve academic success; however, Missouri
educators may be receiving mixed messages about the importance of school libraries.
Starting with the 2015-16 school year, school libraries in Missouri will be reviewed
through the MSIP process when districts fail to meet accreditation standards on the
Annual Performance Report (R. Wilken, Area supervisor for the Missouri Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education, personal communication, January 30, 2018).
Although Missouri was second only to Massachusetts in setting high expectations
for reading proficiency, 64% of Missouri public school fourth grade students scored
below the proficient reading level on the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) in 2009 (U.S. Department of Education, 2010). The number of Missouri public
school fourth grade students scoring below the proficient level on the NAEP has
decreased from 66% in 2011, to 63.7% in 2015 (DESE, 2018). While these NAEP scores
indicate Missouri fourth grade reading achievement is improving slightly, over 60% of
fourth grade students in Missouri perform below the proficient level (DESE 2018). As
school leaders and educators examine standardized reading test results is important to
consider the impact school library programs may have on student achievement.
School libraries have a narrowly defined purpose: to support educational
programs. Bishop (2013) notes a high priority of library programs has been the promotion

4

of reading. “With the current emphasis on standardized reading test scores, this priority
has become even more a focus and has served to closely link classrooms and the school
library” (p. 30). Kane (2008) agreed, “Obviously, literacy is a primary focus of school
libraries, and information literacy, the ability to derive, make, and share meaning from
information, is often an integral part of each school’s curriculum” (p. 46). Bishop (2013)
notes the school library program provides a setting where students develop essential skills
and access traditional and nontraditional print and non-print resources. Krashen, Lee, and
McQuillan (2012) reported access to limited libraries containing as few as 500 books can
positively impact students’ reading scores. Krashen (2011) states, “We must invest in
libraries” (p. 29). “If there are no books it is certain that no reading will take place” (p.
28).
Educators generally acknowledge school library programs are the collective result
of many program decisions: staffing, collection, and scheduling. Each decision can
impact the benefit of the program. School leaders must consider whether to hire a parttime or full-time librarian and whether to provide support personnel such as a library
assistant or aide. Consideration must be given to the qualifications of the personnel hired
to fill those positions. Schools must also consider the make-up of the collection: books, ebooks, periodicals, and technology. While many decisions regarding school libraries are
made at the district level, this study will focus on decisions made at the building level by
school librarians and building administrators.
The American Association of School Librarians (AASL) Position Statement on
the Role of the School Library Program (2016) states:

5

For students, the school library represents one of America’s most cherished
freedoms: the freedom to speak and hear what others have to say. Students have
the right to choose what they will read, view, or hear and are expected to develop
the ability to think clearly, critically, and creatively about their choices, rather
than allowing others to do this for them. (p. 1)
Since becoming a division of the American Library Association (ALA) in 1951,
the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) has published position
statements regarding practices such as flexible scheduling, labeling books with reading
levels, and the instructional role of the school librarian. These research-based position
statements set a standard for school libraries practicing librarians and aspiring librarians
are encouraged to attain; however, this cannot happen in isolation as decisions regarding
the elementary library are rarely made without the cooperation of the school
administrator(s) and consideration of the big school picture. Factors such as the school
schedule and budget often determine how the elementary library program looks and
functions. School libraries were once considered important in Missouri; however, the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education no longer collects information
regarding public school libraries in Missouri and leaves the design of school library
programs in the hands of individual districts and schools. This leads to the researcher’s
problem statement.
Problem Statement
Research linking elementary school libraries and student achievement as
determined by the Missouri Achievement Program (MAP) communication arts scores is
limited. Educators generally agree reading proficiency by the end of grade three is

6

important; however library programs supporting reading instruction can look very
different from school to school (R. Wilken, Area supervisor for the Missouri Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education, personal communication, January 30, 2018).
This may present a problem, as school libraries may be a contributing factor to student
achievement. Educators and school librarians in Missouri receive mixed messages
regarding the importance of school libraries. While more than 90% of public elementary
schools currently have a school library (Rosa, 2014), the Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education stopped requiring schools to report data on public school libraries
prior to 2014- 2015. The American Association of School Librarians (AASL) takes a
strong position regarding the role and importance of the school library and the role of the
school librarian in 21st century learning, yet it is possible policy makers in Missouri may
no longer see value of school libraries.
At the building level, school leaders and librarians make decisions, for example,
to offer a fixed schedule, one in which the librarian is often used to provide release time
for classroom teachers; an open schedule, one in which teachers can schedule the use of
the library on an as-needed basis; or a mixed schedule, which is a combination of both
the fixed and open schedules (Bishop, 2013). Schools must also make decisions regarding
the collection such as the number and ratio of print to digital resources to provide. The
type of schedule and the make up of the collection often drive decisions such as the
number of visits students make to the library and the number of books they check out per
week (Haycock, 2011). Access to a school library can be especially important to at-risk
students, especially those who may enter school with a vocabulary deficit and need extra
vocabulary exposure and practice (Adams, 2013).

7

Just as literacy is a very fluid concept, the attainment of literacy by students today
is also a very fluid process as students learn to seamlessly access both printed text and
digital media (Barone, 2015). School librarians can offer specialized training in skills
such as the use of technology, the identification of reliable sources, and research methods
that, when utilized, can add to the classroom teachers’ knowledge base and therefore
strengthen instruction. Collaborative practices between school librarians and classroom
teachers within a school can range from simple technology assistance to deep planning,
teaching, and evaluating instructional units; however, the most effective collaborative
practice is the co-planning of instructional units (Hattie, 2012).
Theoretical Framework
This study seeks insight into the design and practices of elementary library
programs to determine if certain practices have an impact on student achievement. The
study is important because practices recommended by entities such as the AASL are no
longer mandated or routinely evaluated in the state of Missouri. School district leaders
have the decision making power to determine whether or how certain library programs
are implemented (R. Wilken, Area supervisor for the Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education, personal communication, January 30, 2018). Because of this,
practices can look very different from school to school. What remains to be discovered is
whether certain school library practices impact reading achievement in Missouri
elementary schools.
The theoretical framework regarding effective libraries for this study is based on
the work of Haycock (2011). Haycock (2011) researched the relationship between and
among literacy, student achievement, and the school library. The goal of the study was to

8

determine the impact, if any, of the school library on student achievement in British
Columbia, Canada. Haycock (2011) formed research questions to discover the
characteristics of school libraries in high performing schools and the extent school and
district decision-making to utilize school library resources impacted student achievement.
Haycock (2011) found high performing schools in British Columbia have bettersupported school libraries. School librarians in the high performing schools collaborated
more with classroom teachers, taught more students more often on flexible schedules,
supported teachers by identifying resources, invested time in reading promotion, and
made greater use of volunteer assistance. The study, which confirmed the findings of
over 40 years of research, correlated effective libraries with increased student
achievement; however, school size was not an isolated variable in Haycock’s study. The
research questions and the conclusions drawn from the study led the researcher to
examine library program decisions and practices within local control to see if there is a
difference in those practices between high performing schools and non-high performing
schools in Missouri.
Another important framework for the study is the work of Hattie (2015), who
claims the greatest barrier to student learning is within-school variability. Within-school
variability, or differences from classroom to classroom or teacher to teacher, is much
larger than variability between schools in most Western countries (Hattie, 2015). While
there can be wide variation from classroom to classroom within a school, there is also
wide expertise within the school that can be identified, nurtured, esteemed, and brought
together to reduce this variance (Hattie, 2015). Hattie (2015) also noted this most
important factor, within-school variability, is one school leaders and stakeholders have

9

some influence to reduce. Hattie (2015) suggests one way to lessen the variability of the
quality of instruction from classroom to classroom is to encourage the practice of
collaborative expertise. Rather than allowing teachers to continue to work behind closed
doors in isolation, Hattie (2015) suggests a shift is needed toward a culture that values
and emphasizes collaboration and encourages all teachers to have the same impact as the
best teachers. “The greatest influence on student learning is having highly expert,
inspired and passionate teachers and school leaders working together to maximize the
effect of their teaching on all students in their care” (Hattie, 2015, p. 19). When
educators, including school librarians and classroom teachers, stop working in isolation
and begin working together to share knowledge, plan units of instruction and teaching
interventions, and evaluate student learning they build what Hattie (2015) refers to as “a
coalition of the successful” (p. 23). In a school community based on shared teacher
expertise where teachers share and learn from one another, equity is enhanced, withinschool variability is reduced, and schools become inviting places to learn for all (Hattie,
2015).
Purpose of Study
Increased accountability for high student achievement requires school
administrators and stakeholders to examine educational practices closely. Legislation
such as the No Child Left Behind Act (2002) and more recent statewide initiatives such
as Top 10 by 20 (2014) have placed increased importance on student achievement.
Parents, patrons, community members, and business leaders are aware of the importance
of developing proficient academic skills. Administrators and those responsible for
making decisions regarding elementary library program practices will gain knowledge

10

from the results of this study. The purpose of this study was to examine the practices of
elementary libraries in both high and non-high performing schools and describe key
practices that may lead to increased student achievement. This study is presented to
expand the body of knowledge regarding elementary library programs and the potential
impact programs may have on student achievement.
Main Research Question
What are the differences, if any, in the presence of particular practices of
elementary libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular
practices in non-high performing elementary schools?
Subset Research Questions
1. What are the differences, if any, in the number of third grade students’ weekly
visits to the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade
students’ weekly visits to the library in non-high performing schools?
2. What are the differences, if any, in the number of books checked out per week by
third grade students in high performing schools and the number of books checked
out per week by third grade students in non-high performing schools?
3. What are the differences, if any, in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high
performing schools?
4. What are the differences, if any, in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools?

11

5. What are the differences, if any, in the collaborative practices between librarians
and classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools?
Main Null Hypotheses
There is no difference in the presence of particular practices of elementary
libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular practices in
non-high performing elementary schools.
Subset Null Hypotheses
1. There is no significant difference in the number of third grade students’ weekly
visits to the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade
students’ weekly visits to the library in non-high performing schools.
2. There is no significant difference in the number of books checked out per week
during scheduled visits by third grade students in high performing schools and the
number of books checked out per week during scheduled visits by third grade
students in non-high performing schools.
3. There is no significant difference in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high
performing schools.
4. There is no significant difference in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools.
5. There is no significant difference in the collaborative practices between librarians
and classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools.

12

Design Controls
Surveys will be returned to an administrative assistant in order to decrease bias on
the part of the researcher. The administrative assistant will collect survey data and
remove any identifying information. Protecting participants’ confidentiality and assuring
anonymity in responding will increase truthfulness of respondents.
Limitations of Study
1. Though several factors contribute to students’ attainment of reading skills this
study is limited to the school library’s influence on the attainment of reading
skills.
2. The data used in this study was obtained through a survey presented to
elementary librarians. The researcher acknowledges the perceptual nature of
the qualitative data and the honesty of the respondents. Each school
predetermined library schedules, circulation policies, and labeling practices
prior to this study. The responses offer a snapshot of library practices as
perceived by the school librarians in each school.
3. The accuracy of the data was dependent on the willingness of school
personnel to respond to the survey.
Delimitations of Study
1. The study focused on Missouri public elementary schools serving grade 3 in
school districts with an enrollment of 750 to 1,500.
2. The schools meeting the criteria for the study will be classified by the
researcher as high performing or non-high performing based on the 3rd grade
Missouri Assessment Program (MAP) English Language Arts scores

13

published by the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education.
3. The researcher acknowledges the importance of the elementary librarian and
the quality of instruction or guidance provided by the librarian; however, this
study will focus on students’ access to library resources, including the
collective expertise of the librarian and classroom teachers as demonstrated
through collaboration.
4. Labeling practices within the library collection were discussed and examined
with regard to aiding or preventing student access to materials; however, the
researcher did not review or discuss the merits of computerized programs such
as Accelerated Reader in this study.
5. The researcher recognizes the importance of all academic areas; however, for
the purpose of this study emphasis was placed on the school library’s
influence on the attainment of skills leading to 3rd grade reading proficiency as
all academic pursuits are impacted by the ability to read proficiently.
Definition of Terms
Collaborative Activities. Collaborative activities include those in which classroom
teachers and school librarians share knowledge or resources for the purpose of
instruction. Collaborative activities may be initiated by classroom teachers or school
librarians and may occur when students are present and when they are not (Gavigan &
Lance, 2015).
Collaboration. Collaboration is the process of individuals taking what they know how to
do (personal knowledge) and working together to create value or new sources of value

14

(Senge, 2006). In a school setting, this process may include activities such as posing
questions, exploring ideas, capitalizing on individual strengths, combining perspectives,
and sharing expertise (Copeland & Jacobs, 2017).
Operational definition of collaboration. The researcher acknowledges the definitions
for collaboration and collaborative activities; however, for the purpose of this study
collaboration will describe a joint effort between classroom teachers and librarians to
plan, carry out, and evaluate units of study by sharing students, resources, and expertise.
Fixed Schedule. A fixed schedule is a scheduling arrangement in which all grades have
prescribed class visits to the library media center at fixed times (Bishop, 2007.)
Flexible Schedule. A flexible library schedule allows for variation in library use, rather
than having each class assigned to a fixed period. This schedule allows classroom
teachers to bring students to the library when there is a need to conduct research or access
resources (McGregor, 2006).
High Performing Schools. Elementary schools were classified as high performing based
on the percentage of 3rd grade students scoring in the proficient or advanced categories on
the 2015, 2016, and 2017 English Language Arts assessment. For the purpose of this
study, the researcher defines high performing elementary schools as those whose
combined proficient and advanced percentages on the 3rd grade ELA assessment are more
than one standard deviation above the mean combined proficient and advanced
percentages of all schools included in the sample for the 2015, 2016, and 2017 school
years. Non-high elementary schools are those whose combined proficient and advanced
percentages are below one standard deviation above the mean combined proficient and

15

advanced percentages on the 3rd grade ELA assessment for the 2015, 2016, and 2017
school years.
Librarian. The term librarian will be used interchangeably with school librarian or
library media specialist by the researcher throughout this paper.
Library media center (LMC). The term school library will be used interchangeably
with Library Media Center (LMC) throughout this paper.
Mixed schedule. A mixed library schedule is a combination approach to scheduling in
which part of the library time is fixed and part of the time is flexible. For example, each
classroom has an assigned or fixed time to visit the library during the week and the
remainder of the schedule is flexible or available for students or classes to visit for
collaborative projects or when a need arises (McGregor, 2006).
Non-high performing elementary schools. For the purpose of this study, non-high
elementary schools are defined by the researcher as those whose combined proficient and
advanced percentages are below one standard deviation above the mean combined
proficient and advanced percentages on the 3rd grade ELA assessment for the 2015, 2016,
and 2017 school years.
Summary
Chapter one presents the researcher’s problem statement and rationale for the
problem statement. The purpose of this study was articulated and the researcher’s
theoretical framework for conducting the study was presented in detail. Limitations and
delimitations were stated and the definitions of terms for this study were explained. In
chapter two the researcher will review relevant literature pertaining to the purpose of the
study and the supporting theoretical framework.

16

Chapter two presents a review of relevant literature. The literature review is
organized thematically, noting the influence of libraries in the development of reading
proficiency, library practices impacting student access to library resources, and
collaboration and inquiry based learning. Chapter three will outline the methodology used
in this study including the participants, sampling procedures, research setting,
instrumentation, research design, and data treatment. Chapter four will include the data
presentation and analysis of the data. Chapter five will present the findings and
conclusions of this study as well as recommendations and implications for future study.

17

CHAPTER TWO
REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Introduction
The National Research Council (1998) asserted academic success as determined
by graduation from high school could be predicted with reasonable accuracy by knowing
a person’s reading skill at the end of third grade. Low reading proficiency in third grade
has lasting consequences, often negatively impacting the earning capacity of individuals
(Fiester, 2010). The results of a longitudinal study of nearly 4,000 students born between
1979 and 1989 showed one in six children who do not read proficiently in third grade are
four times more likely to leave high school without a diploma than children who read
proficiently (Hernandez, 2011). In this study researchers divided the students into three
groups roughly corresponding to the proficiency levels established by the National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP): proficient, basic, and below basic. Dropout
rates (or failure to finish high school on time) were highest, 23%, for students reading at
the lowest level compared to 9% for students with basic reading skills and 4% for
proficient readers (Hernandez, 2011). Hernandez (2011) noted children with the lowest
reading scores represented a third of total students but more than 63% of those who did
not graduate from high school. Hernandez (2011) explained achieving proficiency by the
end of third grade is important, as a pivotal shift occurs from learning to read in the
primary grades to reading to learn beyond third grade. Hernandez (2011) also noted
interventions implemented with struggling readers beyond third grade are rarely as
effective as interventions presented in earlier years. Reading proficiency by the end of
third grade matters because it enables children to use reading skills to gain information in

18

other content areas such as math, science, and social studies; to think critically and solve
problems; and to share what they have learned with others (Feister, 2010).
School libraries in elementary, middle, and high schools have a narrowly defined
purpose: to support educational programs. Kane (2008) explained, “Obviously, literacy is
a primary focus of school libraries, and information literacy, the ability to derive, make,
and share meaning from information, is often an integral part of each school’s
curriculum” (p. 46). Bishop (2013) concurred:
Traditionally, a high priority of library programs has been the promotion of
reading. With the current emphasis on standardized reading test scores, this
priority has become even more a focus and has served to closely link classrooms
and the school library. (p. 30)
The establishment of elementary school libraries began in 1958, when state
supervisors began to see the possibilities for research into the effectiveness of elementary
school libraries and their impact on student achievement (Gaver, n.d.). Gaver (n.d.) noted
the impetus for this research surfaced when state supervisors found it increasingly
difficult to convince local and county school superintendents that libraries in elementary
schools were a necessity. Although university and high school libraries existed in nearly
all institutions, elementary libraries existed in only a small percentage of schools. For
example, in New Jersey, school libraries served only 16% of elementary classrooms
(Gaver, n.d.). In 1963, Gaver testified before Congress and shared research linking
student achievement to the existence of an elementary school library staffed by a fulltime certified librarian. In The Education Improvement Act of 1963, Congress voted in
favor of funding the development of such libraries across the nation (Loertscher, 2014).

19

Wiegand (2007) noted the number of public schools with libraries increased from 50% in
1958, to 93% in 1985.
Very little substantive historical literature, published or unpublished, has been
written on the American public school library since 1965 (Wiegand, 2007). Wiegan
explained:
That was when most graduate programs in library and information studies (LIS)
accredited by the American Library Association (ALA) dropped requirements to
write master’s theses. In addition, dissertations on American public school library
history also diminished after 1985, when LIS doctoral programs began to focus
much more attention on libraries as information institutions (with “information”
almost always linked to and defined by newer information technologies).
(Wiegand, 2007, p. 57-58)
A report from the National Center for Education Statistics confirms today more than 90%
of public schools have a school library while only 49% of public charter schools have a
school library (Rosa, 2014).
Reading proficiency became a focus of the George W. Bush administration’s No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB), which required annual testing and reporting of
students’ reading proficiency scores. The goal of NCLB was for all children to meet
grade-level proficiency scores by 2014. This legislation required states to disaggregate
scores according to socioeconomic status, race/ethnicity, gender, disability, and English
proficiency. A report from the Annie E. Casey Foundation (2010) asserted that, in the
absence of a “consistent, commonly accepted and applied understanding of what reading
proficiency means or how to measure it,” each state set its own standard and uses a

20

unique test to measure reading proficiency (p. 12). In Missouri, third grade reading
proficiency standards for both literature and informational text are outlined in the
Missouri Learning Standards and measured by the Missouri Assessment Program (MAP)
third grade English Language Arts (ELA) assessment.
Role of the Library in Developing Proficient Readers
Although goals for the attainment of literacy skills have been established, it is
difficult to find a widely agreed-upon definition of literacy. Keefe and Copeland (2011)
explained, “The literature discusses research, conceptual frameworks, and approaches to
teaching literacy (often characterized as reading and/or writing) without explicitly
defining what is meant by these terms” (p. 92).
The report of the National Reading Panel (2000), one having significant impact
on reading instruction over the last decade, did not define the terms literacy or reading
(Keefe & Copeland, 2011). Instead, the report focused on five areas related to reading:
phonemic awareness, phonics, reading fluency, vocabulary development, and
comprehension strategies, skills necessary for students to develop in order to become
proficient readers.
Barone (2015) refers to the nature of literacy as “fluid” and suggests, “There is no
fixed definition of literacy; rather, literacy is redefined every day” (p.7). The traditional
ways children acquire literacy skills are shifting along with the development of new
technology (Barone, 2015). Rideout, Foehr, and Roberts (2010) conducted a study
determining students were more likely to spend as much time reading a screen as reading
printed material. Fredrick (2014) refers to these readers as “ambidextrous,” or
“comfortable and open to reading both print and eBooks” (p. 22).

21

Today, literacy instruction requires providing support to students as they come to
understand the modes of image, film, music, and digital social interaction (Barone, 2015),
while making seamless transitions from page to screen and screen to page (Fredrick
(2014). Twenty-first century learners must become skilled at determining the authority
and accuracy of information and gain the ability to analyze and evaluate information in
order to synthesize new learning from multiple sources. Barone (2015) notes,
“Multimodal literacy includes interpretation of visual, written, and performative aspects
of text” (p. 7). Barone continues, “Just knowing how to help students read print is no
longer sufficient” (p. 7).
Digital citizenship, the appropriate, safe, effective, and ethical use of technology
tools and resources, is especially critical for students who are provided and expected to
use a digital device at school or at home (Kompar, 2016). School librarians model and
teach these skills for teachers and students as books and text morph into new formats just
as other media such as music and videos have (Frederick, 2014). Literacy is embedded
within digital media practices supported by school Internet access. For example, instead
of writing traditional book reports, students can write comments about their everyday
reading on Twitter (Barone, 2015). This social connectivity often results in high levels of
engagement for students. Kompar (2016) refers to the teaching of digital citizenship skills
as the “Driver’s Ed to using their devices at home and at school” (p. 62).
Advancements in technology have expanded the school library beyond its
physical walls, often allowing students to access resources 24/7 from their classrooms
and homes (Barone, 2015). Rheingold (2012) notes essential digital literacy skills include
the literacies of attention, participation, collaboration, network know-how, and the ability

22

to deal with the “massive floods of inaccurate information, misinformation,
disinformation—to say nothing of spam, porn, and political incentive” (p. 54). Mardis
(2017) noted the American Association of School Librarians editorial board affirmed,
“Reading is at the core of personal and academic mastery” (p. 50), and continued, “The
school library program is centered on engaging with relevant information resources and
digital learning opportunities in a culture of reading” p. 50. In addition to preparing
students to examine the authority of authors and the bias of sponsors, school library
programs afford students the opportunity to become efficient, effective, creative users of
information. Deloza, summarized:
The development of strong critical thinking skills is not only important in the
digital age, it’s essential. You can Google just about anything, but if you don’t
have the ability to interpret, analyze, evaluate, and process the information you
find, then what good does it do you? (as cited in Barone, 2015, p. 8)
Martin and Panter (2015) asked, “Now that students have all of this access to technology,
why are school librarians still important?” and asserted, “We give them the tools to assess
resources and find truth in a haze of information” (p. 58).
School library programs also provide students the opportunity open their hearts
and minds and to read for enjoyment (Martin & Panter, 2015). Beard and Antim (2010)
note reading is like any other human proficiency: practice matters. When students are
matched with just right books, ones matching their needs, interests and level of ability,
students will likely read more, experience engagement, and comprehend what they have
read (Beard & Antim, 2010). Wide reading, also known as leisure reading, recreational
reading, pleasure reading, or free voluntary reading, is independent, self-selected reading

23

of a continuous text for a wide range of social purposes. This type of reading can take
place in and outside of school, at any time (International Reading Association, 2014).
One of the best techniques for motivating young readers is to increase their access to
books of all types (McElMeel, 2015). Krashen (2003, 2005, 2011) found student choice
and access to books has the most impact on reading improvement, as compared to other
elements of reading instruction. Phonics instruction, checking for understanding and
other strategies are important; however, time to read and access to books are the most
important, yet most ignored factor (McElMeel, 2015). Allington and Gabriel (2012)
stated, “Students are more likely to read more, understand more, and are more likely to
continue reading when they have the opportunity to choose what they read” (p. 10).
To become lifelong readers students must have access to current, quality, high
interest and extensive collections of books and other print materials in their school
libraries, classrooms, and public libraries. Referring to a group of reluctant readers,
McElMeel (2015) related the reluctant readers understood phonics:
…but that wasn’t enough to put those students into the category of reader. Choice
is what put them over the edge, and discussions about good books that they chose
helped them understand and share what they were reading. (2015, p. 31)
Hudson and Williams (2015) related a goal for students, authentic reading, “…that which
mirrors the reading activities that occur in the daily lives of people outside of a school
setting” is encouraged when students are given real books, time to enjoy reading without
the distraction of questions or tasks, choice of what to read, and time to converse about
their reading (p. 532). Hudson and Williams (2015) related student surveys revealed
having choice and access to a wide selection of books led students to, “view reading as a

24

purposeful activity rather than just a task for school” (p. 535). Hudson and Williams
(2015) noted forcing students to read books they do not like may result not only in
students’ failure to engage with the books, but may also cause students to dislike reading
altogether. The power of choice can have a great impact on readers (Hudson & Williams,
2015).
A survey by Scholastic (2016) reported 91% of children ages 6-17 say they are
more likely to read books when they are able to make their own book choices. Research
suggests reading fluency increases with the amount of time reading voluntarily.
Unfortunately, independent reading is often a casualty in our fast paced, media-focused
society. Today’s students know how to read but have little interest in doing so. They have
failed to catch the love of reading; therefore, they choose not to read (Scholastic, 2016).
Beginning Readers should have many opportunities to read books at their
independent levels. When beginning readers read a wide variety of texts independently
their background knowledge and vocabulary increase (Dorn & Jones, 2012). Increasing
children’s access to books had been shown to have dramatically positive effects on
reading growth and achievement (Lindsay, 2013).
Sanden (2014), in a study designed to examine highly effective teachers’
understandings and perspectives regarding independent reading and classroom practices
observed, “One consistent finding was a desire among teachers to empower students’
choices while monitoring their decision making” (p. 167). Each of the teachers
participating in the study agreed student autonomy was a cornerstone of independent
reading (Sanden, 2014); however, they also noted the importance of matching students to
just right books and teaching students to independently determine text appropriateness by

25

using strategies such as the five-finger rule, a strategy in which students read one page of
text and use their fingers to count unknown words, determining the text is too difficult if
five unknown words are counted on one page (Sanden, 2014).
School libraries have an important role in helping at-risk students gain literacy
skills. At risk students often enter kindergarten lacking basic skills (Adams, 2013).
Adams notes these young learners may experience “word poverty,” a vocabulary deficit
(2013, p. 6). Young at-risk students often lack not only basic vocabulary skills, but also
the words needed to ask questions or comprehend stories. Regarding at risk students,
Adams (2013), continues:
Many have never owned books, experienced story time, home libraries, or
technology. They face abuse, broken homes, homelessness, community violence,
and are at risk of dropping out. Some come from other countries and are learning
English for the first time. All face challenges we cannot begin to fathom. (p. 28)
Allington and Gabriel (2012) noted voluminous reading has been proven to be a
successful intervention strategy for struggling readers as well as the most effective form
of test preparation for all students.
Beard and Antim (2010), conducted a study noting below-grade-level readers
benefitted when they consulted with the teacher-librarian about just-right books.
Struggling readers were observed making appropriate book selections after working with
the teacher-librarian for just two weeks, suggesting the students were motivated to read
through this intervention (Beard & Antim, 2010). Pinnell & Fountas (2009) recognized
the need for struggling readers to read and talk about a large number of texts including
those read to them and those they read independently every day. These students need to

26

read texts that interest and engage them. Struggling readers need to read texts from a
variety of genres and ones they can read fluently and comprehend (Pinnell & Fountas,
2009). Pinnell and Fountas conclude:
Even more than children who learn easily, children who have reading difficulties
need to process continuous text (meaningful books). They need to read texts that
are interesting and engaging. They need to expand their reading abilities by
reading “just right” text with your support; they also need to read many texts on
their own. Fill our classroom library with many texts your students can read
independently. Quantity matters. (2009, p. 6)
When classroom libraries cannot meet the demand for books due to lack of space or
funding, students and teachers look to the school library for assistance with finding books
meeting their interests and needs (Beard & Antim, 2010). Catapano, Fleming and Elias
(2009) note, while well stocked, high-quality classroom libraries generate interest and
motivation for reading, support differentiation by matching students with texts and
provide the means to practice reading skills, the establishment a classroom library,
especially for new teachers, comes second to establishing classroom rules and
implementing curriculum. The acquisition, organization, and dissemination of resources
through the school library allow school districts to support classroom reading instruction
in a cost effective way (Beard & Antim, 2010).
Today, school library media centers function as sanctuaries and places of hope for
all students, including those at-risk, when staffed by empathetic school librarians who are
aware of their needs (Adams, 2013). Books provide a comforting haven from a world that
is not always fair. School libraries provide a place where relationships can be established

27

and, when the collection represents the population of the school, students can read and
learn about others like themselves (Adams, 2013). At-risk students often benefit from
resources such as audiobooks, which aid the development of vocabulary, fluency,
comprehension, and familiarity with the proper pronunciation of words (Adams, 2013).
Extensions of school library programs such as book clubs provide a sense of belonging
while encouraging the development of literacy skills. Assistive technology, when
available, can also positively impact at-risk students’ learning (Adams, 2013).
Miller and Moss (2013) note struggling readers typically read less during and
outside of the school day. Regarding struggling readers, Allington (2014), concurs:
Thus, reading volume deficits are largely overlooked when explanations of
reading difficulties (or fluency problems) are offered and overlooked in designing
intervention lessons to remediate the reading difficulty. Reading volume is
typically not addressed in Individual Education Plans (IEP) developed for pupils
with disabilities even though some 80 percent of these students exhibit reading
difficulties. (p. 17)
When struggling readers engage in leisure reading outside of school (Allington,
2009), receive support for selecting books (Reutzel, Fawsom, & Smith, 2008), and talk
about the books they have read (Kamil, 2008), they make gains in reading achievement.
Struggling readers are often given the least choice and check out fewer books than their
peers. Honoring and inquiring about students’ selections, even when the selections are
short, engaging texts, empowers students and provides insight into their lives as readers
(Ward, 2017). When teachers provide a selection of choices to guide students toward
successful reading experiences and develop students’ ability to self-select appropriate

28

texts, the likelihood students will read outside school improves dramatically (Allington,
2012).
Library Practices Impacting Student Access to Library Resources
The American Association of School Librarians states, “Effective school libraries
are dynamic learning environments that bridge the gap between access and opportunity
for all K-12 learners (AASL, 2016). School librarians spend time and money developing
a collection of resources to meet the needs of students and teachers, yet collections are
not always used to the fullest (Bishop, 2013). Bishop (2013) states, “To encourage the
use of library materials, school librarians should develop workable circulation policies
that are positive, rather than punitive” (p. 136). School library policies generally vary
according to the library’s schedule and the needs of the students (Bishop, 2013). School
librarians should encourage the use of library materials and collaborate with classroom
teachers to promote both reading and the library collection (Bishop, 2013). Williams
(2013) noted unfortunately, library rules and regulations sometimes keep students away
from books. Williams (2013) explained, “If reading is to be the window to the world,
then we, as teacher librarians need to punch more windows through our own library walls
in order to provide a steady accessible, inviting stream of books to our students” (p. 15).
Krashen (2011) agrees, “The obvious practical implication is that if we are serious about
encouraging literacy development, we need to be serious about providing access to
reading material” (p. 29). To prepare students for lifelong learning, 21st century librarians
must position their work at the center of their school’s reading programs, develop policies
and practices supporting students’ academic and personal needs, and eliminate
restrictions on students’ choice of and access to resources (Moreillon, 2009).

29

Circulation practices. The American Association of School Librarians (AASL)
position statement on the librarian’s role in reading states school libraries must provide
“open, non-restricted access to a varied high quality collection of reading materials in
multiple formats that reflect academic needs and personal interests” (2016b, p.1). In a
study that compared student achievement at higher and lower performing schools with
similar funding in British Columbia, Haycock (2011) found the library collections at high
performing schools held an average of 15,000 items, while the library collections at low
performing schools held an average of 12,000 items. The holdings at high performing
schools, on the average, were nearly four years newer. Haycock (2011) also found school
library usage was greater in public schools with high student achievement. High
performing schools had an average of 1,001.7 individual visits to the library while lower
performing schools had an average of 416.5 individual visits. Similarly, high performing
schools had an average of 18.8 group visits to the library per week while low performing
schools had an average of 14.1 group visits. A study conducted by Francis, Lance, and
Lietzau (2010) provided evidence that elementary schools with more individual library
visits each week tended to have a higher percentage of students scoring proficient or
advanced in reading at third and fifth grade. Students performed better when library visits
and the number of resources borrowed indicated heavier use of the library (Francis,
Lance, & Lietzau, 2010).
School library circulation policies can impact student access to books and
resources. Policies regarding the number of visits per week, (often driven by the master
schedule), the number of books students can check out per visit, and whether students can
continue to check out if they have overdue books can impact student achievement

30

(Haycock, 2011). School librarians who use restrictive circulation policies, such as
allowing young students to check out only one book at a time, inhibit students’ access to
books, potentially negatively impacting students’ reading growth (Downes, Krueger, &
Taylor, 2017).
School library circulation policies are especially important for students living in
poverty as these students have access to fewer libraries or libraries that are under
resourced. A study conducted by Pribesh, Gavigan, and Dickinson (2011) showed
“consistent, statistically significant differences between libraries housed in schools with
high and low concentrations of students living in poverty” (p. 155). Pribesh, Gavigan,
and Dickinson (2011) concluded school libraries have the potential to help bridge the
poverty achievement gap with access to books and resources.
The American Library Association’s Policy on Confidentiality of Library records
states the circulation records and other records identifying the names of library users are
confidential and should not be made available to any local, state or federal governmental
agency without a subpoena (ALA, 1986). Following suit, the American Association of
School Librarians Position Statement on the Confidentiality of Library Records
acknowledges the library community recognizes children and youth have the same right
to privacy as adults (AASL, 2012). Today some school librarians do not keep students’
checkout records past one previous user in an effort to protect confidentiality. Lansford
(2017) shares several ways circulation data void of student names can be used to improve
student access to books. First, when considering changes to improve circulation Lansford
(2017) suggests starting small and looking at one or two data points to interpret. For
example, Lansford (2017) recommends starting with a section of the library such as

31

biographies or graphic novels. Comparing circulation data on biographies and anecdotal
notes about which biographies students were choosing led to the purchase of more
popular biographies to pair with existing ones (Lansford, 2017). Similarly, circulation
data regarding graphic novels showed these books were in high demand; however, while
graphic novels represented a high percentage of the overall collection circulated, they
represented a low percentage of the overall collection, showing this genre needed to be
expanded (Lansford, 2017). In addition to uncovering discrepancies between the
collection and circulation, Lansford (2017) notes circulation data can be used to increase
access to books and resources by creating “visiting library” programs through which
teachers check out bins of books relating to the curriculum to enhance their classroom
collections,” and to make changes to circulation policies such as promoting flexible
checkout times (p. 75).
School librarians can help instill a joy of reading or extinguish it. Limiting the
number of books students may check out based on a need to teach responsibility may
thwart a learner’s natural desire for self-direction and personal choice. Requiring students
to select only books they can read or stipulating books may not be abandoned, even if
they are too difficult or boring, can kill the joy of reading (Beckham, 2011). Beckham
(2011) also noted, “Who knows whether they read or do not read the books? However, it
is clear they will not read what they do not have access to, either in their hands or in their
book bags” (p. 53).
Conversely, removing limits on the number of books students may check out and
allowing self-checkout increases circulation and empowers students (Beckham, 2011). A
study conducted in one school noted the number of books checked out during the two

32

years prior to and the two years following a policy change that allowed students to
increase the number of books checked out from one book every six day cycle to four
books each visit (Downes, Steege, & Taylor, 2017). Changing to a less restrictive
circulation policy resulted in students checking out over 80% more books in the two
years following the change (Downes, Steege, & Taylor, 2017). Downes, Steege, and
Taylor noted the Kindergarten students entering school following the policy change year
learned to be responsible for books from their first week of school. Based on the findings
of the study Downes, Steege and Taylor (2017) recommended younger students be
allowed to check out the same number of books as upper elementary students and that
librarians provide opportunities for students to exchange books between scheduled library
classes.
Labeling practices. School library labeling practices can create interest in books
or discourage or even prohibit wide reading (Martin, 2015.) Hunt and Wachsmann (2012)
describe labels as “stickers and dots that indicate which books are considered—by one
rubric or another—appropriate for a particular reading level or lexile level” (p 90).
Labels are sometimes used to note reading levels or to identify award-winning books.
School librarians using this type of labels argue the labels enhance access and improve
convenience for readers. Other librarians argue the same labeling practices can cause
readers to judge books by their labels rather than content, resulting in readers avoiding
entire groups of books because teachers or parents deem them off limits (Hunt &
Wachsmann, 2012).
The library media specialist is usually identified as the children’s literature expert
in the elementary school whose role is to provide expertise and a collection that meets

33

curricular needs (Hunt & Wachsmann, 2012; Martin, 2015). When students are allowed
to pursue their interests and can confidently find books they can read proficiently they are
encouraged to read more and, as a result, sometimes become subject experts. Labels can
help match readers to books on the topics of interest. Within the context of self-selection
and choice, labels can help students choose books, not prevent them from choosing (Hunt
& Wachsmann, 2012).
Motivations for labeling come in several forms. Sometimes the collection is
labeled in an effort to help students find materials quickly and efficiently. Other times it
is an attempt to restrict access to materials deemed offensive or as a result of mandates
from administrators (Martin, 2015). Labels may give the impression the library or
librarian endorses or favors certain resources over others. Rating systems such as
Common Sense Media or Focus on the Family provide content ratings may influence a
reader’s opinion for or against the material (Martin, 2015). Unlike viewpoint-neutral
directional labels, which do not suggest moral or doctrinal endorsement, these systems
assume individuals or groups have the authority to determine what is appropriate or
inappropriate for others (Martin, 2015). Viewpoint or prejudicial labeling exists to warn,
discourage or prohibit students from accessing resources based on a value judgment of
content, language, theme, etc. Viewpoint labeling may be prejudicial and conflict with
the Library Bill of Rights (Martin, 2015). Doyle (2015) notes barriers to access prevent
students from browsing books on sensitive or controversial topics as students feel less
comfortable requesting access to those materials at the circulation desk as they would
browsing through them on regular library shelves.

34

Hunt and Wachsmann (2012) explain labels also help students choose books
efficiently from hundreds or thousands of books in the school library. Hunt (2012) notes
browsing efficiency must be taught as a strategy because students’ browsing time is
limited during the school day. Labels may help students use limited library time within
any type of library schedule more efficiently (Hunt & Wachsmann, 2012). Emergent
readers may find the task of choosing books in the library overwhelming, especially in
schools where budget cuts have resulted in a reduction of the library staff. Wachsmann
(2012) notes labels may become an expedient substitute for busy or unavailable library
staff.
Labels are sometimes used to simply indicate quizzes are available for particular
books. While this type label can also indicate reading level or point value, Hunt (2012)
prefers to put this type of information on the inside of the book so a student browser must
open the book and, by doing so, may get a better idea of whether it is a good fit. Hunt
(2012) states labels can be used to inform rather than censor student book choice.
While labels may seem advantageous to some, Wachsmann (2012) argues a
labeled collection creates opportunity for censorship, especially when students are told
they can choose books only within certain parameters such as reading levels. Wachsmann
(2012) asks, “What about that student who wants to revisit an old favorite or share it with
a younger brother or sister? (p. 91). Martin (2015) expressed concern that labels
indicating reading levels or readability may cause embarrassment for students reading at
higher or lower levels than their classmates. Martin (2015) suggests these labels pose a
bullying risk when students, including those identified as gifted, carry books identifying
their reading levels.

35

Labels used in elementary libraries are sometimes viewed as helpful. Labels
identifying award-winning books or books with certain topics can generate interest and
promote efficient browsing while those same labels can discourage wide reading (Hunt &
Wachsmann, 2012). Books labeled to note an electronic quiz is available for a program
such as Renaissance Learning’s Accelerated Reader (AR) program may also send a
message that books without quiz labels are not worth reading because they are not worth
points (Cregor, 2011).
School libraries play a unique role in maintaining intellectual freedom by
providing students with opportunities to read materials they might not otherwise be able
to access or afford. A core belief of intellectual freedom is a student’s right to privacy
and confidentiality (Martin & Panter, 2015). Library program practices should not
prevent students from feeling safe and free to access information, explore issues of
concern to them, and learn (Martin & Panter, 2015).
Scheduling practices. Another feature of the school library program impacting
student access to resources is the organization of the library schedule. Library schedules
are commonly described as fixed, flexible or mixed. Each type of schedule has unique
benefits and limitations. Scheduling can be one of the most important considerations for
school libraries. Beyond reflecting the physical constraints of the library, scheduling
reflects the school’s teaching and learning philosophy (Moreillon, 2014b).
Fixed schedules. The fixed schedule is one in which elementary classrooms have
a regularly scheduled library time that rotates, often on a weekly basis. For many schools,
fixed schedules are still the practice of the day and will not change soon (Rowe, 2007).
The scheduling of library instructional time is often a weekly special (Stubeck, 2015),

36

through which students rotate to provide classroom teachers with planning time
(Moreillon, 2014b). Unlike elementary libraries, high school libraries remain open during
the school day while teachers are provided a planning or conference time each day
(Moreillon, 2014b). Moreillon (2014b) suggests using scheduled library time to provide
planning time for elementary classroom teachers is commonly practiced in elementary
schools where administrators have not found workable alternatives to providing adequate
planning time during contact hours.
Librarians who work within a fixed schedule have noted the benefits of this type
of schedule. For example, students are seen in the library on a regular, often weekly,
basis. This allows the librarians to follow the students from year to year. Smith (2017)
notes, “Although some research has shown that this might not be the most effective way
to provide library skills instruction, it does allow for a captive audience” (p. 28). Rowe
(2007) notes fixed schedules also give librarians the opportunity to develop a very good
knowledge of students’ interests and capabilities. The predictable schedule gives
children, especially younger ones, a comfortable familiarity with the library (Rowe,
2007). Smith (2017) agrees regularly scheduled library time can be used to advocate for
the importance of the library by sharing stories with even the youngest readers in which
favorite characters visit the library and learn to use library resources.
Perceived drawbacks to fixed scheduling also exist. School librarians who see
students once a week at their regularly scheduled time and then do not see those students
until the next week may find their teaching is less effective and deep learning is not
secured (Moreillon, 2014b). Ahlfeld (2014) explained, “Although there was great
learning happening in the library, it was sometimes like Las Vegas—what happened in

37

the library stayed in the library” (2014, p.33). Fixed scheduling often results in standalone lessons rather than inquiry or resource-based learning (Stubeck, 2015). This type of
scheduling can inhibit collaborative teaching due to the absence of common planning
time which allows the librarian and classroom teacher to plan units, assemble resources,
teach information literacy within the context of the unit, provide support, conduct
assessments, grade collaboratively, and evaluate the unit in order to improve it for future
learning (Stubeck 2015).
Opportunities for collaboration with teachers and authentic information literacy
are often perceived as limited within the fixed schedule; however, with ingenuity,
approachability, and persistence, collaboration is achievable (Rowe, 2007). The
librarian’s challenge within a fixed schedule is figuring out how to make meaningful
connections with students about finding, evaluating and synthesizing information as well
as encouraging lifelong reading habits in a short amount of time (Ahlfeld, 2014). Rowe
(2007) suggests fixed schedules make collaboration difficult, but not impossible.
Cooperation and constant communication with classroom teachers create inroads through
which collaborative ventures such as English language arts poetry units, and Native
American social studies units are established (Rowe, 2007).
Stubeck (2015) noted fixed library schedules result in more stand-alone lessons
than inquiry or resource-based instruction. The absence of common planning time with
classroom teachers makes it difficult for the school librarian to meet with teachers to
identify teaching goals, plan inquiry units, gather resources to support units of
instruction, and teach information literacy within the context of the units (Stubeck, 2015).
Stubeck (2015) noted skills taught in stand-along lessons apart from the content of the

38

curriculum are not as relevant to students as those taught in the context of the students’
prior knowledge related to the content. In an effort to enable inquiry learning with a fixed
library schedule Stubeck (2015), a school librarian, and classroom teachers willing to
collaborate on unit planning utilized digital technology to implement the Information
Search Process (ISP), a staged, predictable model for guided inquiry. Stages of the ISP
model include task initiation, exploration, topic selection, focus formulation, information
collection, and presentation (Stubeck 2015). Each stage of the ISP model presented an
opportunity for the school librarian or classroom teachers to prescribe interventions for
individual students or entire classes from either location, the school library or the
classroom. The use of digital resources made it possible for the school librarian and
classroom teachers to use the ISP as a tool for collaboration within a fixed library
schedule and to replicate this process across the district with future collaborative units
(Stubeck, 2015).
Fixed library schedules may make it more difficult to help students develop
genuine reading behaviors. Lambert (2017) noted a drawback to fixed library schedules is
the fact that students sometimes get so caught up in the routine of scheduled visits they
may return the books whether they are finished with them or not. Lambert (2017),
concerned about this practice, explained the students were not behaving like genuine
readers. Genuine readers, carefully select books based on interest, peer recommendations,
and excitement about the next selection. Genuine readers, as Lambert (2017) noted, do
not pull bookmarks from the middle of their books and check in their books “just because
it’s library day” (p. 34). Instead, genuine readers return books because they finish or
choose to abandon them (Lambert, 2017).

39

Fixed schedules afford all students the opportunity to visit the library at least once
a week. During these visits, librarians can teach information literacy skills to all students
in the school. Unfortunately, students may view the library as a subject rather than a
source of resources and learning. Because the library time is scheduled, students are not
able to visit the library at the point of need. In larger schools, fixed schedules consume
80-90% of the librarian’s time, leaving little time for other management responsibilities
such as cataloging or collaboration (Bishop, 2013).
Flexible schedules. A flexible school library schedule allows for variation of use,
as classes are not regularly scheduled on a rotating basis. Flexible schedules allow for
“just in time” instruction (when needed) vs. the “just in case” instruction (might be
needed someday) found in the lessons presented to students who go to the library on a
fixed schedule (McGregor, 2006). Moreillon (2014b), describes flexibly scheduled
library programs as those which embrace a model of library access “at the point of need,”
providing students and teachers opportunities to use the library when resources are
needed. During the 2007-08 school year, flexible scheduling was available in 61% of
school libraries (Rosa, 2014, p. 364). More recently, the American Association of School
Librarians (AASL) sponsored School Libraries Count, a national longitudinal study of
school library programs across the United States. The School Libraries Count study
(2012) reported the mean total hours per week available for flexible scheduling was 21.1
with a range from 20 hours per week to 44 hours per week.
Flexible scheduling allows students to have learning experiences that are driven
by needs, rather than a fixed time to visit the library. It allows students, teachers, and
librarians to become partners in learning and for inquiry skills to be taught within the

40

context of the curriculum, rather than in isolation so students can develop the skills to
analyze, evaluate, interpret and communicate information and ideas (AASL, 2014).
Flexible scheduling allows librarians and teachers to take advantage of teachable
moments and provide support for learning at the time of need vs. pre-planned library
lessons taught in isolation (McGregor, 2006). These brief moments extend learning
opportunities to access prior knowledge, use context, and connect information patterns
through meaningful assignments that are open-ended, allow for choice and personal
interest, and expression of personal opinion. Students take ownership and get excited
about this kind of learning (McGregor, 2006).
Inquiry learning has been described as a relationship between thinking skills and
content (McGregor, 2006). Flexibly scheduled school libraries can provide students
conducting inquiry, whether scientific, historical, social, or other types of inquiry, the
ready access to information that waiting a week for the next regularly scheduled library
time cannot provide (McGregor, 2006). Because students are seen in the library at the
point of need or interest, the teaching of information literacy skills is closely related to
classroom assignments. Flexible scheduling allows librarians and teachers to collaborate,
improving communication and familiarity with the curriculum (McGregor, 2006).
Flexible schedules encourage students to become independent users of resources who
gain lifelong skills. One school noted more teachers integrated educational technology
into their instruction within a modified flexible schedule (Moreillon, 2014b).
One drawback to flexible scheduling is the possibility students may infrequently
or never visit the library to check out resources for research or to read for pleasure
(Bishop, 2013). Bishop (2013) offered additional concerns including the possibility

41

problem students may be sent to the library frequently to get them out of the classroom
and having students and teachers in the library constantly may leave the librarian little
time for other responsibilities such as ordering or cataloging resources
Although the AASL promotes flexible scheduling as best practice, practicing
librarians sometimes question the effectiveness of a flexible schedule. Johnson (2017), in
a blog post revisiting his presentation to the AASL 12th National Conference in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, stated he has offered his last apology regarding fixed library
schedules and raised several additional concerns with flexible schedules.
1) You can’t teach kids you don’t see.
Johnson noted he has never met a media specialist in a flexible library
program who meets with every teacher on staff, let alone for an equal
amount of time. Cooperative teachers will make sure their students
have a superior learning experience while those who are isolationists
may not.
2) We are teaching teachers to derive from the curriculum.
Johnson (2017) noted unless flexible scheduling is required for every
class, it encourages a rogue-teacher mentality. He suggests we should
ask whether a flexible or fixed schedule works better with the assigned
curriculum?
3) It’s not just research, but reading.
Johnson (2017) asks, “Do we sacrifice our role in promoting life-long
readers that can be best done with regular LMC visits to our role in

42

teaching technology and information literacy skills in flexibly
scheduled programs?” (n.p.)
4) Inquiry should be a daily activity.
Studies have demonstrated that distributed practice or spaced learning
sessions over time leads to better retention of information than massed
practice or cramming learning sessions together in immediate
succession (Goossens, Camp, Verkoeijen, Tabbers, Boumeester &
Zwaan, 2016). Johnson (2017) poses the possibility that this type of
distributed practice may apply to information literacy skills by asking,
“Can smaller but continuous opportunities for practicing information
literacy skills be as or more beneficial than a few, isolated larger
projects?” (n.p.)
5) We are neglecting our part in the containment agreement.
Johnson (2017) states, “Let’s just get bottom-line pragmatic—it’s hard
to fire prep-time providers” and asks, “Do we want to work with a
fixed schedule and have job security or with a flex schedule and be
vulnerable to cuts?” (n.p.)
Johnson (2017) recognized the American Association of School Librarians (AASL)
through its position statements, standards, and editorial policies leads educators to
conclude flexibly scheduled programs are beneficial and fixed library schedules are
detrimental, and acknowledged that there is some research about the benefits of flexibly
scheduled programs. Johnson (2017) raised questions about whether there is room in the
AASL tent for both the flexible and the fixed schedules and expressed concern regarding

43

marked downsides to flexible scheduling and strengths to fixed scheduling he was unable
to find addressed in the literature. Several practitioners agreed with Johnson and wrote
letters of support published in subsequent issues of School Library Journal (Gavigan,
Pribesh & Dickinson, 2010). Fontichiaro and Hamilton (2014) echoed Johnson’s concern,
by stating they have heard “good librarians” convince their faculty and principals to
adopt flexible scheduling and convert dull worksheets to rich inquiry projects (p. 57).
Fontichiaro & Hamilton (2014) added this concern:
Flexible scheduling works, but wouldn’t be doable if every teacher bought in.
What makes a flexible schedule successful is…gulp…having some teachers who
opt out, making room in the schedule for those who volunteer. Wait. That wasn’t
what we intended (p. 58).
Mixed schedules. Mixed school library schedules are a combination of fixed and
flexible schedules. There are many possible combinations of mixed schedules such as
fixed schedules for primary classrooms and flexible schedules for upper elementary
classes (Bishop, 2013). When a full-time aide is available, the librarian might teach
scheduled classes within a mixed schedule while the aide assists small groups or
individual students who visit the library from other classes (Bishop, 2013). In schools
where this type of scheduling is possible, the school library may have scheduled classes
in the mornings and be open, or flexibly scheduled, in the afternoons. Bishop (2013)
noted both flexible and mixed library schedules allow more use of the school library for
personal reading and research activities.
Ahlfeld (2014) noted one mixed schedule structure was designed to provide each
primary classrooms with a 30 minute fixed library time allowing for teacher planning

44

periods, followed by a literacy hour in which the librarian assisted the students with highquality book selections while classroom teachers taught guided reading lessons (Ahlfeld,
2014). In this model, students were able to browse, read in comfortable spaces, choose
books, and discover the pleasure of spending time in the school library (Ahlfeld, 2014).
This model allowed the school librarian to learn more about the readers and hold
important conversations with students about reading and the library (Ahlfeld, 2014). In
grades three through six, the model provided opportunities for in-depth research or for
projects integrating technology. Ahlfeld (2014) noted in addition to important student
conversations about books and resources, this mixed schedule model brought increased
collaboration between the librarian and classroom teachers. As the dialogue deepened,
trust increased, and the librarian and classroom teachers were able to work in either the
library media center or classroom environment in which the students felt most
comfortable (Ahlfeld, 2014).
Some elementary school librarians consider the mixed schedule to be the ideal
(Bishop, 2013). Moreillon (2014b) states:
In some schools with small student populations, mixed schedules including both
fixed and flexible times can be effective for teaching and learning as long as there
is sufficient time over consecutive days for sustained engagement with resources
and the expertise of the school librarian. (p. 26)
Collaboration and Inquiry Based Learning
Collaboration is generally described in conversational terms as people working
together to reach a common goal. Senge (2006) dedicates his third discipline to
collaborating, or team learning. Senge refers to this as “alignment” (p. 217) and describes

45

it as a group working together to function as a whole. Using a jazz band as an example of
alignment, Senge (2006) notes while each member plays an important individual part,
beautiful music is created when members combine their parts and “play as one” (p. 218).
School librarians have been consistently defined throughout the years as an
instructional consultant and instructional partner (Martin & Panter, 2015). In an effective
school library program, the school librarian serves as an instructional leader, program
administrator, teacher, information specialist, and collaborative partner (AASL, 2016).
Working with classroom teachers, the school librarian develops information literacy and
digital literacy instruction for all students (AASL, 2016). Rowe (2007) writes, “One
cannot dispute the value of collaboration. It brings concreteness to concepts for the
children and provides a seamless transition to teaching information literacy” (p. 46).
Teachers and school librarians work together to select materials and plan activities
offering students an integrated approach to learning. Together they share responsibility
for reading and information literacy instruction, planning and teaching collaboratively
based on the needs of the student (AASL, 2010a).
Collaborative teaching allows the school librarian and classroom teacher to
provide immediate feedback and to have deeper conversations with students during work
time than either would have when working in isolation (Ainsworth, 2016). Kowalski
(2016) suggests librarians must initiate the collaborative conversations with classroom
teachers rather than simply offering to help if needed. Librarians become active partners
in the learning exchange by understanding content standards, attending team meetings,
communicating with teachers, and making time to co-create meaningful and empowering
lessons that deepen critical thinking (Akingbola, 2017).

46

Steck (2012), an elementary principal in a school where collaborative conferences
allow stakeholders to plan units of instruction offers this perspective: “In today’s world it
is so important that our students have the opportunity to develop research strategies to
effectively use the wealth of information that is instantly available to them” (Steck &
Padget, 2012, p. 36). Steck and Padget (2012) noted their collaborative conference model
began as a shared vision and grew into the primary vehicle for vertical and horizontal
planning among teachers in their school.
Gavigan and Lance (2015) presented the results of a study in which participating
administrators and teachers consistently endorsed collaborative instruction between
school librarians and teachers. Both librarians and teachers mentioned the value of
collaborative activities. School librarians were recognized as model teachers when
students were present and when they were not. Collaboration between school librarians
and classroom teachers puts the librarian at the center of instruction and helps with the
perception the librarian’s work is essential for student success (Moreillon, 2014a).
Gavigan (2012) maintains learning partnerships that foster a love of lifelong learning and
positively impact student achievement are built through collaboration between school
librarians and classroom teachers. A study of high performing schools in British
Columbia by Haycock (2011) determined school librarians in higher performing schools
collaborate more with classroom teachers, support teachers by identifying resources, and
teach more students, often during flexibly scheduled library time.
A meta-analysis conducted by Hattie (2012) of more than 800 studies on what
works best for student learning in classrooms identified collaboration as an important
influence on student learning. Hattie (2012) noted, “The co-planning of lessons is the task

47

that has one of the highest likelihoods of making a marked positive difference on student
learning” (p. 74). After co-planning, co-teaching, and co-assessing a unit designed to
teach students how to use nonfiction sources to research a topic, practitioners Copeland, a
school librarian, and Jacobs, a fourth grade teacher (2017), noted their students showed
growth in every area assessed. Students’ content knowledge increased from 0% to 84%
proficiency on the performance task pre- and post-assessment rubric. Data collected
indicated students’ perceptions of their own collaboration and communication skills
increased along with note taking skills and website evaluation (Copeland & Jacobs, 2017,
p. 25). In addition to the growth shown by students impacted by this collaborative effort,
Copeland and Jacobs (2017) noted as collaborative partners they learned the importance
of effectively using soft skills such as maintaining trust and respect, sharing expertise and
accepting each other’s ideas, and showing understanding when mistakes were made.
Jacobs (2017) noted, “The best part of this collaboration was the ripple effect at our
school” (p. 26).
One benefit of collaborative teaching is it pushes the role of the school librarian
closer and closer to the center of teaching and learning (Loertscher, 2014). Fontichiaro
and Hamilton (2014) expressed concern the world is increasingly satisfied with “good
enough” practices in the absence of better research practices. Kompar (2016) refers to
this as “the false perception that searching on Google is equivalent to research” (p. 61).
Kompar (2016) expressed concern that the ease, convenience, and ubiquitous nature of
information and anywhere/anytime access obscures the need for important lessons on
intellectual freedom, privacy, copyright, and the effective, responsible, safe, and ethical
use of information in a variety of formats. Kompar (20160 believes these lessons are

48

“critical, urgent, and imperative lessons to be learned” (p. 60). School librarians are
accustomed to providing instruction in inquiry and research and the use of technology for
educational purposes in addition to encourage students to read for enjoyment (Kompar
2016). Fontichiaro and Hamilton (2014) explained, “We know that very few teachers
receive pedagogical training or guidance on research skills and strategies in their teacher
education programs (p. 59).” Fontichiaro and Hamilton (2014) note research remains the
librarians’ invisible skill overshadowed by anytime, anywhere Internet access; however,
teachers’ perspectives about what librarians and their students can do change in
collaborative teaching environments.
Another benefit of collaborative teaching is the embedded professional
development that takes place as school librarians and classroom teachers share expertise
such as the use of a particular reading strategy or the use of technology, while trying on
new perspectives and modeling risk-taking for students (Moreillon, 2009). Dotson and
Clark (2015) note, “Student learning is dependent on teacher learning; therefore, reform
often begins with teacher education and/or professional development” (p. 10). School
librarians who have ongoing training can help schools meet the teachers’ needs for
information about the effective use of developing technologies through librarian-led
professional development (Dotson & Clark, 2015). Dotson and Clark note school
librarians are “well positioned to enhance and support the academic success of students
by moving beyond the library and toward teaching the teachers” (p. 15). Kompar (2016)
notes school librarians can support teachers through professional learning opportunities,
tutoring sessions, creating online tutorials or screencasts and working directly with grade
levels or whole faculty groups. Kompar (2016) noted school librarians can embed

49

professional learning with individual teachers through modeling. Ahlfeld (2014),
concurred, “It seemed that if a teacher had to borrow technology outside his/her
classroom, it would get little authentic use and innovation would be minimal” (p. 33). By
creating open lines of communication about topics such as the effective use of
technology, school librarians can provide ongoing professional development (Dotson &
Clark, 2015). Through collaboration, professional learning can and should take place
anytime, anywhere; in any format the learner needs it (Kompar, 2016). The ultimate
beneficiaries of embedded professional development will be the students (Dotson &
Clark, 201).
A study commissioned by the South Carolina Association of School Librarians
(2013) was designed to assess the extent to which school libraries transform schools by
contributing to student success. Phase two of this study examined the perceptions of
administrators’ and teachers’ perceptions of the school librarian’s role in collaborative
teaching and leadership activities. Respondents included 273 administrators and 917
teachers across South Carolina. Of the administrators responding to the survey, 36.4%
considered “Librarian & teacher design/teach together” highly desirable while 55%
considered it essential (p. 6).
Schrack (2015) noted collaboration has become a necessity in 21st Century
education. One way school librarians establish and build collaborative relationships is to
connect with new teachers in the school building. Schrack (2015) initiated relationships
with new teachers by conducting a brief overview of the resources available in the library
media center during the new teacher workdays at the beginning of the school year.
Recognizing this overview just skimmed the surface of what the library media center was

50

all about, Schrack (2015) evaluated this approach and asked the following key questions:
“How much are the teachers actually gaining from this experience? Is this truly
beneficial? Will this help to create a culture for collaboration?” (p. 35). Acknowledging
new teachers are often overwhelmed at the beginning of the school year and bombarded
with information overload, Schrack (2015) determined what new teachers needed most
and made the school information system the focus of her initial contact with the new
teachers in her building. Schrack (2015) reached out to new teachers with a personal
email welcoming them to the building, introducing herself as the library media specialist,
and offering to meet with them to review the information system and share helpful
resources available for the new school year. This established the school librarian as a goto person who could assist with setting up classes and provide information about helpful
resources. To stay connected Schrack set up a group within the school information
system for the new teachers to share questions and receive written instructions for
procedures such as setting up voicemail and checking out equipment. As a result, a bond
was quickly established between the school librarian and classroom teachers, setting the
stage for the most effective collaboration the school had experienced (Schrack, 2015).
Morris (2015) also noted the importance of connecting with new teachers and encouraged
school librarians to offer to present at teacher induction programs and to prepare a
collection for resources including items such as a recorded video welcome, frequently
asked questions, passwords for databases, lists of professional resources and a document
listing the schedule, policies, and hours of the library media center.
Kowalski (2012) recognized a gap exists between the resources the library media
center has and what the teachers can use. To bridge the gap, Kowalski (2012) noted

51

school librarians must reach out to other teachers and go beyond simply informing
teachers about available resources. Lansford (2017) noted the importance of school
librarians sharing library data with the larger school community as classroom teachers
and other stakeholders may notice items the librarian overlooked or offer a perspective or
solution the librarian can apply to improve the school library program. Conversely,
school librarians are encouraged to become familiar with grade level curricula and form
ongoing connections resulting in deeper collaborative practices such as setting up a series
of video conferences with local artists, museum staff, and other experts to support the
school’s art curriculum (Kowalski, 2012). Kowalski (2012) encourages school librarians
to create new partnerships by “pushing into classrooms, attending planning meetings,
offering demonstrations, modeling, offering professional development or even issuing a
personal invitation” (p. 30). Bishop (2013) noted it is helpful for school librarians
desiring to collaborate with classroom teachers to become familiar with the school’s
curriculum, identify possible research topics, and establish the time of year resources are
needed for special units of instruction.
Kowalski (2012) notes one benefit resulting from this type of collaborative effort
is, “word spreads quickly, so when one teacher or team or grade level experiences
satisfaction with the school library program, others will share the benefit for you” (p. 30).
Sharing the benefits of satisfactory experiences results in increased collaboration between
the school librarian and other classroom teachers throughout the school. Kowalski (2012)
acknowledges that while the school librarian works at varying degrees of collaboration
with teachers across grade levels and content areas it is important to stay in “hot pursuit
of these invaluable connections, even when they don’t come easily” (p. 30). “When the

52

school librarian is only the gatherer of resources, other educators will not realize what the
librarian can do” (Kowalski, 2012, p. 31). Morris (2015) encourages school librarians to
introduce new teachers to the library media center over time, to build on small
interactions, to stay positive even if teachers are not receptive at the start, and to continue
modeling professional collaboration with new and veteran teachers.
It is important to acknowledge collaboration is not valued by every classroom
teacher and not every elementary school has a collaborative culture. Fontichiaro and
Hamilton (2014) consider one reason classroom teachers may not be willing to participate
in collaborative activities and explain, “The threat of evaluations tied to standardized test
scores looms large on many teachers’ radar at all times, and some educators don’t feel
comfortable sharing ownership of their classroom with anyone else” (p. 58). Loertscher
(2014) concurs, “It seems that in this time of test-driven assessment, the contributions of
the librarian are getting lost” (p. 8). Loertscher (2014) noted while historically school
librarians have been taught the principles of collaboration and co-teaching during their
pre-service courses many have noted the difficulty in creating collaborative partnerships.
Loertscher (2014) noted possible reasons for this difficulty include unmatched schedules,
preferences of teachers to have total control of their classrooms and the pressure of
standardized testing which pushed inquiry and collaboration aside. Cox (2015) explains
too often, classroom teachers and technology specialists do not have a clear
understanding of school librarians and how librarians can collaborate with them. Cox
(2015) noted school librarians are positioned to work with the entire faculty and stressed
the importance of school librarians sharing their point of view and communicating how
they can support and collaborate with other educators. Fontichiaro and Hamilton (2014)

53

raised the following questions: “Can a school librarian be truly great without excellent
faculty who want to work with you? Does being a good librarian mean working within
existing culture? Or are you expected to change it?” (p. 58).
The Idaho Impact Study (2009) undertaken by the Idaho Commission for
Libraries and endorsed by the Idaho State Department of Education surveyed 176
principals and administrators, 668 classroom teachers, and 146 library media specialists
regarding collaboration (Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010). This study determined
89.1% of the administrators surveyed identified collaboration between school librarians
and classroom teachers as essential or desirable; however, almost half of the classroom
teachers surveyed report neither they (45.1%) nor their school librarians (48.1%) initiate
collaboration with one another (Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010). The results of this
study show advanced scores on the state reading and language arts tests are more likely
when collaboration is more highly valued by school administrators and when school
librarians report more frequent collaborative interactions with classroom teachers,
especially when initiated by the latter (Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010).
Loertscher (2014) conducted a study in which teachers who taught alone in their
classrooms were asked to think of a recent unit or learning experience and provide the
number of students who met or exceeded the teacher’s highest expectations. The same
question was asked of teachers who co-teach with the school librarian. The isolated
teachers responded on average 48% of the students who participated in the learning
experience met or exceeded their highest expectations while the teachers who taught
collaboratively reported 71-100% of the students who participated met or exceeded their

54

highest expectations (Loertscher, 2014). Teachers in the collaborative group responded
with comments such as:
•

“We each have expertise and can help students with different types of
questions.”

•

“I felt we were able to get to more students.”

•

“Students see how the library is at the center of their learning”
(Loertscher, 2014, p. 11).

Moreillon (2014a) notes collaborative practices can position inquiry learning as
an integral part of the curriculum, not just an add-on for which time may never be
available. Missouri’s Growth Guide for School Librarians (2016) defines a proficient
school librarian as one who ensures students assume responsibility for pursuing their own
learning through inquiry (Missouri DESE, 2017a). Inquiry-based instruction is a studentbased strategy in which students learn by asking and investigating meaningful questions.
After identifying what they already know, students analyze what they need to know,
determine how to find the information needed, and evaluate their own learning
(McGregor, 2006). In a collaborative setting, the school librarian and classroom teacher
can work with small groups of students, gaining more time to focus more on students
who need more assistance. Deeper learning occurs when collaborating teachers are able
to produce artifacts, art prints, and interesting picture books to enhance lessons and grow
students’ schema (Ainsworth, 2016). “Rather than presenting inquiry learning as
something totally new or separate from classroom curricula, school librarians can
emphasize the alignment of inquiry learning and reading comprehension instruction to
demonstrate how inquiry can help students improve their reading proficiency”

55

(Moreillon, 2014a, p. E4). Classroom teachers and school librarians collaborate to design,
implement, and evaluate inquiry units resulting in high level learning experiences for
students. Classroom teachers bring knowledge of the content and their students’ needs
while librarians bring a broad knowledge of resources and technology. Together teachers
and librarians create differentiated and adaptable experiences for students of all abilities
and interests (AASL, 2014). When school librarians and classroom teachers collaborate
on inquiry-based units students consider the school library as a source of information and
use it naturally to find answers to their questions (McGregor, 2006). The availability of
library resources and professional staff at the point of need develops intellectual
behaviors that transfer to future academic pursuits and lifelong academic and public
library use (AASL, 2010b).
Collaborating to provide inquiry-based instruction within the context of a fixed
library schedule is challenging, but not impossible (Ahlfeld, 2014). One solution is the
embedded librarian concept, in which librarians embed themselves in classrooms,
providing support for teachers and students ranging from helping students select just right
books or assisting teachers and students with the use of technology such as a document
camera (Ahlfeld, 2014). The embedded librarian concept provides increased
opportunities for conversations between the school librarian and the classroom teacher
and helps students view the librarian as a regular part of the learning routine and culture
rather than a guest in the classroom. The embedded librarian concept allows the school
librarian to know students at a deeper level and gain an understanding of the classroom
teacher’s goals and teaching style. Conversely, the embedded librarian concept makes
time spent in the school library seem less like a “special” and more like an extension of

56

the classroom (Ahlfeld, 2014). Rowe (2007) ascertains, “For many of us, fixed schedules
are still the practice of the day and will not change soon. With ingenuity, approachability,
and persistence, collaboration is achievable” (p. 46).
Summary
The literature review presented in this chapter synthesizes research related to the
school library’s role in helping students acquire literacy skills and describes how library
program practices such as scheduling, circulation policies, labeling, and collaboration
between the school librarian and classroom teachers can impact student access to
resources. The results of this study will be used to identify school library practices that
will likely result in improved student achievement.
Chapter three will present the methodology, participants, and survey instrument
involved in this quantitative study. Chapter four will include the data presentation and
analysis of the data. Chapter five will present the findings and conclusions of this study
as well as recommendations and implications for future study.

57

CHAPTER THREE
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to examine the practices of elementary libraries in
both high performing and non-high performing schools and describe key practices that
may lead to increased student achievement. Of particular interest were the practices
related to library schedules, the number and duration of weekly visits to the library by
third grade students in, the number of books checked out per week by third grade
students, the collection labeling practices, and the collaborative practices between the
school librarians and teachers in high-performing schools. Because improved student
achievement has become a focus for all public school administrators across Missouri it is
vital all programs, including elementary library programs, be reviewed for effectiveness.
The ultimate goal of this study was to identify school library practices that may lead to
increased student achievement. This study was conducted to expand existing research on
the school library practices of public elementary schools across Missouri.
Participants
Participants of this study consisted of 95 elementary school librarians who serve
grade three in Missouri public school districts with an enrollment of 750-1,500, and the
students who participated in the Missouri Assessment Program in the spring of 2015,
2016, and 2017. Of the 95 school librarians invited to participate in the study 46 returned
the surveys, for an overall return rate of 48.4%. In the 2015-2016 school year 918,483
students attended public schools in Missouri. Median district enrollment was 582 students
and districts ranged in size from 23 students to 25,670 students. Thirteen percent of these

58

students were identified as special education students and 52% qualified for free or
reduced lunches. Of the students attending public schools in Missouri, 89.7% were in
attendance at least 90% of the time (Missouri DESE, 2018). The 2010-2014 American
Community Survey available on the State of Missouri Website noted 6.1% of Missouri
students ages 5 and older spoke a language other than English at home. The average
household income in the state of Missouri is $50,200 and 14.8% of Missouri residents
live in poverty.
Sampling Procedure
The researcher utilized a purposive sample selection process. To be included in
the researcher’s sample, participants must meet the following criteria: the elementary
school must be part of a Missouri public school district with a total student enrollment of
750-1,500; the elementary schools had to serve grade three; the elementary school had to
have third grade English Language Arts data available from 2015, 2016, and 2017; and
the school must not be a charter school. The district enrollment range of 750-1,500 was
selected in order to control for district size and equitable state funding, which is based on
student enrollment. The researcher consulted with practicing superintendents regarding
district comparisons in order to establish this range.
The researcher started with the 2017 list of elementary schools retrieved from the
Missouri DESE school directory available on the DESE website. The researcher
eliminated charter schools, as they are independent public schools free from some rules
and regulations that apply to traditional public school districts as specifically identified in
charter school law. The researcher eliminated schools from districts with a total
enrollment of fewer than 750 and greater than 1,500 students to attempt to maintain a

59

similarity in services offered. By doing so, the researcher attempted to compare
homogeneous programs. Studies (Haycock, 2011) linking school library programs to
student achievement have been conducted; however, not all have controlled for school
size. Schools from districts with an enrollment of fewer than 750 are less likely to have a
full-time librarian or a schedule resembling those with a greater student population.
Schools from districts larger than 1,500 are likely to have more professional and material
resources available to their school library programs. Ninety-six schools met the
enrollment criteria; however, one school was eliminated because it had only one year of
Missouri Assessment Program (MAP) English language arts (ELA) scores. Ninety-six
elementary schools in Missouri met the criteria established by the researcher for inclusion
in this purposive sample. One school was eliminated because it had only one year of 3rd
grade ELA MAP data. Thirteen of the schools were classified as high performing
schools. The remaining 82 schools were classified as non-high performing schools.
Research Setting
The setting for this study is Missouri public K-5 elementary schools from districts
with an enrollment of 750-1,500, across the state of Missouri. The schools included in the
survey represent every quadrant in the state.
Missouri’s school districts range in size from 2.0821 square miles to 507.04469
square miles. The state of Missouri encompasses 69,704 square miles and is located in
the central or Midwest area of the United States (Learn about Missouri, n.d.). In 2016,
manufacturing industries made a significant contribution to Missouri’s economy,
representing 12.8% of the Gross State Product (GSP). The top three manufacturing
industries in Missouri are transportation equipment manufacturing, food manufacturing,

60

and fabricated metal product manufacturing. Real estate, rental, and leasing provided
11.8% of Missouri’s GSP.
Missouri agriculture has an economic impact of $9.1 billion per year. The top five
agricultural products sold include meat animals, oil crops, food crops, cattle and cows,
and corn. Crops and livestock are equally important in Missouri, with nearly equal
production values of 52% and 48%, respectively. Family farms comprise 91.24% of the
97,233 farms in Missouri, which have an average size of 285 acres. In 2014, Missouri
produced 260 million bushels of soybeans, ranking 6th in the nation in soybean
production (Missouri Department of Agriculture, 2016).
Research Design.
The Department of Elementary and Secondary Education reviews and accredits
schools through the Missouri School Improvement Program (MSIP) and publishes an
Annual Performance Report (APR) for each school and school district. The school’s
achievement data, as determined by student scores on the MAP contribute to the overall
APR points. For the purpose of this study, high performing elementary schools were
those whose three-year (2015-2017) average percentage of students scoring at or above
the proficient level were one standard deviation above the mean scores of all schools
included in the sample. Schools with percentages of combined proficient and advanced
students below one standard deviation above the mean were classified as non-high
performing.
The researcher retrieved the list of Missouri school districts from the Missouri
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education Directory (DESE), available on the
Missouri DESE website. The directory list included the name of each school district,

61

buildings within the school district, the name of the principal of each building, mailing
address of the school, and the email address of the principal, and enrollment information.
The Missouri Annual Performance Reports (APR) for years 2015, 2016, and 2017 for
each building meeting the criteria for the study were available to the public on the
Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education website.
Participants gave consent by completing the online or phone survey. The
submitted forms describe participant confidentiality, the ability to withdraw from the
study at any time without penalty, lack of unforeseen harm to respondents and a brief
overview of the purpose of the study: to examine library practices in elementary schools
to determine which practices, if any, affect student achievement. The researcher used
quantitative and qualitative research in this study to gather data on elementary library
practices in small elementary schools and to determine if certain library practices impact
student achievement. The research began with a review of relevant literature focused on
the following areas: the development of proficient reading skills, the library labeling
practices, circulation policies, library schedules, and collaboration between school
librarians and classroom teachers.
The research questions in this study sought to gather information to describe the
current practices of elementary libraries in public school districts across Missouri with an
enrollment of 750 to 1,500. The researcher chose to control for size in this study in an
effort to find out how schools with similar enrollment and number of classrooms served
by the school libraries designed their programs and the impact, if any, those choices had
on student achievement. The researcher collected quantitative and qualitative data to gain
a better understanding of library practices in public elementary schools. The combination

62

of quantitative and qualitative research should provide a fuller understanding of the
impact school library practices may have on student learning than either isolated
approach (Cresswell, 2014; Gay, Mills, & Airasian, 2012).
Data was collected through the completion of a Google Forms survey sent to
elementary principals in the schools meeting the criteria for the study. Each school
principal was asked to forward the survey to the school’s elementary librarian. The
researcher followed up with phone calls to the elementary principals and librarians in the
high performing group due to the small sample size. Five school librarians expressed a
desire to answer the questions over the phone. Librarians participating in the phone
survey waived their right to anonymity, but were assured their answers would remain
confidential and be reported only in aggregate form. The researcher used a printed copy
of the Google Forms survey to mark the responses of the librarians’ answers during the
phone surveys. When the online surveys were completed, Google Forms removed all
identifying information and returned the survey to the researcher. Survey results were
only identified as high performing or non-high performing schools, as determined by the
percentage of 3rd grade students scoring in the proficient and advanced categories on the
English Language Arts assessment required by the Missouri Assessment Program
(MAP).
Instrumentation
The survey (Appendix A) used for this study was developed by the researcher
based on the review of literature surrounding the practices of school libraries. The survey
consisted of eleven questions and began with a demographic question about whether the
librarian’s elementary school has a dedicated library or shares a library with another

63

building or level. Quantitative data was collected regarding the number of visits per week
by third grade students; the number of books checked out by third grade students per
visit; student access to the library outside of their scheduled times; the type of library
schedules; labeling practices; and collaborative practices between school librarians and
classroom teachers. Qualitative data was collected by an open-ended question asking
librarians to describe a collaborative practice they believed had he greatest impact on
student learning in their schools.
To answer the research questions and test the null hypotheses stated in chapter
one the researcher developed a survey to collect information about public school libraries
in elementary schools with an enrollment of from districts with an enrollment of 7501,500. The survey was based on a review of literature surrounding particular library
practices impacting student access to resources that may ultimately impact learning. Face
validity of the survey was determined by a panel of professional educators familiar with
the development of surveys and the subject of school library practices, including school
administrators, school librarians, college professors and fellow educators with doctoral
degrees. The researcher asked panel members to provide feedback to assure congruence
with the research questions stated in chapter one. Panel members’ comments were
reviewed and changes to the survey were made as recommended. Panel members
reviewed the survey after the changes were made.
The second instrument used in this study was the annual third grade English
Language Arts (ELA) assessment required by the Missouri Assessment Program (MAP).
The ELA assessment is given to third graders in Missouri, along with a mathematics
assessment. A three year average of 3rd grade ELA proficient and advanced scores was

64

calculated and used to determine whether the schools participating in this study qualified
as high performing or non-high performing. The MAP is designed to measure how well
students acquire the skills and knowledge described in the Missouri Learning Standards.
The assessments yield information on academic achievement at the student, class, school,
district, and state levels. MAP results are used to gauge the overall quality of education
throughout Missouri.
The origin of the MAP is traced to the 1993 Outstanding Schools Act, which
required Missouri to create a statewide assessment system to measure challenging
academic standards. This act inspired the creation of grade-span assessments over
Missouri’s Show-Me Standards. Originally, the English Language Arts grade-span
assessments were given in grades 3, 7, and 11. This changed when the federal No Child
Left Behind (NCLB) legislation was enacted in 2001. This act required states to develop
grade level assessments in both reading and mathematics. As a result of NCLB, student
performance is reported by the following proficiency categories: below basic, basic,
proficient, and advanced. Student performance at each level is used to calculate the
adequate yearly progress (AYP) at the school, district, and state levels. MAP grade level
assessments were administered fully online for the first time in 2015. All Local Education
Agencies (LEAs) and schools are required to assess at least 95% of their students and
subgroups on the assessments required by the MAP. Zero Annual Performance Report
(APR) points are awarded to schools testing fewer than 90% of enrolled students. The
instrument utilized by the state of Missouri to collect this data has been determined to be
both valid and reliable by the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary

65

Education. A detailed description of their validation and reliability is available on the
DESE website (Missouri DESE, 2018).
The treatment of the combination of data collected with two instruments is
explained along with a rationale for the selection of the statistical treatment in the
following data treatment section.
Data Treatment
This survey provides two types of data, quantitative and qualitative. The
combination of quantitative and qualitative data provided a fuller understanding of the
impact school library practices may have on student learning than either research method
used in isolation (Cresswell, 2014; Gay, Mills, & Airasian, 2012). The survey instrument
answered the following questions:
Main Research Question
What are the differences, if any, in the presence of particular practices of
elementary libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular
practices in non-high performing elementary schools?
Subset Research Questions
1. What are the differences, if any, in the number of third grade students’ weekly
visits to the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade
students’ weekly visits to the library in non-high performing schools?
2. What are the differences, if any, in the number of books checked out per week by
third grade students in high performing schools and the number of books checked
out per week by third grade students in non-high performing schools?

66

3. What are the differences, if any, in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high
performing schools?
4. What are the differences, if any, in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools?
5. What are the differences, if any, in the collaborative practices between librarians
and classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools?
Main Null Hypotheses
There is no difference in the presence of particular practices of elementary
libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular practices in
non-high performing elementary schools.
Subset Null Hypotheses
1. There is no difference in the number of third grade students’ weekly visits to
the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade students’
weekly visits to the library in non-high performing schools.
2. There is no difference in the number of books checked out per week by third
grade students in high performing schools and the number of books checked
out per week by third grade students in non-high performing schools.
3. There is no difference in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high
performing schools.

67

4. There is no difference in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools.
5. There is no difference in the collaborative practices between librarians and
classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools.
The quantitative data compared the independent variables of high performing to
non-high performing schools with the dependent variables of the number of weekly third
grade visits to the library allowed and the number of books checked out by third graders
per week. An ANOVA was calculated to determine if the number of third grade visits to
the library per week and the number of books checked out by third graders per week were
significantly different between high performing and non-high performing schools. The
ANOVA was used instead of individual t-tests for each dependent variable. The
utilization of the ANOVA reduced the possibility of a type one error (Gay, Mills, &
Airasian, 2012).
The qualitative data was organized by the use of the constant comparative
analysis method (Fram, 2013). The researcher coded the qualitative data to determine the
schedules used, labeling practices, and collaborative practices of the high performing and
non-high performing schools. The researcher compared the findings to determine if
particular practices from the dependent variables of schedules used, labeling practices,
overdue policies, and collaborative practices are different between high performing and
non-high performing school

68

Summary
Chapter three outlined the methodology used in this study including the
participants, sampling procedures, research setting, instrumentation, research design, and
data treatment. Chapter four will include the data presentation and analysis of the data.
Chapter five will present the findings and conclusions of this study as well as
recommendations and implications for future study.

69

CHAPTER FOUR
ANALYSIS OF DATA
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to examine the practices of elementary libraries in
both high and non-high performing schools and describe key practices that may lead to
increased student achievement. In this chapter the data collected is organized and
presented. Survey results were analyzed to determine whether significant differences
between high performing and non-high performing schools existed. Survey participants
were asked to describe the following library practices impacting student access to
resources: 1) circulation practices, 2) scheduling practices, 3) labeling practices, and 4)
collaborative practices between the librarian and classroom teachers.
Analysis of Data
Surveys were distributed to school librarians in 13 high performing schools and
82 non- high performing schools serving third grade students in Missouri public school
districts with an enrollment of 750 to 1,500. Of the 13 high performing schools, 12
participated in the study. Of the 82 non-high performing schools, 34 participated in the
study. Of the 95 school librarians invited to participate, 46 responded to the surveys. The
survey asked librarians to identify or describe library practices that encourage or restrict
student access to library resources.
The survey included one question about the library demographics, asking if the
school had a dedicated elementary library or if the library was shared with another
building or level. One question asked respondents to identify the type of library schedule
implemented. Four questions about circulation practices asked the respondents about the

70

number of weekly visits and number of books checked out by third grade students as well
as whether students could check out books before, during or after school or continue to
check out books if they had books that were overdue. One question asked the participants
to identify each system used to level the library collection. Two questions asked
participants to note changes in practices over the last three years. Two questions asked
the participants to identify collaborative practices taking place between the librarian and
classroom teachers, one of which was a qualitative question asking the elementary school
librarians to identify a collaborative practice they believed had the greatest impact on
student learning in their schools. Data from the survey was used to describe and compare
the library practices of high performing and non-high performing schools.
Data Presentation
Inferential Statistics
The researcher calculated a one way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for all of the
ten survey questions comparing means of the high performing elementary schools and the
non-high performing elementary schools. The results of the one way ANOVA indicate
there were no significant differences between the two groups for the following
independent variables: dedicated elementary library or shared library; type of library
schedule (flexible, fixed, or mixed); number of weekly visits by third grade students;
number of books checked out during scheduled weekly visits; and students’ ability to
continue to check out books when they have overdue books. Other independent variables
indicating no significant differences between the high performing elementary schools and
non-high performing elementary schools were the labeling system(s) utilized; and library

71

availability for student visits to check out books before, during, and after school.
ANOVA results for each independent variable are discussed below.
The first question on the survey asked school librarians to indicate whether the
elementary school had a dedicated library or shared a library with another building or
level. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the differences in the
responses between high and non-high performing schools. The researcher established p <
.05 as the significance level. The F was .491, and no significant difference was found
between the high performing and non-high performing groups, as the p was .487.
Question two asked survey participants to indicate the type of library schedule utilized in
their schools. The researcher established p < .05 as the significance level. The F was
1.246, and no significant difference was found between the high performing and non-high
performing groups, as the p was .271.
Several questions on the survey focused on school library circulation practices.
School librarians responding to the survey were asked to answer a question regarding the
number of weekly scheduled visits third grade students made to the library. The
researcher established p < .05 as the significance level. The F was .379, and no
significant difference was found between groups, as the p was .541. The librarians were
also asked to report the number of books third grade students checked out per week
during scheduled visits. The researcher established p < .05 as the significance level. The
F was .680, and no significant difference was found between groups, as the p was .414.
On question seven, school librarians were asked to indicate the times outside of
scheduled class visits students were allowed to visit the library to check out books. The
results of question 7 are listed in table 4.1.

72

Table 4.1: ANOVA for Visits to the Library Outside of Scheduled Class Times
Sum of
df
Mean
F
Squares
Square
Before
Between groups
21.177
1
21.177
2.980
School
Within Groups
305.623 43
7.108
Total
During
School

After School

Other

326.800

44

Between groups

36.057

1

36.057

Within Groups

280.254

43

6.518

Total

316.311

44

Between groups

24.414

1

24.414

Within Groups

306.564

43

7.129

Total

330.978

44

Between groups

21.748

1

21.748

Within Groups

316.029

43

7.350

Total

337.778

44

Sig
.092

5.532

.023*

3.424

.071

2.959

.093

* p < .05
For the choice, “before school,” the F was 2.980, and the p was .092. For the
choice, “during school with a library pass or teacher’s permission,” the F was 5.532, and
the p was .023, showing a statistically significant difference between high performing and
non-high performing schools. For the choice, “after school,” the F was 3.424, and the p
was .071. For the choice, “other,” the F was 2.959, and the p was .093. There were no
statistically significant differences between the high performing and non-high performing
schools with regard to students visiting the library to check out books before or after
school. There was a statistically significant difference between high performing and nonhigh performing schools with regard to students visiting the library during the school day

73

with a library pass or permission from the teacher. Question eight on the survey asked
the school librarians to indicate whether students were allowed to continue to check out
books from the library, even when they had overdue books. The researcher established p
< .05 as the significance level. The F was .251, and no significant difference was found
between the high performing and non-high performing groups, as the p was .619.
Question nine on the survey asked librarians to select each system used to label
their school libraries. The F for the choice “not labeled” was .319, and the p was .575.
For the choice, “viewpoint neutral directional aids,” the F was .108 and the p was .744.
For the choice, “labeled to identify books for programs such as Accelerated Reader or
Reading Counts,” the F was .143, and the p was .707. For the choice, “labeled to identify
reading levels or Lexiles” the F was .414, and the p was .524. For the choice, “labeled to
protect students from content deemed inappropriate,” the F was .512, and the p was .478.
For the choice, “other,” the F was .018 and the p was .895. Because the researcher
established p < .05 as the significance level, there were no statistically significant
differences on any of the leveling system choices on question nine between the high
performing and non-high performing schools.
Question ten asked the school librarians to identify each of the collaborative
practices in which they participate with classroom teachers. The researcher established p
< .05 as the significance level. For the collaborative choice, “assists teachers with the use
of technology,” the F was 1.672 and the p was .203. For the choice, “shares information
about resources available in the library,” the F was .319 and the p was .575. For the
choice, “consults with teachers about the reading preferences of individual students,” the
F was .231 and the p was .633. For the choice, “consults with teachers about the reading

74

abilities of individual students the F was 1.097, and the p was .301. For the collaborative
choice, “spends time in classrooms co-teaching with classroom teachers,” the F was .001,
and the p was .979. For the collaborative choice, “provides professional development for
the elementary staff,” the F was .003 and the p was .959. Because the researcher
established p < .05 as the significance level there were no statistically significant
differences between the high performing and non-high performing groups on any of the
collaborative practices listed on question nine.
The researcher continued to investigate where possible differences may exist
between the high performing and non-high performing groups by producing a frequency
count for each question. The results are presented beginning with Table 1. Tables
comparing the means and standard deviations in the responses of the high performing and
non-high performing groups follow the frequency counts. Later in the chapter the
researcher will also compare the open-ended question responses using the constant
comparative analysis (Fram, 2013) to identify common themes. The results of the
constant comparative analysis will be discussed after the presentation of the comparisons
of the means and standard deviations.
The researcher continued to investigate where possible differences may exist
between the high performing and non-high performing groups by producing a frequency
count for each question. The results are presented beginning with Table 1. Tables
comparing the means and standard deviations in the responses of the high performing and
non-high performing groups follow the frequency counts. Later in the chapter the
researcher will also compare the open-ended question responses using the constant
comparative analysis (Fram, 2013) to identify common themes. The results of the

75

constant comparative analysis will be discussed after the presentation of the comparisons
of the means and standard deviations.
Descriptive Statistics
The survey presented to school librarians was designed to find out how particular
practices have been implemented in their school libraries. The survey included eleven
total questions (See Appendix A). Question one asked the school librarians to identify
whether the elementary school had its own library or shared a library with another
building or level. Questions 2-10 asked the participants to particular practices related to
circulation, scheduling, labeling, and collaborative activities present in their schools. Two
of those questions asked if certain practices had changed in the last three years, as three
years of MAP data was used to determine whether schools in the sample were high
performing or non-high performing. Question 11 was an open-ended question asking
school librarians to describe a collaborative practice they believe has had the greatest
impact on student learning in their schools.
Scheduling Practices.
All of the survey participants responded to question two, regarding the type of
schedule implemented in the participants’ school libraries. School librarians representing
high performing elementary schools accounted for 26.1% of the total responses. School
librarians representing non-high performing elementary schools accounted for 73.9% of
the total responses. The frequency counts of high performing elementary schools, nonhigh performing elementary schools, and total schools choosing flexible, fixed, and
mixed schedules are shown in Table 4.2.

76

Table 4.2 Type of Schedule Frequency Counts and Percentage of Responses of high
performing schools (N=12) compared to non-high performing schools (N=34)
Q2 Type of Schedule
Flexible
Fixed
Mixed
n % of N
n % of N
n % of N
High performing

0

0

8

66.7

4

33.3

Non-high performing

0

0

15

44.1

19

55.9

Total schools

0

0

23

50

23

50

High performing schools (N=12), Non-high performing schools (N=34)
Of the high performing schools, 66.7% reported having fixed schedules while
44.1% of non-high performing schools have fixed schedules. Conversely, 44.1% of the
participating high performing schools reported having a mixed schedule while 55.9% of
the non-high performing schools have mixed schedules. Fifty percent of the total schools
represented have fixed schedules while 50% have mixed schedules.
Circulation Practices.
Question three asked survey participants to identify the number of weekly
scheduled visits made to the library by third grade students. Participants selected 0-1
weekly visits, 2 weekly visits, or 3 or more weekly visits. All survey participants
responded to question three. The frequency counts of the number of visits selected are
presented in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Weekly Visits Frequency Counts and percentage of responses by high performing
schools (N=12) compared to non-high performing schools (N=34).
Q3 Number of weekly visits
0-1 visits
2 visits
More than 2 visits
n % of N
n % of N
n % of N
High performing

7

58.3

5

41.7

0

0

Non-high performing

25

73.5

5

14.7

4

11.8

Total schools

32

69.6

10

21.7

4

8.7

77

Librarians representing high performing schools reported students have more
scheduled library visits throughout the week than the number of visits reported by
librarians representing non-high performing schools.
Question five asked survey participants to identify the number of books checked
out during weekly scheduled visits made to the library by third grade students.
Participants selected 0-2 books, 3-5 books or more than 5 books. All survey participants
responded to question five. The frequency counts of the number of books selected are
presented in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4 Number of Books Frequency Counts and percentage of responses by high
performing schools (N=12) compared to non-high performing schools (N=34).
Q5 Number of books
0-2 books
3-5 books
More than 5
books
n % of N
n % of N
n % of N
High performing schools

7

58.3

5

41.7

0

0

Non-high performing

26

76.5

8

23.5

0

0

Total schools

33

71.7

13

28.3

0

0

A greater percentage of school librarians representing high performing schools
reported third grade students, 41.7%, check out 3-5 books during weekly visits while a
greater percentage of school librarians representing non-high performing schools reported
76.5% of third grade students check out 0-1 books during weekly visits. Of the total
number of school librarians participating in the survey, 71.7% reported their third grade
students check out 0-1 books during weekly visits to the elementary school library.
Question seven asked school librarians participating in the survey to mark times
their students were allowed to visit the library to check out books outside of their

78

scheduled library class times. Participants selected all that applied from the following
choices: before school, during school with a library pass or teacher’s permission, after
school, and other. The frequency counts for the times students could visit the library are
listed in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5 Visits During School Frequency Counts and percentage of responses by high
performing schools (N=12) compared to non-high performing schools (N=34).
Q2 Visit during school

Yes

No

n

% of N

n

% of N

High performing schools

10

83.3

2

16.7

Non-high performing

14

41.2

20

58.8

Total schools

24

55.8

19

44.2

When asked if students could visit the library during the school day with a library pass or
permission from the teacher, 83.3% of librarians representing high performing schools
marked yes, compared to 41.2% of the librarians representing non-high performing
schools.
Question eight asked survey participants whether students are allowed to continue
to check out library books if they have books that are overdue. Participants were to mark
“yes,” “no,” or “other.” The frequency counts for question eight are listed in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6 Overdue Book Policy Frequency Counts and percentage of responses by
high performing schools (N=12) compared to non-high performing schools (N=34).
Q8 Overdue
Yes
No
Other
n
% of N
n
% of N
n
% of N
High performing

5

41.7

5

41.7

2

16.7

Non-high performing

9

26.5

18

52.9

7

20.6

Total

14

30.4

23

50

9

19.6

79

When participating school librarians were asked if students were allowed to continue to
check out books even if they had overdue books, 41.7% of the librarians in high
performing schools marked “yes” while 26.5% of the librarians in non-high performing
schools marked “yes.” Research suggests it is difficult for school librarians to balance
being good stewards of the library collection while making every effort to get books and
resources into students’ hands (Haycock, 2011). One respondent who chose “other”
indicated students must go for two weeks without checking out books as a consequence
for losing the book(s) and to provide time for the book to reappear. If the student has not
returned the book(s) after two weeks he may resume checking out books from the library,
but must keep the books at school. Another participant noted she keeps discarded books
on hand for students with overdue books to read. These practices suggest the participating
school librarians who chose “other” may provide an alternate ways for students to
continue to access library resources.
To further analyze the data, the researcher calculated means and standard
deviations for survey questions 1-10. The means and standard deviations for questions 16 and 8 are listed in Table 4.7.

80

Table 4.7 Group Statistics for Questions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8.
High vs
N
Mean
Std.
Non-high
Deviation
Q1 Own lib
H
12
1.17
.577
Nh
34
1.09
.288

Std. Error
Mean
.167
.049

Q2 Schedule

H
Nh

12
34

2.33
2.56

.492
.504

.142
.086

Q3 Visits

H
Nh

12
34

1.58
1.32

.669
.638

.193
.109

Q4 Chg Vis

H
Nh

12
34

1.92
1.94

.289
.343

.083
.059

Q5 Books

H
Nh

12
34

1.42
1.24

.515
.431

.149
.074

Q6 Chg. Bks

H
Nh

12
34

2.00
1.97

.000
.H71

.000
.029

Q8 Overdue

H
Nh

12
34

1.75
1.94

.754
.694

.218
.119

Although the responses to questions 1-6 and 8 are not statistically significant the
researcher noted a difference exists in the responses to question 8, which focused on
practices regarding students continuing to check out books when they already have
overdue books. If survey participants marked yes, the responses were coded “1.” If the
response was no, the response was coded “2.” The high performing schools’ mean score
was 1.75, indicating students in high-performing schools are more likely to be able to
continue to check out books, even if they have overdue books, than students in non-high
performing schools.
Survey question 7 asked participants to check all times students could visit the
elementary school library to check out books. Answer choices included: before school,

81

during school with a library pass or teacher’s permission, after school, and other. Survey
results for question 7 are listed in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8 Group Statistics for Question 7
High v
N
Non high
Q7 Ck
H
10
Before
Nh
34
Q7 Ck
During

Mean
1.70

Std.
Deviation
.483

Std. Error
Mean
.153

1.32

1.886

.324

H

10

1.00

.000

.000

Nh

34

1.26

1.880

.322

Q7 Ck After

H
Nh

10
34

1.70
1.44

.483
1.894

.153
.325

Q7 Other

H
Nh

10
34

2.00
1.62

.000
1.891

.000
.324

While the differences between the means of high performing and non-high
performing schools are not statistically significant, the researcher noted differences in the
means of practices listed under question seven. If respondents indicated students were
able to check out before school, during school with a library pass or teacher’s permission,
or after school, the responses were coded with a “1.” If a choice was not marked, it was
coded with a “2;” thus, the closer the mean is to “1,” the more likely that particular
practice is implemented. Non-high performing schools had lower means on both choices
indicating the library is available before school and after school while the libraries in high
performing schools were more likely to be available for students to check out books
during the school day.

82

Labeling Practices.
Question 9 asked participants to check the labeling systems used in their
elementary libraries. Answer choices included: not labeled; labels that are viewpointneutral directional; labels identifying books for programs such as Accelerated Reader or
Reading Counts; labeled to identify reading levels or Lexiles; labeled to protect students
from inappropriate content; and other. The means and standard deviations for the
responses to question 9 are listed in Table 4.9.
Table 4.9 Group Statistics for Question 9
High v
N
Non-high
Not labeled
H
12
Nh
33

Mean
2.00
1.68

Std.
Deviation
.000
1.886

Std. Error
Mean
.000
.324

Viewpt.
Neutral

H
Nh

12
33

1.50
1.58

.522
.502

.151
.087

AR or RC

H
Nh

12
33

1.33
1.36

.492
.489

.142
.085

Rdg. Levels

H
Nh

12
33

1.58
1.48

.515
.508

.149
.088

Inapp. Con.

H
Nh

12
33

2.00
1.91

.000
.292

.000
.051

Other

H
Nh

12
33

1.58
1.88

.515
.331

.149
.058

Question 9 asked school librarians to mark the systems used to label their
elementary school libraries. If a choice was marked, the response was coded with a “1.”
If a choice was not marked, it was coded with a “2.” While the results of Question 9
indicated no statistically significant differences, the researcher noted non-high

83

performing school librarians responding to the survey indicated their libraries were more
likely labeled by reading levels or Lexiles than the libraries in high-performing schools.
Question 10 asked survey participants to mark the collaborative practices that take
place between the school librarian and classroom teachers in their elementary schools.
Answer choices included: librarian helps with technology; librarian shares information
about resources available in the library; librarian consults with classroom teachers about
the reading preferences of individual students; librarian consults with classroom teachers
about the reading abilities of individual students; librarian spends time in classrooms coteaching with classroom teachers; and librarian provides professional development for the
elementary staff. The means and standard deviations for the responses to question 10 are
listed below in Table 4.10.
Table 4.10 Group Statistics for Question 10, Collaborative Practices
High v
N
Mean
Std.
Non-high
Deviation
Asst. Tech.
H
12
1.58
.515
Nh
34
1.41
.500

Std. Error
Mean
.149
.086

Resources

H
Nh

12
34

1.00
1.03

.000
.171

.000
.029

Rdg. Pref.

H
Nh

12
34

1.33
1.35

.492
.485

.142
.083

Rdg.
Abilities

H

12

1.42

.515

.149

Nh

34

1.21

.410

.070

Co-teach

H
Nh

12
34

1.92
1.91

.289
.288

.083
.049

Prof. Dev.

H
Nh

12
34

1.75
1.74

.452
.448

.131
.077

84

Table 4.10 provides a snapshot of the collaborative practices carried out by the
elementary school librarians in high performing and non-high performing schools
participating in this study. If participating librarians marked a collaborative practice,
choice, the choice was coded “1.” If the choice was mot marked, it was coded “2.” A
mean closer to “1” indicates it is more likely the school librarian implements the
collaborative practice. A close look at the differences between the means of the high
performing and non-high performing schools and standard deviations indicate that while
collaborative practices including sharing information about resources available in the
library, consulting with classroom teachers about the reading preferences of students, coteaching with classroom teachers are very similar, there are differences to consider. First,
the means of high performing school librarians who assist teachers with technology are
higher than the means of the librarians who assist with technology in non-high
performing schools. The percentage of librarians assisting teachers with technology in
non-high performing schools is greater than the librarians assisting teachers with
technology in high performing schools. A difference between the means of high
performing and non-high performing librarians who consult with teachers about the
reading abilities of individual students also exists. Librarians from non-high performing
schools are more likely to consult with classroom teachers about the reading abilities of
individual students as suggested by the mean closer to “1.” Though the differences
between the collaborative practices of assisting teachers with technology and consulting
with teachers about the reading abilities of individual students are not statistically
significant, it is noted that there is a greater difference between the means of these
practices than the other collaborative practices examined

85

Qualitative Data
A constant comparative analysis was conducted to ascertain common themes in
the responses to question eleven. Question eleven was open-ended, and asked participants
to describe a collaborative practice the participants believed had the greatest impact on
student learning in their schools. Of the 46 survey participants, 23 participants chose to
answer this question. Although the researcher has no way of knowing if the 23
participants who did not respond to this question could have named an effective
collaborative practice and simply chose not to, the researcher acknowledges the fact that
none of the participating librarians reported having a flexible schedule. The fact that all
46 librarians participating in the study reported having fixed or mixed schedules may
have impacted the level of collaboration between the librarian and classroom teachers.
Library schedules can inhibit collaborative teaching due to the absence of common
planning time which allows the librarian and classroom teacher to plan units, assemble
resources, teach information literacy within the context of the unit, provide support,
conduct assessments, grade collaboratively, and evaluate the unit in order to improve it
for future learning (Stubeck 2015). To illustrate this point, one participant responded, “I
cover the teachers’ plan times and have classes for 55 minutes each week for 26 classes.
There is little time to collaborate.” Responses to question eleven fell into the following
categories: Teaches research skills or research projects; Supports classroom instruction;
Communicates with classroom teachers; Collaborates with classroom teachers during
Professional Learning Community (PLC) time or vertical English language arts (ELA)
team meetings; Co-teaches with classroom teachers; Provides professional Development;
and Other. The responses were placed under the appropriate categories in an Excel

86

spreadsheet. If participants’ responses fit more than one of the aforementioned categories
the responses were assigned to each appropriate category.
Of the 23 elementary school librarians who responded to question eleven, five
responses fell within the “Teaches research skills or research projects” category.
Elementary school librarians’ responses included: the librarian helps with research and
writing preparation, the librarian teaches digital literacy skills, the librarian assists
students with research projects on the topic of famous women in history, and the librarian
teaches research skills such as finding reliable sources to assist students with research
projects.
Of the 23 elementary school librarians who responded to question eleven
regarding collaborative practices having the greatest impact on student learning, eleven
responses fell within the “Supports classroom instruction” category. The responses
represented a wide range of collaborative practices. One librarian stated, “Knowing the
reading abilities of individual students has helped me assist the students in picking just
right books from the library.” Another participant noted, “I make an extra effort in
providing a large variety of books that correlate with the curriculum taught in the
classroom.” One respondent noted an impactful collaborative practice involved
“Providing books to fourth grade students to help in researching their topics such as
Presidents, Olympic events, and famous Missourians, etc.” One librarian who teaches
keyboarding in the library shared a typing competition is held for students in her school.
When students reach the target level of proficiency the librarian takes the students’
photos and displays the photos in the hallway. At first the researcher questioned the
collaborative nature of this response regarding the typing competition; however, the

87

librarian noted this practice encourages the students to practice keyboarding skills,
meeting the need of increased productivity in the classroom. One survey respondent
noted the librarian collaborates with the science specialist and uses the library
Makerspace to support projects matching the students’ science units. For example,
students were challenged to work on heat transfer projects by using the Makerspace to
build penguin houses to keep eggs warm. This comment supports Bishop (2013), who
noted it is helpful for school librarians desiring to collaborate with classroom teachers to
become familiar with the school’s curriculum, identify possible research topics, and
establish the time of year resources are needed for special units of instruction. The
respondent continued, “We have worked together on several projects. She’s an old
friend,” highlighting the importance of building trust and respect in a collaborative
relationship as noted by Copeland and Jacobs (2017). Another librarian responded:
I collaborate with classroom teachers with units that are to be covered in a
particular grade level. In first grade, I have literature circles to introduce the
students to chapter books, complete a science requirement for second grade
(plants), and throughout the year have conducted lessons for third grades on
figurative language and poetry [sic].
Other responses in the category “Supports classroom instruction” included: collaborating
with kindergarten teachers and providing books and projects matching the letter of the
alphabet being studied, working with staff to share resources, and working with
classroom teachers to provide resources to complete projects or units of study. Of the 23
elementary school librarians who responded to question eleven, six responses were

88

categorized as “Collaboration through meetings.” The responses ranged from one noting
one-on-one conversations held with classroom teachers to one stating:
Our school meets monthly as an ELA [English language arts] team during our
PLC [Professional Learning Community] times. This is a great opportunity to
touch base with a member from every grade level as well as SPED [special
education teachers] and Title [Title 1 teachers]. We meet regularly discuss [sic]
ways to improve our practices with ELA.
Two other respondents mentioned meeting with classroom teachers during PLC time and
a third respondent mentioned meeting with teachers during ELA vertical team meetings
“to discuss how the library can support the curriculum.” One respondent noted librarians
and classroom teachers share information learned through attending conferences
informally after school or during monthly staff meetings.
One librarian’s response to question eleven indicated the collaborative practice of
co-teaching positively impacted student learning. This participant noted the elementary
librarian is in charge of mentoring the new teachers in the school. The librarian stated, “I
observe them quarterly, meet with them monthly, and help the new teachers in any way
possible with lessons, pacing guides, materials, etc.” The librarian continued, “We
revamped the new teacher program over 3 years ago and it has been very beneficial for
our new teachers.”
Of the survey participants representing the high performing schools in this study
100% of the school librarians answered question eleven regarding collaborative practices
they believed had the greatest impact on student learning, though one participant
responded, “None.” Conversely, eleven of the 34 participants (32.4%) representing the

89

non-high schools provided an example of a collaborative practice they felt had the
greatest impact on student learning.
Summary of Findings
This section summarizes findings related to the study. Findings are discussed
within the context of each research question. Null hypotheses results follow the research
questions.
Main Research Question
What are the differences, if any, in the presence of particular practices of
elementary libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular
practices in non-high performing elementary schools?
After analyzing the inferential, descriptive, and qualitative data generated by the
surveys completed by school librarians participating in the study the researcher
determined there were no statistically significant differences in the library practices of the
high performing and non-high performing elementary schools participating in this study.
Subset Research Question 1
What are the differences, if any, in the number of third grade students’ weekly visits
to the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade students’ weekly
visits to the library in non-high performing schools?
After analyzing the one way ANOVA results along with the means and standard
deviations of the survey responses, the researcher determined there were no statistically
significant differences in the number of third grade students’ weekly visits to the library
in the high performing and non-high performing elementary schools participating in this
study. The ANOVA conducted by the researcher indicated no statistically significant

90

differences between the responses from librarians representing the high performing
schools and the librarians representing non-high performing schools.
Subset Research Question 2
What are the differences, if any, in the number of books checked out per week by
third grade students in high performing schools and the number of books checked out per
week by third grade students in non-high performing schools?
After analyzing the results of the one way analysis of variance (ANOVA) along
with the means and standard deviations of survey responses, the researcher determined
there were no statistically significant differences in the number of books checked out per
week by third grade students in the high performing and non-high performing elementary
schools participating in this study.
Subset Research Question 3
What are the differences, if any, in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high performing
schools?
After analyzing the one way ANOVA results along with the means and standard
deviations of survey responses, the researcher determined there were no statistically
significant differences in the schedule of the libraries in the high performing and nonhigh performing elementary schools participating in this study. The researcher notes that
50% of the total survey respondents indicated their school library has a fixed schedule
while 50% indicated their school library has a mixed schedule. None of the participating
school librarians reported having a flexible library.

91

Subset Research Question 4
What are the differences, if any, in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools?
After analyzing the survey results, the researcher determined there were no
statistically significant differences in the school library labeling practices of the high
performing and non-high performing elementary schools participating in this study.
Subset Research Question 5
What are the differences, if any, in the collaborative practices between librarians
and classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools?
After analyzing the survey results, the researcher determined there were no
statistically significant differences in the collaborative practices between librarians and
classroom teachers in the high performing and non-high performing elementary schools
participating in this study.
Main Null Hypotheses
There is no difference in the presence of particular practices of elementary
libraries in high performing elementary schools and the presence of particular practices in
non-high performing elementary schools. The researcher fails to reject the main null
hypothesis.
Subset Null Hypotheses 1
There is no significant difference in the number of third grade students’ weekly visits to
the library in high performing schools and the number of third grade students’ weekly

92

visits to the library in non-high performing schools. The researcher fails to reject null
hypothesis 1.
Subset Null Hypotheses 2
There is no significant difference in the number of books checked out per week
during scheduled visits by third grade students in high performing schools and the
number of books checked out per week during scheduled visits by third grade students in
non-high performing schools. The researcher fails to reject null hypothesis 2.
Subset Null Hypotheses 3
There is no significant difference in the schedule of the elementary library in high
performing schools and the schedule of the elementary library in non-high performing
schools. The researcher fails to reject null hypothesis 3.
Subset Null Hypotheses 4
There is no significant difference in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools. The researcher fails to reject null
hypothesis 4.
Subset Null Hypotheses 5
There is no significant difference in the collaborative practices between librarians
and classroom teachers in high performing schools and the collaborative practices
between librarians and classroom teachers in non-high performing schools. The
researcher fails to reject null hypothesis 5.
Summary
Chapter four included the analysis of data and data presentation for this study. Data
regarding the differences of library practices in high performing and non-high performing

93

elementary schools included inferential statistics, descriptive statistics, and qualitative
data. Chapter five will present the researcher’s conclusions and recommendations for
future study.

94

CHAPTER FIVE
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATONS

Introduction
This study examined library practices in elementary schools serving grade three in
districts with an enrollment of 750 to 1,500 and compared the practices of high
performing schools to non-high performing schools. The researcher collected data for this
study from elementary school librarians in the state of Missouri. After receiving approval
from the Research Review Board (RRB) in March of 2018 for this study, an email with a
link to the Google Forms Survey was sent to 95 elementary principals of elementary
schools meeting the criteria for the study. Principals were asked to forward the email
containing the link to the survey to the elementary librarians in their buildings. Follow-up
emails were sent one week after the initial survey containing the survey link. Due to the
small number of high performing schools in the sample, the researcher contacted several
elementary principals and school librarians by phone.
The researcher developed the survey after conducting a thorough review of the
literature surrounding library programs. Four themes regarding library practices emerged
from the review of literature: circulation practices, scheduling practices, labeling
practices, and collaborative practices between the school librarian and classroom
teachers. The researcher developed the survey questions to explore current library
practices surrounding these themes in the participating elementary schools. A panel of
experts reviewed the survey and provided feedback. The survey was reviewed after
revisions were made to ensure face validity. The survey asked eleven questions regarding

95

library practices and one open-ended question about a collaborative practice participants
believe had a positive impact on student learning in their school.
Several limitations may have affected the results of this study. The first factor
beyond the researcher’s control was the number of participants who responded to the
online survey. With a total of 12 librarians representing high performing schools and 34
librarians representing non-high performing schools (N=46) participating in the study,
the sample size was smaller than anticipated. Other limitations include the perceptual
nature of the librarians’ responses to the open-ended qualitative question and the honesty
of the responses.
The researcher took steps to minimize the effects of the limitations of the study.
Design controls accounted for the limitations, delimitations, and assumptions of the
study. It was assumed the librarians would respond truthfully to the survey questions.
Participants were assured confidentiality, as results would be presented in aggregate form
that would not identify individual participants or schools. A letter of consent attached to
the email containing the link to the online survey indicated surveys returned online would
not contain the respondents email address. Ten of the survey questions asked the school
librarians to identify library practices and one open-ended question asked participants to
describe a collaborative practice they believed had the greatest impact on student learning
in their schools. In an attempt to control for size, thus comparing schools serving a
similar number of students and having access to similar funding and resources, the
researcher limited the study to elementary schools serving grade 3 in Missouri districts
with an enrollment of 750 to 1,500 students. Of the 95 schools meeting the criteria for
inclusion in the study, 46 school librarians responded for a return rate of 48.4%. Of the

96

82 non-high performing schools invited to participate, 34 school librarians responded for
a return rate of 41.5%. Of the 13 high-performing schools invited to participate in the
study, 12 librarians responded for a return rate of 92.3%. Results are generalizable to the
school districts serving 750 to 1,500 students across the state of Missouri.
Findings
The purpose of this study was to examine the practices of elementary libraries in
both high and non-high performing schools and describe key practices that may lead to
increased student achievement. The researcher desired to learn about the schools’ library
practices and to discover if particular practices were implemented more frequently in
high performing elementary schools in order to share the library practices most likely to
positively impact student learning.
High performing schools were identified as those performing one standard
deviation above the mean of all schools’ 3-year average of the percentage of students
performing at the proficient or advanced level on the 3rd grade Missouri Assessment
Program (MAP) English language arts (ELA) test. The 3-year averaged proficiency
percentages ranged from 26.5% to 89.9%, indicating a wide range of proficiency among
the schools included in this study. This led the researcher to believe factors other than the
practices examined in this study may positively impact student performance in high
performing schools.
The researcher sought to determine the differences in the circulation practices of
high performing and non-high performing elementary schools. Questions about
circulation practices sought to determine the number of scheduled third grade library
visits, the number of books checked out per visit by third grade students, the number of

97

third grade students’ weekly visits to the library, the availability of the library for
students to check out books before school, during school, and after school, and the policy
regarding the students’ ability to continue to check out books if students have overdue
books. As reported in chapter 4, the results of this study indicated there are no significant
differences between the number of third grade students’ weekly visits to the library in
high performing and non-high performing schools. One point of interest is high
performing schools are more likely to implement practices that encourage the frequent
exchange of library books. The only statistically significant finding in this study is high
performing schools are more likely to allow students to visit the library during the school
day with a library pass or teacher’s permission.
Four participating schools (one high performing and four non-high performing)
indicated schedule changes in the past 3 years that increased the number of visits third
graders could make to the library. One participating school librarian indicated the library
schedule changed to a mixed schedule. Three librarians noted the library schedule now
includes an extra library time every few weeks and one librarian noted an extra weekly
visit was added to the existing weekly class to allow students to check out books. Only
one librarian out of the 46 who responded to the survey indicated the number of visits
“changed due to budget cuts, indicating the number of visits may have been reduced;”
however, the librarian did not explain the change. This information tells the researcher
that overall, school leaders and librarians in the 46 reporting schools kept the number of
visits constant or altered the schedules to make time for students to visit the library more
often, even if that meant one extra visit to the library in the rotation with other “specials”
each month.

98

This study also examined the number of books checked out per week during
scheduled visits by third grade students in high performing schools and the number of
books checked out per week during scheduled visits by third grade students in non-high
performing schools? The differences in the number of books checked out per week by
third grade students during scheduled visits to the library in high performing schools and
non-high performing schools were measured by analyzing the results of the surveys
completed by the school librarians in participating schools. Results indicated there were
no significant differences between the number of books checked out during scheduled
weekly visits to the library over the last 3 years in high performing elementary schools
and non-high performing elementary schools participating in the study.
Of the 46 participants in this study only one librarian responded to question 6,
indicating a change in the number of books third graders were allowed to check out
during scheduled weekly visits in the last 3 years. This librarian from a non-high
performing school stated, “Students are [sic] allowed to check out two hardback books
and one e-book [electronic book] starting last year. Before that time we did not have ebooks so they could only check out hardback books.” The remaining 45 survey
participants indicated no change regarding the number of books checked out by third
graders during scheduled weekly visits over the last 3 years has remained constant.
Differences in the schedule of the elementary library implemented in high
performing schools and non-high performing schools were measured by analyzing the
results of the surveys completed by the school librarians in participating schools. Results
indicated there were no significant differences in the library schedules of high performing
elementary schools and non-high performing elementary schools participating in the

99

study. Although there was no significant difference in the type of library schedule among
the 46 reporting schools, it is important to note that none of the schools reported having a
flexible schedule. The researcher found this interesting, as the flexible schedule is the one
recommended by the American Association of School Librarians (AASL). The 3-year
averages of students’ scores on the third grade English language arts (ELA) Missouri
Assessment Program (MAP) test were at or above 69.4% proficient or advanced in
participating high performing schools, indicating it is possible for students to reach
proficiency on the ELA MAP, even in the absence of the AASL recommended flexible
library schedule.
While there was no statistically significant difference between the types of library
schedules in high performing and non-high performing schools the researcher believes
the fact that all 46 schools reported having fixed or mixed schedules did impact that
quality of collaboration present in participating schools. Of the 46 school librarians
responding to the survey, 97.1% indicated they collaborate by sharing information about
resources available in the library yet only 8.8% indicated they collaborate by spending
time in the classroom co-teaching with classroom teachers. Fixed schedules, especially
for librarians who provide release time for classroom teachers’ planning periods, often
prevent deeper collaboration such as co-teaching because the time to do so is just not
available within the school day, especially considering the fact that 58.8% of the
participating librarians indicate they assist teachers with the use of technology, another
collaborative activity that would require the librarian’s time throughout the school day or
week. While assisting teachers with technology may be considered a lower level of
collaboration, the benefit of embedded professional development may be present when

100

librarians are willing to share their knowledge and teachers are willing to learn about
technology and model risk taking in the future to help themselves (Moreillon, 2009).
The study examined the differences in the school library labeling practices of high
performing schools and non-high performing schools by asking respondents to identify
the practices implemented in their schools. The differences in the labeling practices of
high performing schools and non-high performing schools were measured by analyzing
the results of the surveys completed by the school librarians. All of the librarians who
responded to this question indicated their school library is labeled using at least one
system. While there were no significant differences in the overall labeling practices, it is
important to note that 64.4% of the libraries represented in the survey were labeled to
identify books for programs such as Accelerated Reader (AR) or Reading Counts.
Additionally, 73.3% of the librarians responded their libraries are labeled to identify
reading levels or Lexiles. Both of the aforementioned labeling practices are discouraged
by the American Association of School Librarians in the association’s Position Statement
on Labeling Books with Reading Levels. (AASL, 2011) and the association’s Questions
and Answers on Labeling and Rating Systems (AASL, 2010c).
Of the librarians representing high performing schools, 41.7% indicated their
libraries are leveled by reading levels or Lexiles and 66.7% indicated their libraries are
leveled to identify books for a program such as Accelerated Reader (AR) or Reading
Counts. This leads the researcher to conclude the school leaders and educators in these
high performing schools see a value in these labeling practices, even though the practices
are not supported by the AASL.

101

Collaborative practices between librarians and classroom teachers in high
performing schools and non-high performing schools were also examined in this study.
Results indicated there were no significant differences in the collaborative practices of
high performing elementary schools and non-high performing elementary schools
participating in the study. Survey question 10 asked the participants identify collaborative
practices between the school librarian and classroom teachers in their schools. It is
interesting to note 97.1% of the librarians participating in the study indicated they
collaborate by sharing information about resources available in the library while only
8.3% spend time in classrooms co-teaching with classroom teachers. The survey results
indicate only one of the 13 librarians representing high performing schools collaborated
by co-teaching and only three of the 34 librarians representing non-high performing
schools participated in co-teaching. This leads the researcher to believe most of the
students’ interactions with the librarian occur in the library and that while collaborative
practices were identified, most of the practices revolved around the librarian sharing
resources with the classroom teachers. The results of question 11, the open-ended
question that asked librarians to identify an impactful collaborative practice, supported
the researcher’s conclusion as the greatest number of responses were categorized as
“supporting classroom instruction.” The researcher concludes the librarian’s role is
perhaps seen as separate from or supporting the classroom teacher’s role in instruction
rather than close to the center of teaching and learning as described by Loertscher (2014).
Conclusions and Recommendations
One result of this study is the number of questions the researcher had at its
conclusion. The results of the study did not support previous research on the relationship

102

between school library programs and student achievement because the differences
between the practices of the high performing schools and the non-high performing
elementary schools were not statistically significant. The third grade students in the high
performing schools included in the study excelled on the Missouri Assessment Program
ELA assessment despite the fact that many of the library practices in high performing
schools were similar to the practices of non-high performing schools.
The results of this study led the researcher to question if the results would have
been the same if practices in other grade levels had been examined. The 3rd grade MAP is
generally viewed by educators as a grade span test, meaning students’ cumulative
knowledge is assessed in the spring of the 3rd grade year. The researcher recommends
expanding the study to examine the library practices in grades K-2. Dorn and Jones
(2012) state beginning readers should have many opportunities to read books at their
independent levels. When beginning readers read a wide variety of texts independently
their background knowledge and vocabulary increase. The researcher recommends
expanding the survey to include grades K-2 library practices as the practices that
encourage or restrict young learners’ access to books may impact their literacy
development and level of proficiency on the 3rd grade English language arts tests.
The researcher concludes significant differences between high performing and
non-high performing may be more evident if the study had included many more or even
all of the public elementary schools serving 3rd grade across Missouri. For the purpose
of this study, the researcher attempted to control for size in an effort to examine library
practices in schools with a similar number of classes served by the elementary library, a
similar library staff, and similar access to financial resources. The review of literature

103

caused the researcher to question the library practices in her elementary school, and
created a desire to know how similar schools across the state designed their library
programs. Though the overall return rate was 48.4%, the researcher acknowledges the
size of the sample, (N=95), was small. The researcher noticed the addition of one survey
changed the significance of the results, eliminating a statistically significant difference
between a library practice of the high performing and non-high performing groups. The
researcher concludes it is possible the small sample size may have skewed the results of
the study. The researcher is curious to know if the results of the study would remain
consistent if elementary schools in districts smaller and larger than 750 to 1,500 were
included in the study. The results of this study provide an important starting point;
however, the researcher recommends expanding the study to include all public
elementary schools in the state of Missouri.
Perhaps the researcher’s biggest question centers on the possibility that the library
practices examined in this study do not matter as much as the librarian. The researcher
concludes it is possible the school librarian can make a significant difference between
effective libraries and less effective ones. To answer these questions, the researcher
recommends future study that includes librarians self-perceptions regarding effective
qualities or practices, the perceptions of the librarians’ effectiveness as determined by
other school staff including classroom teachers and administrators, and—importantly—
the students’ perceptions of what makes their librarian effective. Librarians in high
performing schools may excel at certain skills such as forming positive relationships with
students, forming collaborative relationships with classroom teachers, and matching
students with just right books. While this study focused on practices related to students’

104

access to resources, Sanden (2014) noted the importance of matching students to just
right books and teaching students to implement strategies to independently determine text
appropriateness. The researcher recommends a study focused on the characteristics and
pedagogical strengths of librarians in high performing schools as determined by English
language arts scores across the state of Missouri.
The researcher also questions how conducting the study at a different time of year
would have impacted the results. The initial surveys were sent to elementary principals
on March 8, 2018. Follow-up emails were sent one week later, on March 15. At this time
the researcher, concerned with the low return rate, began making phone calls in an
attempt to touch base with the elementary principals to whom the surveys were emailed.
This proved to be quite difficult as several of the schools were on spring break either
during the first week the surveys were sent, or the follow-up week. Because of this
difficulty, the researcher recommends conducting research during the school year at a
time that is void of common breaks or vacations.
Another question the researcher developed after conducting a few phone surveys
with participating school librarians focused on the detailed responses provided during
phone interviews as compared to the less-detailed responses to the online survey. The
researcher contacted several of the high performing school librarians directly in an effort
to encourage completion of the online surveys or make a phone survey available if that
was more convenient to the librarian. The librarians were generally pleasant and very
willing to answer questions about their library practices; however, it was often difficult
for the researcher to make connections with them. This difficulty was the result of several
factors: the librarians often had classes throughout the day; the librarians’ planning time

105

sometimes changed on a daily basis due to the schedule; not all librarians had access to a
phone in the library, and some school secretaries are very good at deflecting callers who
mention surveys. The researcher recommends requesting permission from the elementary
principals to contact school librarians rather than relying on busy school principals to
read and forward the emails containing links to the surveys.
The researcher questioned the decision to email the surveys from the start due to
being familiar with the number of emails elementary principals receive each day. While
online surveys are efficient and convenient, reading or forwarding an email that contains
“survey” in the subject line may not be a top priority of a busy elementary principal.
Although it is more time consuming, the researcher recommends conducting a phone
survey with at least a portion of elementary librarians included in the study regarding
library practices in order to collect more complete information. For example, when asked
to note and explain if the number of 3rd grade visits to the library had changed in the last
three years, one online survey participant said, “Changed in the 2017-18 year due to
budget cuts.” This answer did not identify the number of visits students previously made
to the library or the reason for the change other than the generally stated, “budget cuts.”
A phone interview would have allowed the researcher to ask follow-up questions that
would have provided more complete data for analysis.
The researcher acknowledges factors other than library practices may determine
or contribute to student success on the 3rd grade ELA assessment. The researcher
questions whether high performing schools have reading incentive programs that
encourage students to read a high volume of books. The researcher is curious to know if
incentives such as summer reading calendars and activities such as “blind date with a

106

book” in which students are matched with a book without viewing the cover make a
difference in the number of books read by students. As mentioned in the introduction of
the study, the researcher visited a high performing school with a team of teachers to
review the reading materials used by teachers. Students in this school were reading a high
volume of books--so many the school librarian had trouble keeping up with reshelving
the books. It is important to note the students at this school were able to take a
computerized test and receive one soda each day they passed a test. Though this type of
incentive is controversial, the researcher questions if there benefits to extrinsic rewards
that encourage students to read and recommends library program reading incentives as a
potential topic for future study. Perhaps there are other practices, materials, programs, or
characteristics of classroom teachers that help students become proficient readers. The
researcher acknowledges each of these topics could be studied to determine their impact
on the development of proficient readers as determined by proficiency on the English
language arts test of the Missouri Assessment Program.
Summary
The purpose of this study was to examine the practices of elementary libraries in
both high and non-high performing schools and describe key practices that may lead to
increased student achievement. In chapter five the findings for each of the research
questions in the study were presented. Through analysis of the study it was determined
there were no significant differences in the library practices in high performing and nonhigh performing elementary schools. The aggregate data revealed that all schools
participating in the study had fixed or mixed schedules while none of the schools had
flexible schedules as recommended by the American Association of School Librarians.

107

Aggregate data also revealed that while most librarians participating in the study
participate in collaborative activities, few participate in deep collaboration with
classroom teachers such as co-teaching units of study. This suggests school leaders may
need to explore ways to bring classroom teachers and school librarians together through
increased participation by the librarian on vertical curriculum teams or during
Professional Learning Community (PLC) time and posing guiding questions that provide
a focus on how these groups can collaborate to develop the shared expertise Hattie (2015)
encouraged. The school librarian and classroom teachers bring unique knowledge,
expertise, and passion to the most important work of helping students develop both
proficient reading skills as well as a love for reading by the end of 3rd grade. The
significance of this research is that it offers a starting point for further research and
determines that factors other than the particular practices examined within this study may
contribute to students’ proficiency on the English Language Arts assessment in Missouri.