
Abstract
TRACY DANEEN CREECH. Your library ain’t like mine: Perceptions of quality school
library programming from library professionals. (Under the direction of DR. CHANCE
W. LEWIS)
There are few instances in which school library professionals are able to give
input as to what constitutes a quality school library media program. This study seeks to
determine if there are key differences in perceptions of school library programming from
school library personnel who are licensed as opposed to those who do not share that
distinction. Additionally, this study also seeks to determine if there are statistically
significant differences between school library personnel who are employed in Title I
eligible schools versus school library personnel who are not employed in such schools.
The data were collected via a cross sectional survey. The target population for the
administered survey were the school library media professionals in the state of North
Carolina. The sampling frame was the school library media professionals from the
Dewey County NC Public School District (pseudonym). School library media
professionals in this instance consisted of licensed school library media specialists, nonlicensed school library media assistants, technology facilitators or any staff member
permanently assigned to work in the school media center. The data were analyzed by
determining the frequency of responses and by means of an independent samples t-test.
Literature regarding the essential elements of school library services were
expounded upon in detail during this study. The elements included were certified school
library media specialists, print and electronic resources, school library accessibility and
quality school library programming. Moreover, the theoretical perspectives of Michel

iii

Foucault and Paulo Freire and how they can be applied to the field of library and
information science was also explored.
This study comprises the major findings discovered in relation to this study as
well as recommendations for future research in the area of school libraries. Research in
this field is sorely needed as additional studies can effectively add to the body of
research. Such research can inform key stakeholders of the importance of school libraries
and school librarians. This study concludes with recommendations for all those who have
an interest in maintaining school library services to students.


CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
“At the moment that we persuade a child, any child, to cross that threshold, that magic
threshold into a library, we change their lives forever, for the better.” -- President (then
Senator) Barack Obama

School library media centers are often an overlooked component of student
success. According to the Library Research Service [LRS], (n.d.), a school library media
center is defined as:
“a dedicated facility located in and administered by the school that provides at
least the following: an organized, circulating collection of printed and/or
audiovisual and/or computer-based resources, or a combination thereof; paid staff;
an established schedule during which services of the staff are available to students
and faculty; instruction on using library materials to support classroom standards
and improve student research and literacy skills” (para. 3).
There have been a number of studies that suggest that a quality school media library
program and student achievement are positively correlated (Burgin, Bracy & Brown,
2003; Gavigan & Lance, 2016; Lance, 2001; Kachel & Lance, 2013; Lance, Schwarz, &
Rodney, 2014). An effective school media library program is one that has a certified
school librarian as the primary purveyor of information, provides a personalized learning
environment, and offers equitable access to resources in order to ensure a well-rounded
education for all students (American Association of School Librarians [AASL], 2016). A
firm foundation in literacy is needed at an early age for there to be optimal academic
success into adulthood. School library media centers aid in the development of lifelong
reading skills. Many studies cite third grade reading scores as a gateway to lifelong

1

literacy and high school graduation (Anne E. Casey Foundation, 2010; Lu, 2013; Sparks,
2011). North Carolina (NC) legislators reviewed data regarding third grade reading
scores and attempted to take preventative measures against illiteracy by passing House
Bill 950 in 2012 (North Carolina House Bill 950, 2012, §115C-83.1A). NC House Bill
950 is commonly known as Read to Achieve and went into effect beginning with the
2013 – 2014 academic year. The major objectives of Read to Achieve is to increase
proficiency in reading and to ensure that all NC students are able to read at or above
grade level by the end of their third-grade year. The efforts made by NC legislators
should be applauded as this appears to be a concerted effort to tackle the abhorrent
problem of illiteracy in the state; however, this law does not make concessions for or
even mention school library media centers. School library media centers and school
library media specialists and their importance in relation to student academic success and
literacy is noticeably absent from the educational equation.
School library media centers that serve students that come from families at a
lower socioeconomic level are often plagued with outdated or near obsolete resources and
a lack of qualified staff (Adkins, 2014; Everhart, 2002; Glick, 2002). Those who are the
most vulnerable often need the most resources in order to be successful (Kachel & Lance,
2013). If student academic success and school library media centers are positively
correlated, it would make sense that schools that serve economically challenged and/or
intellectually deficient students be staffed with the appropriate resources so that the most
marginalized can be equipped with the tools needed to be academically successful. In
addition to robust resources in terms of books and technology, adequate staffing is
desperately needed in order to execute a quality school library media program. School

2

library media specialists are much more than instruments of information and glorified
clerks for checking materials in and out. School library media specialists provide research
instruction to staff and students alike. They also have the added responsibility of ensuring
that library collections are up to date with the appropriate resources which enhance
curriculum and academic skills. Oftentimes, school library media centers that serve
economically challenged students are staffed with media assistants who do not hold the
appropriate licensure or credentials (Adkins, 2014; Everhart, 2002; Glick, 2002); which
greatly affects the quality of the services provided. The absence of a qualified and
licensed school library media specialist severely limits the ability of a high-quality school
library media program to flourish. Additionally, the failure of school library media
centers to provide up to date and adequate resources can also affect the effectiveness of a
quality school media program.

Statement of the Problem
School library media centers and school library media specialist have been on the
decline for a number of years (Everhart, 2002a; Everhart, 2002b; Helms, 2015; Rosales,
2011; Sullivan, 2013; Vercelletto, 2015); even though there are a multitude of studies that
make a positive correlation between school libraries staffed with certified staff and
student achievement (Baumbach, 2003; Burgin, Bracy & Brown, 2003; Lance, Rodney &
Hamilton-Pennell, 2000a; Kaplan, 2007; Lance, Rodney & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000b;
Lance, Schwartz & Rodney, 2014; Lonsdale, 2003; Schroeder & Fisher, 2015). Academic
success is the primary objective for all educational stakeholders. Since previous studies
suggest that the presence of school library media centers and media specialists ultimately

3

aid in the overall academic development of students, reductions in the essential
components of library services confounds logic. The series of reductions by many school
districts have left school library media programs in peril (Carlton, 2016; Geir, 2011;
Johnson, 2005). The current literature is sparse regarding what embodies a quality school
library program, although there is an abundance of studies that have been conducted that
espouse the positive correlation between library services and student achievement
(Gavigan & Lance, 2016; Lance, 2001; Lance & Loertscher, 2005; Lance, Schwarz, &
Rodney, 2014; Lonsdale, 2003). Additionally, there is literature regarding libraries and
the services they provide to economically disadvantaged students (Adkins, 2014;
Neuman & Celano, 2001). For the purposes of this study, an economically disadvantaged
student was defined as any student that attends a Title I or Title I eligible school. Title I
eligible schools specifically serve the needs of students who come from lower
socioeconomic households, so this characterization is appropriate in this context.
The services provided to low income and middle-income patrons in four distinct
neighborhood libraries was studied by Neuman and Celano (2001). They found that
access to print and electronic materials was perhaps the most significant wedge terms of
library usage. The access gap in terms of library services (or programming) is an issue
that must be adequately explored. Much work needs to be done to address the paucity in
contemporary literature regarding what defines a quality school library program.
Moreover, there are few instances where practitioners in the field of school library
services are given the opportunity to make concrete distinctions as to what they feel is a
quality school library media program or service. The increase in such literature can be

4

effectively used to shape educational policy as it relates to school library media centers,
school library media specialists and the services provided by school libraries.

Purpose of the Study
The primary purpose of this study was to gauge perceptions from school library
media personnel regarding what typifies a quality school library media program. The
researcher asserted that a quality school library media program is one that is led by a
certified school library media specialist and one that supports the curricula mission of the
school through the use of academic programs and services. This assertion is aligned with
the position of the AASL (2016). Since there has been diminutive research done to define
the role of the school library media center program by a multitude of professionals in the
field (Bush, 2009; Haycock, 1999; Loertscher, 2000; Rosenfeld & Loertscher, 2007), this
study added to the scarcity of the currently available literature. Oftentimes, the views
from professionals who are currently working in the field have not been adequately
espoused which made this study significant and apropos.
The educational stakeholders that have the arduous task of making budgetary
decisions may find that eliminating school library media specialists and school library
services will have a negative impact on academic growth in the long run. In this sense,
school library media centers, school library media specialists and school library
programming will each take their place in educational discourse. Just as school
administrators, teachers and even coaches have an enduring place in the educational
arena, school librarians must also be allowed a permanent space as well in the same
venue since they aid in student academic progression.

5

Research Questions
The following descriptive, non-experimental study utilized survey research as the
primary method for data collection. The survey instrument (see Appendix A) was
designed to measure the perceptions of what characterized a quality school library media
program from professionals in the field. The kindergarten through twelfth grade schools
from the Dewey County, NC School District (pseudonym) was utilized for this study.
The research questions that guided this study were as follows:
RQ1: What are the characteristics of a quality school library media program
according to the school library media personnel in the Dewey County, NC School
District?
RQ2: In what ways do the characteristics of quality school library media
programs differ between licensed school library media specialists and nonlicensed school media professionals in the Dewey County, NC School District?
RQ3: In what ways do characteristics of school library media programs differ
between Title I eligible schools and non-Title I eligible schools in the Dewey, NC
School District?
The survey participants were the school library media personnel from Dewey County
Public Schools which is located in North Carolina. Dewey County Public Schools is
situated in an urban area and has over 140,000 students attending over 170 schools.
School library media personnel includes certified school library media specialists and
noncertified school library media staff.

6

Theoretical Perspectives
The theoretical perspectives of Michel Foucault and his viewpoints on library and
information science primarily guided this study. Foucault posits that the library is a site
for the possibility of new knowledge as well as a passive storehouse that provides access
to immense facts (Radford, 1992). The library is an entity that is able to provide a
transformative effect on the individual which then translates into personal empowerment.
In a contemporary society, the library experience is grounded in a positivist view of
knowledge. As a comparison to positivism, library and information science builds general
and priori rules with which to build systems that allow an efficient and precise access to
information and knowledge (Radford, 1992).
An additional theoretical concept that guided this research is critical theory of
library and information science. The theory of library and information science is actually
born out of the critical pedagogy of Paulo Freire. Freire (1970) stresses the importance of
those who are deemed the oppressed to take back their lives through education. Education
can be the one liberating factor for ensuring that the marginalized can overcome the
obstacles that prevent their full integration into society. It is only education that allows
men and women to essentially redefine themselves.
Critical theory of library and information science is relatively new in the world of
academia. It borrows from Foucault’s and Freire’s concepts because it is the library that
seeks to educate those who are often relegated or who are on the fringe of society.
Critical theory of library and information science was introduced by Leckie, Given and
Buschman (2010) and is based on seventy-five years of theory in relation to literacy and
education. Critical theory of library and information science asserts that the main purpose

7

of libraries is to enable learners to process information better but to also teach one
another in a community of learners. Libraries should be viewed as transformative
educational sites which seek to reach a cross section of learners. The library is therefore
charged with understanding first the learner and then assessing community needs (Leckie,
Given & Buschman, 2010). Based on the fundamental foundation of critical theory,
library services should be equal and available to all.
Social Exchange Theory
This study utilized survey research via an online platform as the primary method
of data collection. Online surveys often mean that some sort of incentive needs to be
given so that participants can respond honestly and in a timely manner. According to
Ward and Meade (2018), the quality of online survey data is of upmost importance so
that comprehensive corollaries can be used in decision making. Social exchange theory
asserts that individuals primarily seek reward and avoid punishment as well as calculate,
or seek to maximize, profits for themselves (Sabettelli, 2003). Rewards and profits are
not necessarily pecuniary but can rather be emotionally defined. In the framework of this
study, participants are encouraged to answer honestly, thoughtfully and expeditiously so
that they can provide feedback regarding the importance of school library services and
programming. An additional benefit is that school library professionals can provide
feedback regarding the profession in which they work. In this instance, the cost
encompasses the devotion of time necessary to answer the questionnaire. The reward, or
incentive, is the satisfaction of advocating for the profession and the services provided by
school library media specialists.

8

Each of the theoretical concepts are expounded upon in subsequent chapters of
this study. The theories of Foucault and Freire and how they relate to library services and
library patrons are found in chapter two. The concept of social exchange theory and how
it can be applied to survey research can be found in chapter three.

Overview of Context and Methods
This descriptive, non-experimental study sought to gauge perceptions from school
library media personnel regarding what characterized a quality school library media
program. A cross-sectional survey was administered to school library personnel which
sufficiently addressed each of the aforementioned research questions. Library personnel
included certified school library media specialists and non-certified library media staff
from the Dewey County Public Schools District in the state of North Carolina. A list of
potential participants was secured by working closely with the district level school media
personnel. The questionnaire was sent to identified participants via electronic mail and
was available for approximately three weeks. A minimum of three reminder emails were
sent in order to maximize participation.
The structure of the questionnaire in relation to the research questions formulated
several variables which was utilized during this study. The focus of research question one
is inherently illustrative and as such, descriptive statistics with a focus on frequency was
applied. In regard to research inquires two and three, the dichotomous independent
variables Title I eligibility and certified staffing licensure can in no way be manipulated
by the researcher and as such, they were deemed quasi-independent. The statistical
method for research inquires two and three was an independent samples t-test. The

9

statistical software SPSS was used for all aspects of statistical analysis for the duration of
this study. Final analysis of the results are reported in chapter four. The ways in which
the results can be effectively applied to the research inquiries are presented in chapter
five. Moreover, the ways in which school library programming ultimately benefits
students academically in relation to the theoretical concepts presented is also answered in
chapter five.

Significance of the Study
This study may be used to inform key stakeholders (North Carolina Department
of Public Instruction, school districts, school level administrators and school library
media specialists and staff) about the intrinsic value of school library media centers and
school library media specialists and how each aide in the development of a quality school
library media program. School library media programs in turn, may lead to positive
student academic growth.
Additional components of school library media that were reinforced in this work
were the quality of resources available, the availability of the school library media center
for patron usage and the quality of the programs and services offered to patrons. The
relationship between each of the elements are, in effect, reciprocal (see Figure 1). School
library media centers and school library media specialists aid in student achievement
(Burgin, Bracy & Brown, 2003; Gavigan & Lance, 2016; Lance, 2001; Lance & Kachel,
2013; Lance, Schwarz & Rodney, 2014); however, their role is slowly diminishing in
educational discourse. This study can be used as a means to inform school level
administrators and school library media specialists regarding how to identify a quality

10

school library media program. Appropriate resources can then be allocated to ensure
equitable distribution to all schools in terms of print and electronic materials, technology,
library hours, availability and staffing since each of these are needed to ensure clear and
consistent quality.

Student
Academic
Growth
Quality
School
Library
Programs

Quality
School
Library
Resources

School
Library
Media
Center

Certified
School
Media
Librarian

Figure 1: Connection of Student Academics and School Library Media Fundamentals

Definition of Terms
There are several terms that are associated with this study which may be
significant. The terms school library media specialist, media specialist, school librarian,
librarian, and media coordinator are at times used interchangeably. According to the
AASL, (n.d.a.),
a “school librarian works with both students and teachers to facilitate access to
information in a wide variety of formats, instruct students and teachers how to
acquire, evaluate and use information and the technology needed in this process,
and introduces children and young adults to literature and other resources to
11

broaden their horizons. As a collaborator, change agent, and leader, the school
librarian develops, promotes and implements a program that will help prepare
students to be effective users of ideas and information, a lifelong skill” (para 1).
Other significant terms utilized in this study are as follows:
Certified School Library Media Specialist – a school librarian that coordinates and directs
the activities of school library media support staff which may include media assistants,
technical assistants, student assistants and at times, volunteers. In order to obtain
certification (often called licensure) in the state of North Carolina, a candidate for the
position much attend an approved Master’s Degree level education program and obtain
the minimum score required on the Praxis Exam for Library Media Specialist (North
Carolina School Library Media Association [NCSLMA], n.d.).
Library Automation System – the computerized system used by libraries that keeps track
of resources acquired, patron borrowing records, patron fees owed and information
regarding cataloged resources.
North Carolina Department of Public Instruction (NCDPI) – the governing body that sets
standards for all North Carolina Public Schools. The NCDPI sets the principles for
certification, also known as licensure, for all instructional school personnel.
North Carolina Digital and Learning Media Inventory Report (NC DLMI) – “The NC
DLMI collects data for state and national reporting, to inform state and local budgets, and
to assist in planning state and local digital learning efforts. Inventory questions are
streamlined and aligned to the North Carolina Digital Learning Progress Rubric” (North
Carolina Public Schools, n.d., para. 1). The NC DLMI was formally called the Annual
Media Technology Report (AMTR).

12

Patron – a person who utilizes the library or school library media center; client or
customer.
School Media Program or Media Center Program – the services provided to library
patrons. Such services may include, but not limited to, research classes, technology
classes, battle of the books, reading is fundamental and story time. The terms school
media program, school library program, library program or media program may be used
interchangeably.
Title I Program – The Title I program provides financial assistance to local educational
agencies (LEAs) and schools with high numbers or high percentages of children from
low-income families to help ensure that all children meet challenging state academic
standards (US Department of Education [USDOE], n.d.b.). The terms Title I and Title I
eligible may be used interchangeably.
Title I Eligible School – a school that meets the parameters of a USDOE Title I school;
however, said school is not designated as a Title I school by the LEA. All schools
designated as Title I by Dewey County Schools are Title I eligible based on guidelines
from the USDOE.
Statement of Subjectivity
The need to be completely transparent in regard to this study is needed in order
for the concluding results to be taken into full consideration. As such, a statement that
provides information about the researcher is contained herein. Although the researcher
has previously worked as a school library media specialist, the research and subsequent
results of this study were in no way compromised by this fact.

13

I began my foray into education as a high school English teacher immediately
after college. The school in which I was assigned would be considered affluent since it
would not have qualified as Title I eligible. After spending many years as a classroom
teacher, I obtained a Master of Library Science degree. I then began working as a school
library media specialist. I have always worked on the secondary level and as such, I have
no experience with the elementary age group. My interest in libraries began at a relatively
young age. My parents ensured that I had a home library before I entered preschool. I had
wide variety of books from all genres. My interest in reading began as a small child and
has endured to the present.
My years as a school library media specialist were primarily at Title I eligible
schools. This is in stark contrast during my tenure as a classroom teacher. Although I no
longer work as a school library media specialist, I have made the importance of libraries
and the correlation to positive academic outcomes a research focus as I concentrated on
my doctoral studies in curriculum and instruction. It is my belief that a strong foundation
in literacy is often needed in order to progress in all disciplines and as such, libraries and
the services provided therein should also be factored into the educational equation.
Summary
This study begins with an overall synopsis of the current issues facing school
library media centers and why a strong school library media program is needed. A
definition of key terms and the theoretical perspectives of Michel Foucault and Paulo
Freire and the correlation to library and information science is briefly introduced.
Additionally, a brief overview of social exchange theory and its principles are introduced.
Chapter two begins by reviewing scholarly literature regarding the emergence of school

14

library media centers, quality media programs, school library media specialists and the
correlation between print and electronic resources as well as the overall decline of school
library media centers over time. Chapter three is a presentation of the methodology that
will be utilized for this study. The methodology includes a description of the study, a
description of the survey instrument and information regarding the sample participants.
Chapter four gives a detailed summation of study results. Chapter five provides the
summary and conclusion of the study. Recommendations are also presented to key
stakeholders.

15

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
“Cutting libraries during a recession is like cutting hospitals during a plague.” -Eleanor Crumblehulme

The purpose of this study was to gauge perceptions from school library media
personnel regarding what characterizes a quality school library media program. This
study utilized input from public school library media personnel in the Dewey County
Public School District (pseudonym) in the state of North Carolina using survey research
methods. First, this chapter begins with a historical synopsis of the emergence of school
libraries. Second, a review of existing literature from noted scholars regarding the
essential components of school library media was espoused. These components include
school library media staffing, resources, availability and access and the ways in which the
school library media program contributes to academic success. Third, the role that school
libraries play in regard to student achievement was explored. School libraries succor
diverse student populations such as the economically challenged and exceptional
educational needs students and as such, appropriate literature to augment that point was
reviewed herein.
This chapter concluded with the theoretical perspectives of Foucault and how his
theories can be appropriately applied to the field of library and information science. His
concepts encompass the bifurcation of knowledge empowerment and the ability of the
library to transform users into ephemeral and ethereal states of being (Radford, 1992).
Additionally, the theories of Paulo Freire were also examined as they too have a direct
impact on library and information science. Freire (1970) posits that knowledge has the
ability to empower which in turns leads to individual transformation. Libraries are

16

passive storehouses for knowledge which makes the theoretical concepts of Freire wholly
appropriate in this context.
The Emergence of the School Library Media Center and Its Essential Components
The historical roots of school libraries are sparse at best. Information from the
American Library Association [ALA], (n.d.) suggests that early colonial schools from the
1700s, equipped with the Bible and Psalm Book, were the early beginnings of would later
become libraries for student use. The evolution of libraries came in the nineteenth century
when school districts began including reading rooms for students in schools. The state of
New York was first to pass legislation that allowed school districts to use tax funds to
purchase library books for students beginning in 1835. By 1839 laws that mirrored New
York’s were passed in Massachusetts, Michigan, Connecticut and Rhode Island. By the
year 1876, nineteen states had developed legislation that instructed school districts to
construct school libraries (ALA, n.d.). New York State was also the first to appoint a
professionally trained librarian to oversee a school library in the borough of Brooklyn.
The early years of the twentieth century is when school libraries began to see exponential
growth. The Office of Education (precursor to the United States Department of
Education) reported that there were approximately 10,000 public school libraries in the
United States. These libraries most often contained fewer than 3,000 titles (ALA, n.d.).
The genesis of the professional role of school librarians is obscure at best.
Melville Dewey created the first curriculum for librarians, irrespective of type, at
Columbia University (née College) in the year 1887 (Weigand, 2007). This newly created
library science curriculum formed the foundation for how all librarians were trained for
years to come. During the 1900s, most elementary and secondary school libraries formed

17

partnerships with public libraries to supply extracurricular reading needs for students
(Weigand, 2007). The National Education Association (NEA) created standards for
school librarians by the 1920s and as a result, state and local governmental agencies
began funding school library supervisors. The funding of school libraries, which affected
the number of newly trained librarians, declined dramatically because of the Great
Depression and America’s participation in World War II. These abhorrent events in
America’s history had a negative impact on library personnel and the services provided to
patrons.
Perhaps the most significant legislation that had a direct impact on America’s
school libraries was the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) which was
introduced in 1965. ESEA was part of then President Lyndon B. Johnson’s War on
Poverty initiative. Title II, Section 201 of ESEA specifically provided funding in the
amount of $100,000,000 over four fiscal years for the acquisition of library resources,
textbooks and a variety of other published instructional materials for use by teachers and
students in public and private elementary and secondary schools (United States ESEA,
1965). This funding was allocated to individual states and provided a gateway for school
libraries to flourish. The number of public school libraries saw exponential growth
because of this infusion of funds. There was an increase from 50 percent in 1958 which
accounted for approximately 40,000 school libraries, to 93 percent by 1985 which was
approximately 74,000 school libraries. By the year 2005, school libraries numbered
roughly 82,000. The number of trained school library media specialists also increased to
136,000 (Weigand, 2007).

18

Just as the historic origins of school libraries in America in general is sparse, the
modest beginnings of school libraries in the state of North Carolina is even more limited.
Libraries of any kind were nearly nonexistent in the state so it makes sense that school
libraries took longer to emerge and gain acceptance. According to Valentine (2010),
North Carolina had only one fully functioning school library in the entire state in the year
1850. This library contained a mere 1,500 volumes. The advent of the Civil War and then
the Reconstruction period caused the expansion of all types of libraries in the state of
North Carolina to temporarily cease. By the year 1870, the number of libraries specific to
schools increased to fourteen with an estimated collection size for all at 77,050
(Valentine, 2010). This illustrates positive growth and a step in the right direction;
however, the numbers pertaining to school library venues, resources and services were
still dismal. Valentine (2010) posits that the lack of resources and the focus on mostly
White, male and upper-class patrons was the culprit for much of the slow growth of
North Carolina school library media centers. The ESEA also had a positive effect on the
state’s school library resources. The added funds provided for school library media
centers and the licensed staff to support them. By the 2011 – 2012 school year, North
Carolina had a total of 2,550 public schools of which 2,340 (or 91.8%) had a dedicated
space for the school library media center (National Center for Educational Statistics
[NCES], n.d.a.). School library media specialists numbered 2,510 for the 2011 – 2012
academic year (NCES, n.d.b.). Although the numbers indicate that a vast majority of
schools enjoy the services provided by a school library and school librarian, there are
many North Carolina schools that do not offer such services to students. Based on the
data from the NCES (n.d.a.), there are 8.2% of North Carolina schools that do not have a

19

library media center. This indicates that some students in the state are impacted by an
access gap in terms of library programming.
The steady growth of the inclusion of libraries in the nation’s public schools
indicate that the services provided are necessary and therefore are an essential component
of the academic process. At present, it is estimated that there are 81,200 libraries in
public schools in the United States (NCES, 2015). Among the public schools that have a
school library media center, the average number of staff present is 1.8. The average
number of certified school library media specialists is 0.9 (NCES, 2015). The
aforementioned data indicate that although there is a dedicated space for specific library
functions, the staff needed to create a quality school library media program is deficient
(especially among certified school library media specialists). In terms of resources, it is
estimated that there are 2,188 books and 81 audio visual materials present per 100
students in the nation’s public school libraries. The number of computer work stations
amounted to approximately 3 per 100 students. Expenditures explicit to public school
library media centers indicate that $16.64 per student was allocated for the 2014 – 2015
academic year on the national level (NCES, 2015).
School library media centers are no longer mere reading rooms for student use.
They have evolved into technological hubs as print materials are not the only resources
available to students and staff. According to the latest figures by the NCES (2015), 43.2
percent of schools who serve a student population of 1,000 or more had laptops for
student use outside of the media center. That figure increases to 60.7 percent for staff
usage. School library media centers now integrate technology as a bridge to literacy
(Haycock, 1999; Horan, 2015; Jurkowski, 2006; Rosenfeld & Loertscher, 2007; Thomas,

20

2004; Williams, 2015). Public school library media centers have transformed
dramatically from the colonial era to technological centers aimed at advancing student
academic growth (Widzinski, 2001).
School Library Media Essential Components
Chapter one gave a brief overview of the essential components of school media
centers (see Figure 1). Media center staffing, resources, availability and the academic
program are all crucial to ensuring that pupils in all grade levels are provided with the
services that are necessary for elevated academic attainment. Moreover, it is imperative
that all said essentials are accounted for in all school library media centers. The absence
of one jeopardizes all so local school districts should make every attempt at ensuring that
each school library media center under their charge has each of the aforementioned
essential components. Scholarly literature that focuses upon the importance of each
crucial component to school library media is expounded upon below.
School library Media Center Staffing
School districts across the country have decreased or eliminated school media
specialist positions in recent years (Everhart, 2002a; Everhart, 2002b; Helms, 2015;
Johnson, 2005). The rationale has always pointed to fiscal concerns. Oftentimes, school
districts are forced to cut non-teaching positions so that instructional positions can remain
intact. Although it is understood that school districts indeed have tough decisions to make
in regards to staffing, reducing or eliminating school media specialists often has a
negative effect on student achievement (Kachel & Lance, 2013; Lance, Schwarz &
Rodney, 2014; Littman, 2014). Another point of concern is that students are slowly
moving away from print resources in favor of electronic ones. The feeling by many is

21

that the role of the librarian in this new technological age is fast becoming obsolete. It is
important for school districts nationwide to realize that school library media specialists
are far more valuable than the newest electronic device.
The sharp reduction or elimination of school library media specialists can, in part,
be blamed on the Obama administration’s consolidation of the of Improving Literacy
Through School Libraries program with five other literacy programs. This streamlining
meant that all five programs had to share $187 million dollars to achieve their individual
goals. Former President Obama’s budget proposal for the 2013 fiscal year eliminated
$28.6 million that was earmarked for literacy programs under the Fund for Improvement
of Education (FIE) in the 2012 fiscal year (American Library Association, 2012). These
measures severely limited the financial resources that trickle down to states and then
local school districts. When faced with a budget crunch, the reduction or elimination of
school media specialists seems to be the easiest and most cost-effective route; however,
the negative impact on student achievement means that school districts have to reallocate
more resources in order to improve achievement deficiencies. School library media
specialists are a positive force in relation to student achievement and as such, should be
seen as essential personnel in all schools. According to a research study implemented by
Kachel and Lance (2013), reading and writer scores were higher for students whose
school were staffed by a full-time certified school library media specialist. They also
found that minority students, economically disadvantaged students and students with
disabilities benefit substantially more than general education students when their school
is staffed with a full-time school media specialist. Kachel and Lance (2013) argue that
staffing school media centers with certified librarians ultimately aids in closing

22

achievement gaps. This is in part because certified school librarians are specifically
trained to provide research services and collection management that will enhance the
school curriculum. Non-certified personnel who staff school library media centers are
trained to offer rudimentary services such as materials checkout. Although non-certified
staff occasionally staff school library media centers, there is no substitute for full-time,
certified school library media specialists who are fully immersed in the teaching and
learning process (Kachel & Lance, 2013).
Kaplan (2007) further addresses the importance of having a qualified school
librarian by providing evidence that they are collaborative partners in education. Kaplan
argues that school librarians are information specialists responsible for knowing the
sources of information in all formats, both print and electronic. He or she is also
knowledgeable and understands the importance of integrating technology into the
educational setting. The school librarian can therefore assist students as well as teachers
with didactic information. Kaplan (2007) also argues that school librarians should be
considered teachers and as such, should be required to meet the same standards as other
highly qualified teachers as defined by the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).
Previously, school librarians did not have to meet the requirements of NCLB which made
staffing school libraries with unqualified media personnel acceptable. The Every Student
Succeeds Act (ESSA), which replaced NCLB and signed into law by then President
Obama in 2015, essentially reauthorized ESEA of 1965 (United Stated Department of
Education [USDOE], n.d.a). Under this reiteration of educational law, school library
media specialists are not specifically mentioned although school library services are. The
credentialing (or certification/licensure) for school library media specialists is abstruse as

23

their role is not adequately defined. For school library media specialists to be seen as true
educators who contribute to academic discourse, their role as teacher librarians should be
defined by national and state educational boards. Should school librarians obtain the
status of highly qualified, then schools would be required to employ certified school
librarians who meet the criteria.
A cost-saving measure that many school districts employ is staffing school media
centers with personnel that are not qualified or certified. There has also been some debate
among educational administrators regarding school library media specialists’ credentials.
School library media specialists typically must hold a Master of Library Science degree
(AASL, n.d.b.; Rathbun-Grubb, 2009). The Master of Library Science degree prepares
those seeking school library media specialist’s positions with essential skills such as
cataloging, acquisitions and research (Solomon & Rathbun-Grubb, 2009). Even if a
school has been allotted funding for a school library media specialist, school level
administrators have the flexibility to use the position as a swap for another position.
School level administrators have often traded school library media specialist’s positions
for teacher assistants, technology associates and academic facilitators. Although these
positions are also needed in the school setting, they cannot and should not take the place
of a qualified and certified school library media specialist.
The American Association for School Librarians [AASL] (1994), framed a
position statement regarding basic staffing needs for school library media centers. The
organization first notes that it is imperative that all students and staff must have access to
a school library media program provided by a minimum of one certified full-time school
librarian. Depending upon the total school population, it may be advisable to have more

24

than one certified school library professional to handle the academic needs that a school
library provides (AASL, 1994). Another salient point is that all school library media
centers should employ a full-time professional and support staff in order to provide
school library programming at all grade levels. A judicious ratio of professional school
library staff to the student population and staff should be established so that adequate
coverage is available at all times (AASL, 1994). An added suggestion that deserves
mention is that each school district should employ a full-time district library media
director to oversee district-wide school media staffing and programming. The district
school media director provides leadership and serves as an intermediary between district
level administration and school based administrators and school librarians. It should be
the responsibility of the school library media director to develop the criteria, policies and
curriculum and communicate the goals and needs of individual schools and district
library media programs to the superintendent and board of education if necessary (AASL,
1994). Ideally, the school district media director will be an advocate for school library
media specialists and school media programs.
The paucity of school library media specialists has become an educational crisis.
Although eliminating school libraries and school library media specialists may see to be
the best course of action when it comes to fiscal constraints, that rationale is far from
sensible. School libraries and school librarians contribute to, not detract from, student
academic success (Kachel & Lance, 2013; Lance, Schwarz & Rodney, 2014; Littman,
2014). It is imperative that school library media specialists are included in the academic
equation.

25

School library Media Center Resources
Collection Development
The process of building library resources in response to library priorities and user
interests is aptly defined as collection development (Johnson, 2014). Proper collection
development process and procedures are necessary in school library media centers
because the school mission and vision can be met with the appropriate academic
materials. School library budgets are often limited so the challenge for school library
media specialists is to find the most appropriate materials to support students and
teachers within budgetary guidelines. Hoffman and Wood (2007) posit that collection
development is one of the most intellectually challenging components of librarianship.
The focus becomes building a quality collection of resources that will serve the needs of
all those who utilize the school library media space. Each patron is unique regardless of
whether they are student or staff so procuring the appropriate materials can become the
real trial. Savard (2007) suggests that libraries and librarians are not only tasked with
building the library collection to support the curriculum, but also to provide access to
information that will be transformative to individual users. When collection development
is done well, teachers should be able to create lessons and assignments with the sound
assurance that students will benefit academically.
Just as school libraries have evolved because of the advent of technological
advances, the collection development process has also made a metamorphosis. Resources
are no longer solely print but have increasingly become electronic in nature. Many school
library media specialists have reverted to purchasing print materials for popular fiction
titles while ensuring that electronic resources and databases are acquired for nonfiction

26

materials (Stephens, 2014). Nonfiction materials can become easily outdated so it would
make sense for librarians to concentrate their often limited budget on electronic
resources. Stephens (2014) posits that the move towards fiction print materials and
nonfiction electronic materials is not merely because of preference but at times necessity.
There are fewer fiction titles in electronic book (e-book) format that are available to
libraries as compared to private individuals. Many school library vendors offer many
more nonfiction titles in the e-book format. This is preferable because nonfiction print
materials are often outdated as soon as they are printed. E-books are easily replaced or
updated.
In addition to ensuring that the appropriate books and materials are available for
academic use, school librarians also have the added task of ensuring that resources
(especially those used for pleasurable reading) are culturally diverse. Totten, Brown and
Garner (1996) suggest that all resources should be vetted by the school library media
specialist so that all ethnic and religious groups are somehow represented. Making sure
that diverse materials are available for all patrons are beneficial to the entire academic
community. Church (2017) posits that all school library media specialists are charged
with meeting the needs of all patrons and as such, school library media professionals
should practice collection development policies that are both purposeful and thoughtful.
Students should be able to see themselves in the materials that they read. Church (2017)
terms this concept “books as mirrors” (p. 4).
Church (2017) also cites statistics from the Cooperative Children’s Book Center
(CCBC) from the year 2015 which highlight the disparities regarding multiculturalism in
children’s literature. Of the approximately 3,200 picture books, novels and nonfiction

27

works received by publishers in the United States in 2015, a total of 243 were about
African Americans or contained an African American character whereas 78 were about
Latinos or contained a Latino character. A scant 28 were about Native Americans or
contained a Native American character. These dismal numbers indicate that much more
literature that has multicultural themes is sorely needed. In the interim, school library
media specialists are tasked to acquire as many quality multicultural resources as
necessary for patron usage.
The task of withdrawing outdated, damaged, low quality materials, and at times
activities, is defined as weeding (Muthu, 2013). Weeding is an essential part of collection
development. The process of weeding a school library collection is one of the many tasks
that school library media specialists must contend with. The efficacy of a school library is
often contingent upon how old or relevant the materials are. Oftentimes, the acquisitions
process receives the most attention in the realm of collection development; however,
weeding ensures that the collection stays relevant and up to date. Weeding also conserves
much needed shelf space that will make way for new materials. Additionally, weeding
materials out of the automation system assists library patrons to get relevant results when
they search for materials.
Acquiring materials that are reflective of not only the school curriculum but also
the demographic makeup of library patrons is an important part of the collection
development process. Providing academically and culturally relevant materials is an
integral task of all trained school library media specialists. Moreover, the ability to know
when and what to weed is an additional component of the collection development

28

process. Certified school library media specialists are trained in all aspects of collection
development.
Access to Library Media Resources
According to Pribesh, Gavigan and Dickinson (2011), schools that have a high
poverty student population were more likely to have access to fewer school library
resources than students who do not live in poverty. Additionally, they found that students
who need the most support had fewer new resources and their libraries were closed more
than schools with students who come from more affluent backgrounds. Such disparities
have a direct correlation to negative academic development. Pribesh, Gavigan and
Dickinson (2011) terms this an access gap as opposed to an achievement gap. The
differences in access to print and electronic resources has a significant impact for a
student’s early literacy development. Pribesh, Gavigan and Dickinson (2011) argue that
students who have access to resources are more likely to read, thereby improving their
reading motivation and achievement. They also make the argument that school library
media centers are an important component of learning. Additionally, it has been found
that school media centers with a robust and up to date print collection has a significant
and positive impact on reading among students who live in poverty (Neuman & Celano,
2001). Manzo (2000) even suggests that school library resources have a significant
impact on standardized test scores, more specifically reading scores.
Educational researchers have established that more access to books leads to better
literacy skills in general (Edwards, 2011; Dijken, Bus & Jong, 1999; Di Loreto & Tse,
2012; Neuman, 1999; Whitehead, 2004; Williams, 2013). Krashen, Lee and McQuillan
(2012) conducted a multivariate study that closely reviewed access to school library

29

media centers and literacy for grades four through eight for children that live in poverty.
They found that the negative effect of poverty on fourth grade reading scores is
significant; however, access to books can improve reading regardless of socioeconomic
status. Poverty is a strong predictor of reading scores; however, access to books makes an
independent contribution to reading achievement. Krashen, Lee and McQuillan (2012)
also found that students who read proficiently in grade four also tend to read better by
grade eight. In each case, access to quality reading material is essential. Library access,
both school library media centers and public libraries for the purposes of the
aforementioned study, was a consistent predictor for reading scores. The amount of
quality reading materials and school library media center circulation made an important
impact on increasing literacy.
Neuman and Celano (2001) also conducted extensive research regarding the effect
of poverty in relation to school library media center access. The study compared middleincome and high poverty neighborhoods in the same city. One important discovery from
the Neuman and Celano (2001) research study is that children from middle-income
neighborhood were deluged with a wide variety of reading materials; however, children
from poor neighborhoods had to aggressively seek out such materials. Children of
poverty had to be persistent in order to obtain quality books (Neuman & Celano, 2001).
Another result of the study was that the data collected showed that children from middleincome communities had roughly thirteen titles for each child to choose from whereas the
children from the high poverty community had one book for every three students. In
addition to the importance of print and electronic resources in school media centers, they
also report that books should be made available in the home as well. The data represented

30

in this study shows the glaring disparities in regard to access to quality literacy resources
for children who live in poverty. Without the appropriate access to print and electronic
resources, literacy is nearly impossible.
Another academic resource that is sorely needed in school library media centers is
access to the internet and to databases for research purposes. In the year 1996, then
President Clinton proclaimed that all schools should be connected to the internet by the
year 2000 (Everhart, 1997). At the time it seemed to be a lofty goal; however, 95.3% of
public school libraries had computer workstations with access to the internet by the 2011
– 2012 academic year (NCES, n.d.c.). This means that a substantial number of students
have the appropriate access, but much work needs to be done to ensure that all students
have accessibility. In terms of database usage, a total of 86.4% of school library media
centers have access to online and licensed databases for student use (NCES, n.d.c.). The
state of North Carolina provides access to database resources for all of its public-school
districts through the NC Wise Owl program (North Carolina Public Schools, n.d.b.).
Premiering in 1999, NC Wise Owl provides unrestricted access to online resources. This
access is provided without regard to economic status students in each individual school
system. NC Wise Owl ensures that all public-school students in the state have access to
online encyclopedias, magazines, reference services and other sources for the purpose of
research. NC Wise Owl is also a service that is available for home use if necessary.
Print resources such as comic books, graphic novels, teen romance novels and
magazines are rarely considered academic materials; however, Krashen (2004) intimates
that such genres have intrinsic value. The ability of students to choose materials outside
of educational reading is a testament that reading is beneficial even when done under the

31

guise of entertainment. Comic books, which are primarily utilized for personal
gratification, contains approximately 2,000 words each. Krashen (2004) cite studies that
suggests that students who read approximately one comic book per day will have read
about 500,000 words annually. Reading for entertainment often transforms into serious
reading over time. Although reading nonacademic materials may at first glance seem
counterproductive, it is an important building block to literacy development. School
library media centers should therefore provide nonacademic reading materials as a
supplement to resources that are primarily educational in nature.
School Library Media Center Availability
The mere presence of a school library media center edifice is negated if there is
not sufficient access to its services. It is important that school library media centers are
open and available during the school day for classes and for research by students, faculty
and staff. Hours before and after established academic hours is also ideal. Krashen (2004)
posits that greater access to school library media centers often translate into voluntary
reading and academic achievement. Voluntary reading suggests that students establish a
love for reading purely for pleasure as opposed to reading to complete an assignment.
This lays the foundation for strong literacy skills and has a positive effect on writing
skills as well. According to Krashen (2004) writing is not learned initially by writing but
rather by reading. Writing skills are acquired because of an exposure to language through
reading. It is important that students are exposed to all the services provided by the
school library media center so that literacy skills are optimized. The services are only
available if there is sufficient access to a fully functioning school library media center.

32

Despines (2001) intimates the importance of school media centers providing
extended hours, or time outside of the normal school day, because many times, students
may not have access to the resources provided by libraries in their home environment.
Some school districts, such as Silver Consolidated School District in New Mexico and
Plano Texas Schools, have taken steps to provide funding to offer library services in the
evenings and at times, weekends (Despines, 2001). This is in stark contrast to other
districts because such accessibility requires additional funding and staffing. An additional
concern is that school libraries that offer extended hours must also provide security. An
interest and responsibility in regards to keeping patrons and resources safe becomes
paramount when offering services after established academic hours. Legislation was
introduced in 2001 by Senators Jack Reed and Thad Cochran in an attempt to mitigate the
fiscal concerns faced by many school districts (NCES, 2005). The Reed-Cochran Bill was
incorporated into the larger No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 under the moniker of the
Improving Literacy Through School Libraries (LSL) program. One essential goal of LSL
was to enable school library media centers to stay open longer providing much needed
access for the overall school population. The intent of LSL was to provide improvement
grants to school districts whose population contained at least twenty percent of students
who come from families with incomes below the poverty line (NCES, 2005).
Many schools in the Washington, DC School District have benefitted from the
services of a nonprofit group titled Turning the Page that offers funding to launch after
school literacy programs at six elementary schools that specifically serve children at the
lower socioeconomic stratum (Ishizuka, 2003). The program is beneficial to both students
and parents because both groups are targeted. While the parents attend workshops

33

regarding storytelling tips so that they can read to their children, the students are
supervised to by volunteers who assist them with much needed literacy skills. A free
book distribution also takes place so that home libraries can be established. All programs
take place within the confines of the school library media center which is the perfect
backdrop to promote the services provided therein.
School Library Media Center Programming
The resources and services provided to library patrons as a collective is referred to
as library programming (Shontz, 1991). It is important that school library programs meet
the academic needs of students. School library media specialists have long been an
integral part of ensuring that quality school library media programs are available to
students, faculty and staff. According to Shontz (1991), school library media specialists
provide assistance to educators in all curriculum areas and at times, contribute to the
instructional design process. School library media specialists actively work through grade
level or departmental groups in order to determine the best resources and services for
optimum academic growth.
School library media programs are an integral part of academic achievement
(Gavigan & Lance, 2016; Lance, 2001; Kachel & Lance, 2013; Lance, Schwarz &
Rodney, 2010; Roberson, Schweinle & Applin, 2003). Researchers from the Library
Research Service, a division of Colorado State University and the University of Denver,
conducted nationwide studies regarding the impact of school library media programs on
academic achievement for public school students. Each of the studies found that staffing
levels, staff activities, collection size, circulation statistics and up to date technology were
all factors that contributed to school library programs (Lance, 2001; Lance & Kachel,

34

2013). In terms of quality school library media programs, the studies went further in that
they assessed each of the aforementioned characteristics at the microlevel. For instance,
library staffing included the numbers of individuals who worked per week in addition to
the type of library staff that worked. A distinction between professional and credentialed
library staff was measured versus paraprofessional and noncredentialled staff. In terms
of technology, the studies measured the types of technology available in addition to
where the technology was located within the schools. Not all available technology
available to students was housed in the school library media center.

School Library Media and the Link to Student Academic Success
Kachel and Lance (2013) conducted studies which suggests that school library
media specialists positively contribute to overall student achievement. They argue that
schools who employ full-time certified media specialists often have students who score
higher on reading and writing examinations. Additionally, economically disadvantaged
students benefit substantially more than other students when their school library is staffed
by a certified school library media specialist. Often, there is a shortage of qualified and
certified school library media specialists in schools with a high student poverty rate
(Kachel & Lance, 2013). This discrepancy has a negative impact on literacy which in turn
leads to a negative impact on student achievement in general. Kachel and Lance (2013)
further argue that staffing school media centers with certified librarians helps to close
achievement gaps. Overall, school library media specialists provide positive contributions
to student achievement and as such, should be seen as essential personnel in all schools.

35

Kaplan (2007) addresses the importance of having a qualified school librarian by
providing evidence that they are collaborative partners in education. Kaplan argues that
school librarians are information specialists responsible for knowing the sources of
information in all formats, both print and electronic. They are also knowledgeable and
understands the importance of integrating technology into the educational setting. The
school librarian can therefore assist students as well as teachers with didactic
information. Kaplan further argues that school librarians should be considered teachers
and as such, should be required to meet the same standards as other highly qualified
teachers as defined by the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). Currently, school
librarians do not have to meet the requirements for NCLB which makes staffing school
libraries acceptable if there are unqualified personnel. If school librarians obtain that
status, then the school would be required to employ certified school librarians who meet
the criteria. This will be a clear path to showing district and school level administrators
that certified and highly qualified school librarians are a requirement for student
achievement.
The research of Lance and Hofschire (2012) bolsters the point that there is a
positive correlation between high test scores and schools that employ a full-time and
certified school library media specialist. After analyzing assessment data from the
Colorado State Department of Education, they found that reading scores either remained
steady or increased slightly every year from 2005 to 2010 for schools that have an active
school media program and school library media specialist. School that did not employ a
school library media specialist either remained constant or decreased in terms of test
scores. Students from grades three through ten were included in the study which makes it

36

wide-ranging in terms of results. Another observation from the Lance and Hofschire
(2012) study was that there were some schools in which there was not a school library
media specialist but rather a school library paraprofessional. When making a comparison
between schools who had no school library media specialist and those with a school
library assistant, that data indicate that there was no statistically significant difference.
This suggests that the absence of a qualified school library media specialist has an impact
on student academic success even if the school library media center is staffed with a
paraprofessional.
The results of the Lance and Hofschire (2012) strongly echo the study as
performed by Lance and Loertscher (2002). They conducted research that found that
school media centers should be considered essential and never an optional service to
students because they aid in overall student achievement. For instance, while performing
research in the state of Alaska, it was discovered that approximately 41% of elementary
age students and approximately 49% of secondary students scored below average when
their school library media center was staffed with a non-licensed paraprofessional.
Conversely, when schools were staffed with a full-time school library media specialist,
the percentage of elementary and secondary students that scored below average dropped
to approximately 17% and 8% prospectively. The correlation of positive academic
growth and staffing with a full-time licensed school library media specialist was evident.
Libraries and Special Populations
Schools are tasked to serve the academic needs of all students. As a general rule,
school library media centers must also follow this objective. Just as there are classroom
services and accommodations for students with disabilities, there are also school library

37

services that provide the same provisions. Murray (2000a) conducted a multiyear case
study that reviewed school library services and resources for students who were
physically and/or mentally challenged. It was revealed that many school library media
centers are already adequately equipped to assist students with disabilities. For instance,
many of the libraries studied provided physical access for wheelchair entry. Shelving is
also adequately spaced for easy maneuverability (Murray, 2000a). Additionally, many
school library media centers are furnished with lower shelves so that books and other
materials can be easily reached. This is essential since disabled students gain a sense of
independence when they can browse titles without assistance. Other services specific to
disabled students include alternative format materials. Such materials may include
electronic books with voice captioned text, books with large print text and in some
instances books with braille text.
Harper (2014) suggests that since students with disabilities are covered under the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), it is the responsibility of the school
library media specialist to ensure that the appropriate accommodations are made so that
their academic success can be maximized. The school library media specialist can aide in
providing an academically rigorous environment by collaborating with teachers
regardless of the student’s academic capacity. One such example is the adaptation of
story time. Sensory story time was developed for children who are on the autism
spectrum. These events are often much more quiet and contained. They also follow a set
pattern by providing a consistent pattern of opening and closing activities. This
adaptation makes it possible for all students to be included in the daily activities of
library services.

38

Gorman (1999) suggests that school library media centers do not have to be
places of intimidation for students with disabilities. It is entirely up to the school library
media specialist to create an environment that is welcoming and comfortable. Oftentimes,
students who struggle academically are not necessarily labeled disabled but have
difficulty as compared to other students. Students with often unseen disabilities such as
dyslexia also need extra attention. School library media specialists can assist such
students though the use of audio books or other instructional aides. Students who read
below grade level can be accommodated with books or other materials that are suited for
optimal academic success. Books that are of high interest but contain lower vocabulary
should be provided. Such books are often available in abridged literary classics so that
students can understand all the elements of literature such as plot, character development
and setting.
The resources and programming provided in school library media centers should
reflect the needs of all of those who utilize the space. School library media specialists
have the responsibility to make sure that such resources are relevant and contemporary as
well as inclusive of everyone that will be served. Resources that reflect diverse
populations are a necessary tool of this inclusiveness. Additionally, resources and
programs that are respectful of students’ disabilities so that they too can use the library
(independently if necessary) should also be a requirement for a school library media
center to be fully functioning.
Theoretical Framework
As a venue, the library is more than a structure that houses texts and other forms
of information, but rather a place where academic connections can be created and at

39

times, shared. Although there is a strict structure to library organization, there is also a
sense that the library is a place devoid of boundaries because of how it has the power to
transform individual patrons. Each library experience is unique to the user despite the
ofttimes ridged guidelines that may frame library services. In one instance, the library has
established rules for organization through the use of highly structured systems. Such
systems may include either Dewey Decimal classification, Library of Congress
classification, Colon classification or Universal Decimal classification in predominantly
English language countries. These rigid rules for cataloging and classification are
necessary to maintain an orderly collection. It also aides in refining the user experience
since materials can be easily located by utilizing these cataloging methods. In contrast,
the library is also a place of boundless opportunities because the user can create a
learning environment that is uniquely their own without being limited. There are no rules
regarding how patrons utilize the space for their own gratification. The antithesis of
library organization versus library user experience and independence is precisely the
enigma that shapes the theoretical underpinnings of library and information science.
According to Foucault (1977), there is a conundrum that exists in regard to
libraries. Although there are ofttimes strict structural practices necessary for library
operation, the library is also a place of infinite possibilities because new worlds emerge
through texts. Foucault intimates that “fantasies are carefully deployed in the hushed
library, with its columns of books, with its titles aligned on shelves to form a tight
enclosure, but within confines that also liberate impossible worlds. The imaginary now
resides between the book and the lamp” (Foucault, 1977, p. 90). The library thus becomes
a space for ethereal and ephemeral transformation despite the fact that it must maintain

40

strict management of its resources. For a brief moment, patrons are transported to other
worlds though the written words which are housed eloquently in the pages of a book.
Radford and Radford (2005) posit that Foucault defines the library as a venue for infinite
possibilities rather than a place where possibilities are exhausted. Library users have the
ability to immerse themselves within the spaces between texts thereby forming
connections and making discoveries more profound than simply collecting facts. The
development of new knowledge is the residual effect of the emergence of original worlds.
In this instance, the library serves as the catalyst for fantasy and new knowledge.
Although Foucault expressly addresses library services in his discourse, the
theoretical perspectives of Freire (1970) and how they can be applied to library services
cannot be dismissed and deserves mention. Freire (1970) metaphorically describes the
transfer of knowledge to individuals as a bank. “In the banking concept of education,
knowledge is a gift bestowed by those who consider themselves knowledgeable upon
those they consider to know nothing” (Freire, 1970, p. 72). In this instance, students are
fed information without the true benefit of inquiry. This stifles true education because
facts are driven by the educator on a need to know basis. The more that students sit idle
and intake information, they are dependent upon educators to take control of their
intellectual pursuits. This passive transfer of knowledge in this sense becomes stifling
and does not truly empower students to take control of their own development. Elmborg
(2010) suggests that Freire equates literacy with the true development of agency. Without
literacy, there cannot be a proper development of self. As a storehouse of information, the
library provides the vehicle in which patrons can be transported to a bank of knowledge
that is their own. They are not reliant on someone to feed them information but rather are

41

able to actively pursue new knowledge independently. Freire (1970) suggests that the
individual pursuit of truth based on inquiry is what lays the foundation for liberation.
This liberation then leads to individual empowerment. The services that the library
provides is a vessel in which empowerment can be maximized.
Summary
Chapter two first provided an overview of the historical roots of library services
to students. Over time, these services evolved from reading rooms with few resources for
student usage to the technological hubs that are seen at present. Additionally, legislation
that shaped library services for students was expounded upon. Chapter two then provided
an overview of each of the essential components of school library media services as
deemed by the author of this work. These components included school library media
staffing, resources, availability and access and the ways in which the school library media
program contributes to academic success. These essential components form the
foundation of this study. This chapter concluded with the theoretical perspectives of
Foucault and Freire and how their theories can aptly be applied to the field of library and
information science. The philosophical concepts of these two scholars create a hybrid
theoretical framework in which intellectual metamorphosis and a transformation into an
ethereal world can ofttimes form an amalgamation.

42

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
“Bad libraries build collections, good libraries build services, great libraries build
communities.” -- R. David Lankes

This descriptive, non-experimental study sought to gauge perceptions from school
library media personnel regarding what characterized a quality school library media
program. Additionally, an inquiry into whether Title I schools differ from non-Title I
eligible schools in terms of school library media programming was also examined. A
cross-sectional survey was administered to school library personnel. Library personnel
included certified school library media specialists and non-certified library media
assistants from the Dewey County Public School District (pseudonym) in the state of
North Carolina. Appendix A displays the survey instrument that was utilized. This study
also utilized publicly available data from the North Carolina Digital Media and Inventory
Report (formally the Annual Media and Technology Report or AMTR). The following
research questions guided the study:
RQ1: What are the characteristics of a quality school library media program
according to the school library media personnel in the Dewey County, NC School
District?
RQ2: In what ways do the characteristics of quality school library media
programs differ between licensed school library media specialists and nonlicensed school media professionals in the Dewey County, NC School District?
RQ3: In what ways do characteristics of school library media programs differ
between Title I eligible schools and non-Title I eligible schools in the Dewey, NC
School District?

43

The proceeding study answered each of the research questions, which in turn hoped to
inform academic stakeholders of the importance of school library media centers, school
library media specialists and the programming that is provided for students, faculty and
staff. The results also show the importance of equitable access and library services for all
students.

Research Design
The research design for this study was a cross-sectional survey. The survey
instrument is provided in Appendix A. Participants were surveyed at one point in a
specific time period in order to gauge their perceptions of what constitutes a quality
media center program. The questionnaire was disseminated using social exchange theory
principles (Dillman, Smyth & Christian, 2014). The premise of social exchange theory
hypothesizes that survey participants are more likely to respond to a request if the reward
for responding exceeds the cost. In this way, there is an expectation of a positive benefit
(Dillman, Smyth & Christian, 2014). The reward for this particular survey is the ability of
school library media personnel to give a previously silent voice to their views on the
subject matter. No financial or other gift incentives was used for participation in this
survey. The tailor-design method adapts the survey and dissemination based on the
chosen population in order to reduce survey error.
Additional assumptions regarding the nature of social exchange theory is that
such exchanges are often characterized by inter-dependence. This inter-dependence
essentially means that the ability to obtain rewards is contingent upon the ability to
provide other persons or entities with rewards (Sabettelli, 2003). The sharing of rewards

44

for the purposes of this study is the ability to advise key stakeholders of the importance of
school library media centers, school library media specialists and school library
programming. There have been instances where school library media specialist positions
have been severely reduced (Everhart, 2002a; Everhart, 2002b; Helms, 2015; Johnson,
2005). This purpose of this study was to show the significance of school library
programming to students and the link of said services to student academic success. State
and local stakeholders who have fiduciary responsibilities may be more apt to ensure that
school library media specialists and library services are included in all aspects of the
educational process based on the outcomes of the data from this study.
Sample
The target population for the administered survey was the school library media
professionals in the state of North Carolina. The sampling frame was the school library
media professionals from the Dewey County NC Public School District. School library
media professionals consisted of licensed school library media specialists, non-licensed
school library media assistants, technology facilitators or any staff member permanently
assigned to work in the school media center. The researcher worked closely with the
aforementioned school district in order to form a sampling frame and to gain appropriate
access to the targeted population. The selected population consisted of one hundred and
forty-nine (N = 149) individuals. By utilizing the formula developed by Krejcie and
Morgan (1970), it was determined that responses from one hundred and eight (S = 108)
respondents was the minimum necessary in order to be representative of the population.

45

Development of the Survey Instrument
The researcher appropriated many of the questions from a survey developed by
the NCES. Queries were taken from the School Library Media Center Questionnaire
(NCES, n.d.c.) in whole or in part. The researcher developed some original content so
that responses could be tailored for Dewey County NC Public School District media
professionals. The survey instrument was reviewed for content and validity by experts in
the field of school library media. Once the questionnaire was finalized, the survey was
piloted with three Dewey County North Carolina School System district level media
specialists. These district level employees were not included in the final collection of
data; however, they gave beneficial feedback regarding the validity of the questionnaire.
The validation process ensured that the instructions, inquiries and answer choices were
clear for participants. This process also established a time frame for survey completion.
Instrumentation
The survey instrument utilized for this study consisted of twenty-one questions
designed to gather information about the availability, staffing, resources, technology and
programming available in the school library media center. Demographic information was
also collected. Response options consisted of dichotomous, multiple choice, shortanswer, Likert and interval measurement scales. A total of four consociating sections
were included on the survey instrument.
The foci of section one was in regard to the availability and staffing of the school
library media center. The ability of students, faculty and staff to be able to use the
services at various points of the day was measured. Additionally, staffing levels which
are a necessary component of school media availability, was also quantified. Section two

46

largely focused on academic and leisure programming and the existing technology
available to patrons in the school media center. Section three measured responses
regarding how school library media personnel feel about the profession of school
librarianship. The fourth and final section was composed of questions regarding
demographic information. Inquiries in this section included the number of years worked
in school library media and professional credentials held by respondents.
Data Collection
The questionnaire was sent to all eligible participants via electronic mail. An
internet link was embedded into the electronic correspondence so that participants could
independently contribute. Before participants commenced the questionnaire, an informed
consent form [Appendix B] describing the questionnaire and assurance of its
confidentiality was presented. The survey was available for approximately three weeks.
An initial email describing the purpose of the survey was sent and then three reminder
emails was subsequently sent to participants who failed to respond. The reminder emails
were sent between five and seven days part. The reminder emails varied in tone. This
tactic conveyed a sense of urgency for optimal participation. It was hoped that this would
increase the rate of response.
The survey and its results were stored using an internet based tool entitled
Surveyshare. The initial and reminder emails were sent using the mail merge function on
the Gmail platform. This method allowed participants to receive personalized electronic
correspondence. This process also avoided such correspondence from being marked as
spam. Access to the survey required an email address so that respondents can be tracked.
It should be noted that tracking does not imply that replies were tied to individual

47

respondents, but rather whether or not participants completed the survey. This ensured
that reminder emails were not sent to participants who previously responded to the
questionnaire. The email addresses were in no way linked to the responses of the
individual.
Analytical Procedures
After the survey data was procured, data regarding the response rate was
calculated. Survey data was then be keyed into the statistical software SPSS for further
analysis. The statistical software utilized can inform research of the statistical
significance of responses from school library personnel that are certified versus noncertified. This method also provided statistical analysis of the responses from Title I
eligible schools versus non-Title I eligible schools. Research question one utilized
descriptive statistics with a focus on frequency. Research questions two and three
employed the use of an independent samples t-test to determine statistical differences.
Variables
There are several variables that were utilized for this study. The variables for each
research question are outlined below.
RQ1: The variables used to describe the characteristics of a quality school library
include certified staffing, media center accessibility, print and electronic resources,
technology and educational applications. The frequency of the selected response options
to each item was reported.
RQ2: The quasi-independent variable was the dichotomous license status of the
school library media professionals (licensed versus non-licensed) in the Dewey County,
NC School District. The dependent variables were the elements of school library services

48

which included certified staffing, media center accessibility, print and electronic
resources, technology and educational applications.
RQ3: The quasi-independent variable was the dichotomous Title I status (Title I
eligible schools versus non-Title I eligible schools) in the Dewey County, NC School
District. The dependent variables were the elements of school library services which
included certified staffing, media center accessibility, print and electronic resources,
technology and educational applications.
Delimitations
There were at least two factors that were delimited for the purposes of this study.
First, there are a total of five school districts with student populations of over 50,000 in
the state of NC. Each of the districts can easily be classified as being situated in an urban
area. The researcher chose to limit the scope of this particular study to one of the five
districts. Additionally, the researcher chose to exclude any school district in the state of
NC that has a student population of less than 80,000 but more than 30,000 even though
those districts would be characterized as urban. The focus of this study was squarely on
districts with robust student populations.
Limitations of the Study
Although great care was taken by the researcher from implementation through
data analysis, this study was not without its limitations. First, a limited number of school
library media personnel in one urban school district in the Southeastern part of the United
States is studied. According to the most recent data compiled by the National Center for
Educational Statistics [NCES] (2015), there are 81,200 school library media centers in
the United States. Conversely, there are 170 school library media centers in Dewey

49

County, NC Schools. This represents less than 1% (or 0.002%) of the total school library
media centers currently in operation. For there to be maximum impact, there needs to be
a nationwide study that specifically addresses all components of a quality school library
program from the perspectives of the professionals in the field.
Second, a study using a qualitative research method in which school library media
personnel from urban, suburban and rural school districts nationwide should be utilized.
This method will ensure that data are gathered at the micro level. The information
gleaned from a quantitative study, which is represented herein, cannot assess minute
details or give an accurate assessment of how school library media personnel nationwide
define the quality of services provided in school media centers. Such an undertaking
would be time and cost prohibitive for the purposes of this study; however, the
aforementioned measures provide a framework for future research.
Assumptions
There are several factors in which the researcher assumed to be accurate
throughout the implementation and completion of this study. These assumptions were as
follows: First, all survey respondents work in a school library media center either full or
part time. Second, all survey respondents answered truthfully or to the best of their
knowledge and finally, all survey respondents worked for the Dewey County, NC school
district.
Summary
The purpose of this research study was to gauge the perceptions of what
constitutes a quality school library media program among school library personnel. Said
research also differentiated the responses from fully licensed school library media

50

specialists and non-licensed school media professionals. Additionally, it discerned if
there are differences in the responses from school library personnel at Title I eligible
school library media centers versus non-Title I eligible school library personnel. Survey
questions focused on the fundamental components of school library services which
includes the presence of a fully operational school library media center, school library
media personnel, school library resources and school library availability. The data from
survey respondents is a useful tool to analyze what is perceived to be a quality school
library media center program. The information gleaned can add to the limited academic
literature regarding this issue.

51

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS AND FINDINGS
“Libraries allow children to ask questions about the world and find the answers. And the
wonderful thing is that once a child learns to use a library, the doors to learning are
always open.” -- Laura Bush

The preceding was a descriptive, non-experimental study in which the primary
goal was to gauge perceptions from school library media personnel regarding what
characterizes a quality school library media program. Two additional inquiries from this
study included an analysis of whether school library programming differed significantly
from schools designated as Title I eligible versus non-Title I eligible schools and whether
there was a difference in the perception of school library programming amongst certified
library personnel versus their non-certified counterparts. Data were gathered by means of
a cross-sectional survey which was administered to school library personnel. School
library personnel included certified school library media specialists and non-certified
library media assistants and other library staff from the Dewey County Public School
District in the state of North Carolina. The major results of the survey are presented
herein.
This chapter shall commence with an overview of information regarding the
respondents. Such information includes the type of school in which the participants were
employed (i.e. Title I eligible school and/or the grade level of students served at the
school) and the length of such employment. Information regarding the credentials of the
participants is also included (i.e. certified versus non-certified staff). Additional
information gleaned includes results from the survey questions. Many of the inquires and
their outcomes are grouped thematically. The survey itself consisted of twenty-one
questions which were dissociated into four sections. The sections included inquiries
52

regarding school library media center accessibility, staffing, resources and programming
and finally demographic information regarding the participants (see Appendix A). The
penultimate section of this chapter shall answer each of the research questions presented
to readers in chapters one and three using data from the questionnaire. This chapter shall
conclude with a general summation of the findings.
Description of the respondents and schools
A total of 149 staff members from Dewey County Public Schools were sent the
electronic questionnaire pertaining to this study. One participant was excluded from the
final analyses as they no longer worked in a school library media center because of a
promotion to assistant principal. The questionnaire was available for approximately three
weeks for participants to complete at their leisure. A total of 75 participants completed
the questionnaire which represents a total response rate of 50.33%. According to the
formula for determining appropriate sample size for categorical data developed by
Krejcie and Morgan (1970), one hundred and eight (S = 108) respondents was the
minimum necessary in order to be representative of the population. This study falls short
of that figure; however, the researcher still obtained valuable data based on those
participants who chose to partake in the questionnaire. As such, the study was conducted
and concluded with the data available.
The proceeding information encompasses the analyses for each of the research
questions presented in chapters one and three. To properly analyze research question one,
descriptive statistics with a focus on frequency was utilized. Research questions two and
three each utilized independent samples t-tests to fully gauge the differences between two
groups. The quasi-independent variable for question two was certified school library

53

media specialists. The dependent variables were the elements of school library services.
Such services were certified staffing, school library accessibility, print and electronic
resources, technology and educational applications. The quasi-independent variable for
research question three was Title I eligible schools. The dependent variables were the
elements of school library services. Such services were certified staffing, school library
accessibility, print and electronic resources, technology and educational applications.
Group statistics, which revealed the mean and standard deviation for each element of
library service was also employed for research questions two and three.

Research Question One Analysis:
RQ1: What are the characteristics of a quality school library media program
according to school library media personnel in the Dewey County, NC School
District?
The initial question guiding this research study was answered by utilizing descriptive
statistics with a focus on frequency. All queries from the survey instrument that can be
analyzed by utilizing that statistical method will be addressed herein. Table 1 represents
the data regarding the frequency and percentage of the grade levels in which the
respondents work as well as the Title I eligibility of the schools. Over half of the
respondents, or 58%, were employed at non-Title I eligible schools whereas 42% of
respondents were employed at a Title I eligible school.
In regard to the various school grade levels which served the students, the largest
number of respondents were employed in kindergarten through fifth grade schools. They
represented 56% of the those surveyed. School media personnel that work with students

54

from grades sixth through eight represented 17% of responses, whereas 15% of those
surveyed work with students from grades nine through twelve. Responses from school
library personnel that work with students in grades kindergarten through eighth grade
represented approximately 7% of the total responses. School library personnel that work
with students in grades six through twelve are representative of approximately 3% of
total responses. The least number were employed in schools that served a student
population of kindergarten through twelfth grade. They are representative of 1% of
respondents.

Table 1: Frequency of grade levels and Title I eligibility
Grade Level
Kindergarten through five
Sixth through eight
Sixth through twelve
Nine through twelve
Kindergarten through eight
Kindergarten through twelve

f
42
13
2
11
5
1

%
56
17.3
2.7
14.7
6.7
1.3

Title I Eligibility
Yes
No

31
43

41.9
58.1

The majority of respondents were relatively new in their role as an employee of
Dewey County Public Schools. A reported 37% worked for less than a year to five years.
Those with six through ten years work experience made up approximately 22% and those
with eleven years through fifteen years work experience encompassed 20% of the
responses. Those with sixteen through twenty years work experience made up 16% of the
total responses. Respondents with twenty or more years of service to Dewey County

55

Public Schools represented the least number of those surveyed. They are representative of
5.4% of the total respondents (see Table 2).
In regard to the number of years worked in a Dewey County Schools library
media center, the largest number of respondents, or 37%, indicated that they were
employed less than one year though five years. This figure strongly mirrors the number
of school library media personnel that have worked in Dewey County Schools in general.
Respondents with six through ten years of experience encompassed 20% of the total
responses, whereas 22% of respondents indicated that they had between eleven through
fifteen years of service. Respondents with sixteen though twenty years of service made
up 14% of responses. The least number of participants, approximately 8%, replied that
they have worked in a Dewey County School District library media center for twenty-one
years or more (see Table 2).

Table 2: Frequency of years worked in Dewey County Schools and Media Center
Years Worked in Dewey County Schools
Less than one year through five years
Six years through ten years
Eleven years through fifteen years
Sixteen years through twenty years
Twenty-one years or more

f
27
16
15
12
4

Years Worked in a Dewey County Schools Library Media Center
Less than one year through five years
27
Six years through ten years
15
Eleven years through fifteen years
16
Sixteen years through twenty years
10
Twenty-one years or more
6

%
36.5
21.6
20.3
16.2
5.4

36.5
20.3
21.6
13.5
8.1

In reference to licensure status, approximately 70% of respondents indicated that
they were North Carolina certified in the area of school library media. Approximately
56

23% of respondents were licensed in a state other than North Carolina in the area of
school library media. Well over half of the respondents, or approximately 68%, were
certified in a subject area other than school library media (refer to Table 3).

Table 3: Frequency of certification/licensure status of respondents
Certification Status
North Carolina Certified School Library Media Specialist
School Library Media Specialist licensed in a state other than North
Carolina
Licensed in a subject area other than School Library Media

f
52

%
70.3

17

23

50

67.6

In terms of school library media center scheduling, results indicate that regular
scheduling, where classes or activities are scheduled at a fixed day and/or time, was more
prominent in school library media centers in Dewey County Schools. This response
elicited 53% of the total replies. Flexible scheduling, where classes or activities are
scheduled as needed, was the second most prominent at 28%. Combination scheduling,
which is a hybrid of regular and flexible scheduling, was third in the number of responses
which represented 16% of respondents’ answers. Roughly 3% of respondents indicated
that neither flexible nor regular scheduling is available for classes or activities, an
indication that no school library programming is available for students (see Table 4).

Table 4: Frequency of school media scheduling
Type of Scheduling
Flexible – classes or activities scheduled as needed
Regular – classes or activities scheduled at a fixed day and/or
time
Combination – hybrid of flexible and regular scheduling
Neither flexible or regular scheduling available

57

f
21
39

%
28.4
52.7

12
2

16.2
2.7

Participants were asked if students were allowed to utilize the school library
media center before, during and after school independently. According to the results,
most respondents – approximately 78% – indicated that students were allowed to use the
school library media center during school hours independently. A robust 65% of
respondents indicated that students were allowed to use the school library media center
independently before classes commence. The only deficit was in regard to school library
usage after classes recessed. Respondents indicated that 34% of school libraries were
available for independent student use after school hours (see Table 5).

Table 5: Frequency of school library media center availability
Independent Student School Library Usage
Independent Student Use Before School Hours
Independent Student Use After School Hours
Independent Student Use During School Hours

f
48
25
58

%
64.9
33.8
78.4

Table 6 details an extensive list of library programming and the frequency in
which such programming was chosen by respondents. Questionnaire participants were
given the opportunity to provide different programming options; however, none of the
responses deviated from those originally provided. According to the data, 68% of
respondents indicated that book fairs were the most popular of the programs available to
students. Television production was the second most popular program as indicated by
51% of respondents. Research classes, which garnered 46% of the responses, were the
third most popular program or service in Dewey County Public Schools. Storytime, a
program in which books are read to students, received 43% of responses. Visits from
authors garnered 35% of responses. Makerspaces, which are collaborative workspace for
teachers and students alike, obtained 32% of responses. Programming for book clubs
58

received 23% of responses, whereas the reading program Fountas and Pennell received
approximately 22% of responses. The programs Celebrate Seuss and Raz Kids both
received 19% of responses. Book talks and the program Drop Everything and Read both
received approximately 16% of response from questionnaire respondents. The reading
program Open Court received a rating of 15%. The program Reader’s Theater garnered
approximately 11% of responses. The reading program Reading Street captured 7% of
total responses. The reading programs Accelerated Reader, Guys Read and Scholastic
Phonics each received approximately 5% of responses as did the program story time in a
foreign language. Programs that center around anime and manga received a 4% response.
Book It by Pizza Hut, cartooning, poetry slams and the program Reading is
Fundamental each received approximately 3% of the responses. The least rated program
was book bingo which garnered an approximate 1% of responses.

Table 6: Frequency of School Library Program Offerings
Program Offering
Book Fair
Television Production
Research Classes
Storytime
Author Visits
Makerspace
Book Club
Fountas and Pennell
Celebrate Seuss
Raz Kids
Book Talk
Drop Everything and Read
Open Court Reading
Reader’s Theater
Reading Street
Accelerated Reader
Guys Read
Scholastic Phonics

f
50
38
43
32
28
24
17
16
14
14
12
12
11
8
5
4
4
4
59

%
67.6
51.4
45.9
43.2
35.1
32.4
23
21.6
18.9
18.9
16.2
16.2
14.9
10.8
6.8
5.4
5.4
5.4

Storytime in a Foreign Language
Manga / Anime
Book It by Pizza Hut
Cartooning
Poetry Slam
Reading is Fundamental
Book Bingo

4
3
2
2
2
2
1

5.4
4.1
2.7
2.7
2.7
2.7
1.4

The data in Table 7 specifically focused on the essential elements of library
services. Certified staffing, accessibility, print and electronic resources, technology and
educational applications were the fundamentals in which school library personnel could
choose. Such services were highlighted in chapter two. Respondents were asked to give
feedback regarding which element(s) they felt were important for quality library
programming. Based on the data collected from the respondents, 92% asserted that
appropriate access to the school library media center ranks as the most important element
of school library services. The second most ranked element of library services based on
responses was the presence of certified staff. This garnered 91% of the total responses.
The presence of technology was the third most rated at 78%. This ranks higher than print
and electronic resources which was ranked at 70%. Education applications, which are
another form of technology, garnered 51% of responses. Respondents were given the
opportunity to write in responses other than the elements listed; however, none deviated
from the original selections.
Additional data from Table 7 continues with a focus on the technology available
in the school library media center. According to the data gathered, 92% of the school
library media centers in Dewey County Schools have access to online, licensed databases
for research. Moreover, the majority of students and staff, approximately 89%, also have
access to an online public access catalog (OPAC) so that they can independently search
60

for library resources. Many students – approximately 78% – have access to laptops for
use while working inside of the school library media center. This number decreases
significantly when it comes to student laptops for use outside of the school library media
center. Approximately 35% of respondents indicated that students are able to utilize
laptops outside of the school library media center. Respondents indicated that 53% of
school library media centers allow staff to use laptops while working in the library, while
41% of respondents indicated that staff can utilize laptops outside of the school library
media center. Regarding the inquiry of whether there is technology to assist students
and/or staff with disabilities, 14% of respondents indicated that such technology was
available.

Table 7: Descriptive Statistics Regarding Elements of Library Services
Element of Library Service
Certified Staffing
School Library Accessibility
Technology
Print and Electronic Resources
Educational Applications

f
67
68
58
52
38

%
90.5
91.9
78.4
70.3
51.4

Technology Available for Student and Staff Use in School Library
Online, licensed databases for research
68
91.9
Online public access catalog (OPAC)
68
89.2
Laptops for student use in media center
58
78.4
Laptops for student use outside media center
26
35.1
Laptops for staff use in media center
39
52.7
Laptops for staff use outside media center
30
40.5
Technology for patrons with disabilities
10
13.5

Table 8 references the general perceptions of the school library professionals in
Dewey County Public Schools. A five response Likert scale was used to gauge their
perceptions of the profession as a whole. After each statement, available responses
61

included: strongly agree, agree, moderately agree, agree a little and finally, do not agree.
In order to analyze this question, descriptive statistics with a focus on frequency was
used. Some of the statements did not elicit a response from participants for all of the
Likert options and as such, those selections were therefore excluded in the final reporting.
For the statement, “I believe that school library media centers are important,”
95% of respondents indicated that they strongly agree. Approximately 5% indicated that
they agree. There were no responses for the moderately agree, agree a little or do not
agree categories.
In regard to the statement, “I enjoy my job as a school library professional,” 70%
of respondents answered that they strongly agreed, whereas 19% responded that they
agreed. Moderately agree received 11% of the total responses. There were no responses
for agree a little or do not agree.
Regarding the statement, “I believe that I make a difference as a school library
professional,” the majority of respondents – 74.3% – indicated that they strongly agreed
with that sentiment. Approximately 18% agreed, 7% moderately agreed and 1%
responded that they agree a little. No respondent indicated that they do not agree with the
statement.
Responses for the statement, “I believe that my principal respects the job that I
do,” were to a certain degree mixed. A little over the majority, or 51%, strongly agreed
while 22% responded that they agreed. Approximately 15% of respondents indicated that
they moderately agreed whereas 8% indicated that they agreed a little with the statement.
This category was the only one in which there were some respondents that indicated that

62

they did not agree. Approximately 4% replied that they did not agree that their principal
respects the job that they do.
The last statement, “I believe that school library media professionals impact
student achievement,” garnered approximately 89% of responses. Approximately 11%
indicated that they agree with that statement. None of the participants chose moderately
agree, agree a little or do not agree.

Table 8: Frequency regarding library professionals’ perceptions about the occupation
Statement regarding school media professionals’ perceptions
I believe that school library media centers are important
Strongly Agree
Agree

f

%

70
4

94.6
5.4

I enjoy my job as a school library professional
Strongly Agree
Agree
Moderately Agree

52
14
8

70.3
18.9
10.8

I believe that I make a difference as a school library professional
Strongly Agree
Agree
Moderately Agree
Agree a Little

55
13
5
1

74.3
17.6
6.8
1.4

I believe that my principal respects the job that I do
Strongly Agree
Agree
Moderately Agree
Agree a Little
Do Not Agree

38
16
11
6
3

51.4
21.6
14.9
8.1
4.1

I believe that school library media professionals impact student
achievement
Strongly Agree
Agree

66
8

89.2
10.8

63

Research Question Two Analysis:
RQ2: In what ways do the characteristics of quality school library media
programs differ between licensed school library media specialists and nonlicensed school media professionals in the Dewey County, NC School District?
This inquiry sought to determine if there were statistically significant differences between
licensed (certified) school library professionals’ perceptions of quality library
programming elements versus the perceptions of their non-licensed (certified)
counterparts. An independent samples t-test was utilized to produce the results. The
significance level as deemed by the researcher was .01. According to the analysis
provided in Table 9, the only statistically significant difference occurred in relation to
whether a licensed school library media specialist was a crucial component to quality
library programming (p < .001). Licensed school library media specialists indicated that a
certified school librarian was essential to library programing, whereas non-licensed
school library staff did not (licensed school library media specialistsx = 1.02, sd = .139,
non-licensed school library staffx = 1.27, sd = .456). Accessibility to school library
services was not a significant factor according to the school library professionals in
Dewey County Public Schools (p = .137), neither was resources (p = .344), technology (p
= .770) or educational applications (p = .911). This indicates that the school library
professionals in Dewey County Public Schools were primarily in consensus regarding the
aforementioned elements of library services.

64

Table 9: Independent samples t-test analysis of certified vs non-certified staff
Licensed

n

x

sd

p*

Certified Staff

Yes
No

52
22

1.02
1.27

.139
.456

< .001

Accessibility

Yes
No

52
22

1.10
.09

.298
.366

.137

Resources

Yes
No

52
22

1.33
1.27

.513
.456

.344

Technology

Yes
No

52
22

1.21
1.23

.412
.429

.770

Educational Apps

Yes
No

52
22

1.46
1.55

.503
.510

.911

Library Element

* p value =  .01

Research Question Three Analysis:
RQ3: In what ways do characteristics of school library media programs differ
between Title I eligible schools and non-Title I eligible schools in the Dewey, NC
School District?
This inquiry sought to determine if there were any statistically significant differences in
the perception of quality library programming from the school library staff at Title I
eligible versus non-Title I eligible schools. The significance level as deemed by the
researcher was .01. According to the data present in Table 10, there were two areas in
which statistically significant differences emerged. School library accessibility (p = .007)
and technology (p = .001) were the two elements in which the staff of Title I eligible and
non-Title I eligible schools significantly differ in their responses. According to the data,
the staff at non-Title I eligible schools indicated that accessibility was not as important
whereas the staff members at Title I eligible schools indicated that it was important for
65

students to have access to school library programming and services (Title I eligible
schoolsx = 1.03, sd = .180, non-Title I eligible schoolsx = .09, sd = .366). In terms of
technology, the staff at non-Title I eligible schools indicated that it was an important
element; however, the staff at Title I eligible schools indicated that it was not an
important element (Title I eligible schoolsx = 1.13, sd = .341, non-Title I eligible
schoolsx = 1.28, sd = .454). The elements of certified staff (p = .091), resources (p =
.320), and educational applications (.570) were not statistically significant. This indicates
that the professionals in non-Title I eligible and Title I eligible schools were on one
accord in terms of these elements.
The researcher also sought to determine if there were statistically significant
differences in the number of computer workstations available in Title I eligible versus
non-Title I eligible schools. The computer workstations could be available for student or
staff usage. An independent samples t-test was used in order to determine said differences
(see Table 10). Once again, the significance level as deemed by the researcher was .01.
According to the data gathered, there were no statistically significant differences in the
number of computer workstations available in the two school types (p = .202); however,
it should be noted that non-Title I eligible schools had a least ten more work stations than
their Title I counterparts (Title I eligible schoolsx = 17.58, sd = 19.50, non-Title I
eligible schoolsx = 27.81, sd = 22.01).

66

Table 10: Independent samples t-test analysis of Title I eligible vs non-Title I eligible
schools
Title I

n

x

sd

p*

Certified Staff

Yes
No

31
43

1.13
1.07

.341
.258

.091

Accessibility

Yes
No

31
43

1.03
.09

.180
.366

.007

Resources

Yes
No

31
43

1.26
1.35

.514
.482

.320

Technology

Yes
No

31
43

1.13
1.28

.341
.454

.001

Educational Apps

Yes
No

31
43

1.45
1.51

.506
.506

.570

Number of Computers

Yes
No

31
43

17.58
27.81

19.497
22.012

.202

Library Element

* p value =  .01

An additional inquiry was if there were statistically significant differences in the
number of full-time and part-time employees and adult volunteers in Title I eligible
versus non-Title I eligible schools (see Table 11). This analysis was done by utilizing an
independent samples t-test. According to the data, the only statistically significant
difference was in regard to volunteers (p < .001). Volunteers were more prominent in
non-Title I eligible schools (Title I eligible schoolsx = .61, sd = .955, non-Title I eligible
schoolsx = 1.91, sd = 2.860).

67

Table 11: Staff and volunteer positions in Title I eligible and non-Title I eligible schools
x

Title I
Yes
No

n
31
43

.97
1.28

sd
.547
.504

p*
.224

Part Time

Yes
No

31
43

.10
.09

.301
.366

.980

Volunteers

Yes
No

31
43

.61
1.91

.955
2.860

< .001

Full Time

* p value =  .01

Summary
Chapter four commenced with a detailed description of survey respondents and
information regarding the schools in which they are employed. Descriptive statistics with
a focus on frequency was used to analyze the results from the survey instrument.
Research questions two and three were analyzed by using the statistical method
independent samples t-test. Both inquiries relied on the elements of library services to
sufficiently address the focus of this study. The elements of library services were the
presence of certified (licensed) staff, school library accessibility, resources, technology
and educational applications.
The focus of research question two was in regard to any statistically significant
differences between licensed school library personnel versus their non-licensed
counterparts. The focus on research question three centered on the statistical differences
between Title I eligible schools versus their non-Title I eligible counterparts. Although
out of the scope of the research questions, the researcher also desired to ascertain if there
were statistically significant differences in staffing levels and non-Title eligible versus
Title I eligible schools. A focus on volunteerism at the two types of schools was also

68

researched. Additionally, the researcher sought to determine if there were statistically
significant differences in the number of computer workstations in non-Title I eligible
schools versus Title I eligible schools. An independent samples t-test was the statistical
method used to determine those differences.

69

CHAPTER 5: IMPLICATIONS AND DISCUSSION
“With a library you are free, not confined by temporary political climates. It is the most
democratic of institutions because no one – but no one at all – can tell you what to read
and when and how.” -- Doris Lessing

The purpose of the preceding study was to gauge perceptions from school library
media personnel regarding what characterizes a quality school library media program.
This study utilized input from public school library media professionals in the Dewey
County Public School District. Dewey County Public Schools is the sobriquet for a large
urban district in the southeastern state of North Carolina. Survey research was the method
by which data was collected (see Appendix A). A combination of descriptive statistics
with a focus on frequency and an independent samples t-test were the methods by which
the data was analyzed.
This chapter shall commence with an overview of the literature pertinent to this
study. The foci of the literature are primarily the essential elements of school library
programming. Such elements included certified staffing, accessibility, print and
electronic resources and technology. A summary of the methods used to collect and
analyze the data shall follow. The theoretical concepts presented in chapters two and
three and how they appropriate into the realm of this study will then be discussed. This
chapter will continue with a summation of the major findings of the study and the
implications of such findings. This chapter will conclude with plans for future research in
the field of school libraries and recommendations for key stakeholders.
Summary of Literature
The literature relevant to this study focused primarily on the essential elements of
school libraries. Each of the elements (certified staffing, accessibility, print and electronic
70

resources and technology) were appropriately expounded upon in chapter two. There was
a consensus among the library professionals in Dewey County Public Schools regarding
the importance of each of the elements with the exception of one. There was a significant
difference between the responses regarding the necessity of certified staff (see Table 9).
Non-certified library staff did not rank that element as important. This difference is
understandable since non-certified professionals were also surveyed. This does not negate
the fact that the literature suggests that having full-time and certified school library media
specialists make a positive impact on student academic success (Kachel & Lance, 2013;
Kaplan, 2007; Lance, Schwarz & Rodney, 2014; Littman, 2014). Non-licensed school
media assistants or other staff should be a complement to, but not a replacement of, a
qualified and licensed school media professional.
In terms of accessibility, the literature is consistent by positing that all aspects of
library services should be available to all students (Edwards, 2011; Dijken, Bus & Jong,
1999; Di Loreto & Tse, 2012; Neuman, 1999; Whitehead, 2004; Williams, 2013). The
school library professionals from this study concur with the current literature. The
majority of the schools in Dewey County Schools (approximately 53%) offered an
opportunity for students to partake in school library classes or programming. Only 3% of
the schools surveyed did not offer any opportunity for students to utilize the services of
the school library media center (see Table 4). Although there are students who do not
have the opportunity to participate in school library programming is negligible in Dewey
County Public Schools, this fact still raises some concern. There should be a concerted
effort by district and school level administrative staff to ensure that all students have
access to appropriate school library services.

71

The literature regarding the resources available in school library media centers
intimates that print and electronic resources should be relevant and contemporary
(Krashen, Lee & McQuillan, 2012; Hoffman and Wood, 2007; Johnson, 2014; Neuman
& Celano, 2001). According to the North Carolina Digital and Learning Media Inventory
Report (NC DLMI), 2016, Dewey County Public Schools has approximately twelve
books per student. The state average is eighteen books per student. Approximately 70%
of the school library professionals in Dewey County are in agreement that resources are
an important part of library services (see Table 7). Often, the efficacy of a library is based
on the number of resources available to patrons as well as the contemporary age of the
collection. The data from the NC DLMI suggests that more resources need to be allocated
in the Dewey County Schools to be on par with the state.
Technology is a sub-set of the resources available in school library media centers.
The emergence and presence of technology in school library media centers have become
standard practice. The library professionals in Dewey County Schools once again
achieved consensus regarding the importance of technology in relation to school library
services. Approximately 92% of the school library media centers have access to
technology specifically for research. Mobile technology in the form of laptop computers
were also available for student and staff usage. Resources that specifically focus on
technology are prominent in Dewey County Schools. In regard to technology, the only
deficit occurred in the area of technology specific to patrons with disabilities. According
to the data gathered in this study, 14% of respondents indicated that technology to assist
those with disabilities were available (see Table 7). To reiterate, it is important that

72

school-based and district level administrative staff advocate for all students in regard to
school library services.
Summary of Methodology
This study utilized survey research as the primary method for data collection.
Approval to conduct research from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte and
Dewey County Public Schools was first sought before a list of suitable survey candidates
could be procured. A survey was sent to all school library professionals in the school
district via electronic mail. The Internet based site Surveyshare was used to collect the
responses. Survey participants were given three weeks to complete the twenty-one
question survey at their leisure (see Appendix A). Three reminder emails were sent to
participants who failed to complete the survey initially. At the end of the collection
period, the data was downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for data preparation. Such
preparation was necessary as the data needed to be uploaded into the statistical software
SPSS. Descriptive statistics were utilized for research question one and an independent ttest was used for research questions two and three. The data was then reported in this
study via the appropriate APA format.
Theoretical Context
The theoretical perspectives of Foucault and Freire were taken into consideration
in the context of school libraries as a precursor to this study. Foucault (1977) asserts that
library patrons can undergo a transformation of their own making in the library. One is
free to explore new worlds and/or new possibilities via the pages of a book. This is in
keeping with students who are free to explore books for pleasurable reading instead of
reading to complete assigned tasks. Conversely, Freire (1970) asserts that education is a

73

source of personal liberation. Freire metaphorically equates education as a banking
system where information is deposited into the minds of students. This is
counterproductive to true education. True education is based on inquiry. Inquiry, which is
born of a curious mind, can be accomplished in the library. Patrons are free to explore
any subject they please in the space of a library. The participants of this study indicated
that there are times when students are free to use the school library media center
independently (see Table 5). Independent library usage was available to students before,
during and after school hours. The freedom to explore autonomously is in keeping with
the theoretical perspectives of Foucault and Freire.
Social exchange theory was another theoretical concept that guided the data
collection portion of this study. The foundation of social exchange theory in this context
is that survey participants are more likely to participate if there is some reward for doing
so. There was no tangible award given for this research; however, the researcher
theorized that survey participants would view giving their input regarding the school
media profession as a just reward. There are few instances where school library
professionals have the opportunity to express their overall feelings towards the
profession.
Major Findings
There were several key conclusions that were uncovered during this study. First,
there were few differences in the how licensed school library media specialists viewed
school library programming versus their non-licensed counterparts. Each group was on
par regarding how they viewed the importance of such services. According to the data
presented in Table 9, both groups viewed the key elements of library services similarly.

74

The one key component in which there was a significant difference was whether a
licensed school library media specialist had more of an impact. As there were nonlicensed school library staff who participated in this study, this conclusion is entirely
understandable. The information regarding key differences in licensed and non-licensed
school media professionals satisfied the second research inquiry.
Additionally, there were only two differences in how the school library
professionals in Title I eligible versus the professionals in non-Title I eligible schools
responded. The two significant differences that did emerge was the information regarding
school accessibility and technology (Table 10). The school library professionals in Title I
eligible schools reported that accessibility is important. The school library professionals
in non-Title I eligible schools did not rank that as high. The presence of technology was
also a factor in which there was a significant difference between the two groups. The
professionals in non-Title I eligible schools ranked the presence of technology higher
than their Title I eligible counterparts (Table 10). The information regarding key
differences in Title I eligible schools and non-Title I eligible schools satisfied the third
research inquiry.
The focus on the types of programming available was an important factor
according to the school library professionals in Dewey County Schools. According to the
data presented in Table 7, programs that focused primarily on literacy ranked extremely
low. Accelerated Reader, Book It by Pizza Hut and Reading is Fundamental each
garnered less than a 10% response. The top literacy program, Fountas and Pennell
generated a 22% response. This was surprising given that the mission of many school
libraries specifically focuses on literacy. Programs such as Book Fairs, Research Classes,

75

Television Production and Storytime ranked much higher with more than a 40% response
each. Book fairs are understandable since they generate revenue for school library media
centers; however, they do not provide a substantive literacy component.
In terms of the perceptions of the profession in general, the responses from the
school library professionals in Dewey County Public Schools were generally positive.
Approximately 95% reported that they strongly believed that school library media centers
are important. A reported 89% indicated that they strongly believe that school library
media professionals impact student achievement. This is important as these professionals
can advocate for the profession based on these beliefs. Approximately 51% school library
media professionals reported that they strongly believed that their principal respected the
job that they do whereas a reported 4% indicated that they strongly disagreed that their
principal respected the job that they do. This too is significant because school-based
administrators often make decisions regarding school library staffing. It is important that
key stakeholders such as principals and other administrative personnel understand the
intrinsic value of school libraries and school library media specialists.
Data Analysis Limitation
The researcher encountered at least one limitation at the onset of data analysis in
regard to this research study. This comes as an addition to the pre-study limitations
presented in chapter three. After all data were gathered, it was discovered that the
minimum number of responses as developed by Krejcie and Morgan (1970) was not
satisfied. There were one hundred forty-nine school personnel surveyed; however,
seventy-five eventually completed the entire questionnaire. The minimum number as
suggested was one hundred and eight. Although several reminder notices were sent, the

76

number of respondents did not increase by the end of the survey response period. The
overall response rate was calculated at 50.33% which ranks higher than many surveys
that are sent electronically (Dillman, Smyth & Christian, 2014). It is theorized that an
incentive other than the ability to provide feedback to key stakeholders was needed. The
theoretical cogitations of social exchange theory seemingly influenced this study. The
introduction of incentives for participation may have had an impact on the response rate.
Pathways for Future Research
The research from this study solely focused on one urban school district using a
survey research method. This school district was limited to the state of North Carolina
which is located in the Southeastern part of the United States. Research studies that are
specific to school libraries are sparse. Additional research in this area can add to
academic literature which may influence how school libraries and school library media
specialists are perceived. The following are suggestive routes for future research.
Research regarding school libraries can be extended by focusing on local, state,
regional and finally national studies regarding school libraries. These studies can build
upon one another in a hierarchal fashion. The perceptions of school library media
specialists in a variety of locations across the country may have more of an impact. The
ability to research school libraries and school library media specialists in rural areas is
also advisable. Additionally, there are several research design methods that can be
utilized. A qualitative research study is recommended because that research method
would gather data at the microlevel. The opportunity for school library personnel to be
interviewed or participate in focus groups would be advisable.

77

Although perceptions of the school library media profession are important, a
research study that can correlate school libraries and student achievement is also another
avenue for research. A positive outcome will provide much needed data to school
administrators who ultimately make decisions regarding the funding of school libraries. A
positive correlation could influence how school libraries are staffed and subsidized. The
suggestive research concepts presented herein would require appropriate funding and a
significant time commitment.
Recommendations for Key Stakeholders
The information gleaned from this study is suggestive of school library personnel
that are in consensus that school library programming has a positive impact on student
academic success (see Table 8). As such, school libraries should be summarily included
in all aspects of school academia. The following are recommendations from the
researcher.
First, each school library should provide adequate space for pleasure reading. A
reading room or other similar area should be housed within each school library to
encourage reading for pleasure. Reading for pleasure enhances literacy skills (especially
for students in lower grades). It is hoped that a child who reads for pleasure (as opposed
to merely reading to complete an assignment) will become a life-long reader. Several
school library programs were present in Dewey County Schools that target independent
and pleasurable reading (see Table 6). The school library programs Drop Everything and
Read (16 %), Open Court Reading (15%), Guys Read (5%) and Manga/Anime (4%)
garnered less than a 20% respond from questionnaire participants. If suitable

78

accommodations were made in the school library media centers, those programs could
thrive and thus have a beneficial impact on student literacy.
School districts should strive to hire only qualified and certified full-time school
library staff. The contributions that certified full-time school library media specialists
make in regard to student achievement is substantial (Kachel & Lance, 2013). Research
suggests that students who attend a school with full-time and certified school librarians
do better academically. It is imperative that school libraries that serve low socioeconomic
students have access to qualified personnel. The results from this study indicates that
91% of questionnaire respondents assert that certified library staff is an essential element
of school library programming (see Table 7). Approximately 70% of respondents were
certified in the area of school library media (see Table 3). Media assistants and other
paraprofessional staff should be a complement to, not a replacement of, a fully licensed
school library media specialist.
Finally, school libraries should attempt to form partnerships with public libraries.
School and public libraries should work in concert to ensure that students can access
appropriate resources when needed. This partnership becomes essential during school
respites such as summer, winter and spring break. Respondents from this study indicated
that approximately 3% of the school library media centers in Dewey County Schools do
not offer any programming for students (see Table 4). Additionally, less than half of the
school media centers in Dewey County Schools or approximately 34%, offer independent
student usage after school (see Table 5). A positive partnership among school and public
libraries will demonstrate to students that library resources are always available to them
no matter the circumstance.

79

Conclusion
It is imperative that school libraries and the services that are provided therein are
easily accessible to all students regardless of socioeconomic circumstances. Libraries
often open new pathways for inquiry-based learning and as such, are a key component to
student academic success. Based on the data derived from this study, the professionals in
Dewey County Schools have come to consensus that school library media centers have a
positive impact on student academic outcomes. They reviewed the elements of library
services and found that each are a necessary component of the amenities provided by
their libraries. The essential elements of library services in essence form a reciprocal
relationship (see Figure 1). The essential elements consist of certified school library
school media specialists, print and electronic resources, school library accessibility and
quality school library programming. The absence of one effect all. Educational
stakeholders should therefore seek to include libraries and librarians in the educational
equation at all times.