Abstract
Academic libraries contribute to student engagement, student learning, and retention;
therefore, the effects of improved library services for students may be positive and long
lasting. However, despite successful application of organizational learning (OL), a
strategic process for improvement, to enhance services in academic libraries, little is
known about OL in libraries of for-profit colleges and universities (FPCUs). The purpose
of this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study was to assess and explore the use of
OL in libraries at FPCUs. Argyris and Schön’s theory of organizational learning
grounded this study. Responses to Chen’s Processes and Phases of Organizational
Learning Questionnaire, completed online by 38 respondents following a recruitment
posting submitted to the electronic mailing list of the Association of College & Research
Libraries Librarianship in For-Profit Educational Institutions interest group, reflected
medium to high levels of OL in the libraries in the study. Multiple regression analysis
indicated that the number of students enrolled was negatively related to OL score. Six
survey respondent volunteers were interviewed to better understand how library staff
members in FPCUs experienced OL. Common themes included external pressures from
the FPCUs that made it more difficult for their libraries to implement OL, as well as the
importance of communication among library team members. As a result of these findings,
a manual about OL strategies for library employees in FPCUs was created. More
knowledge about OL and its implications could lead to positive social change as libraries
use it to better contribute to student learning and success.

Organizational Learning in Libraries at For-Profit Colleges and Universities
by
Julie Evener

Section 1: The Problem
Through this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study, I sought to assess and
explore organizational learning (OL) in the academic libraries of U.S. for-profit colleges
and universities (FPCUs). OL is simply defined as the process by which an organization
creates, retains, and transfers knowledge in order to correct errors and continuously
improve (Argote, 2012). The term incorporates such concepts as professional
development, knowledge management (KM), as well as individual and group learning
opportunities. I was specifically interested in determining participating libraries’
capacities for OL, which library demographic variables most strongly related to OL
capacity, and how library staff members experienced OL in their libraries.
The Problem Statement
As higher education as a whole shifts to data-driven, outcome-based decisions
(Tam, 2014), leaders of academic libraries also recognize the importance of using
available knowledge to achieve maximum performance for their patrons (Kloda,
Koufogiannakis, & Brettle, 2014). To this end, leaders of some academic libraries have
drawn upon principles from the business world (Dermody & Millson-Martula, 2015),
particularly those of OL. Academic librarians have applied OL to their libraries to
increase innovation (Islam, Agarwal, & Ikeda, 2015), facilitate organizational change
(Whitworth, Calvo, Moss, Kifle, & Blåsternes, 2014), and optimize organizational
effectiveness (Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015b).
Despite the successful application of OL in the arenas of higher education and
libraries, there is a dearth of published research on OL in the libraries of FPCUs in the

2
United States. In recent years, FPCUs have surged in popularity in the American higher
education landscape, with a 166% increase in enrollment between 2000 and 2015
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2017). Though for-profit institutions are
educating an increasing number of American students, few research studies have focused
on the libraries in FPCUs.
Understanding how the libraries in FPCUs work and how they can be more
effective will be critical for alleviating the gaps in practice at libraries of FPCUs reflected
in findings that they are not on a par with libraries in traditional institutions (J. Y. Davis,
Adams, & Hardesty, 2011; National Center for Education Statistics, 2013). Narrowing
the gap in knowledge about OL in the libraries of FPCUs could assist the site for this
study, the Association of College & Research Libraries (ACRL) Librarianship in ForProfit Educational Institutions (LFPEI) interest group, in better understanding the context
of library staff members in these institutions and better supporting them and their leaders,
which may lead to improved educational services for students at these institutions.
Rationale
LFPEI is an interest group within a professional organization representing
academic librarians. The specific charges of LFPEI include acting as a forum for
librarians in these environments to “network, share knowledge, and collaborate on tasks,
direction, and issues specific to their roles within the for-profit education industry,”
sponsoring “discussions and programs related to identifying best practices, trends, and
technologies aiding librarians for alignment with institutional outcomes, student learning
objectives, accreditation standards, government principles, and other guidelines specific

3
to the for-profit higher education industry,” disseminating “information and education to
libraries and other academic professionals about the role of librarians in for-profit
educational institutions,” and advocating for libraries, including their employees,
resources, and services, in FPCUs and “the field of librarianship and academia as a
whole” (ACRL, 2012, para. 1). As of August 2017, LFPEI included 178 official
members, a number that has increased in the last several years. In September 2013, for
example, the group had only 125 official members.
LFPEI sponsors an electronic mailing list that serves 584 subscribers (C. Ollis,
personal communication, December 28, 2016), who are not required to be official
members of LFPEI. Over the past 10 years, the list has hosted several discussions related
to OL. For example, in one thread participants discussed the lack of support they received
from their institutions for professional development (Muller, 2013). One librarian related
the following:
I do not know of any for-profit librarians who have benefited in their own
professional lives by writing or publishing in our field. My compensation would
not change, nor would my performance appraisal. Do I contribute to my campus’s
bottom line? That’s the reality . . . . I can write in the professional journals, do
research, but neither time nor incentive is given for such tasks. This is the world I
work in. The situation doesn’t take away my professional responsibility for
contributing, but the situation does make it challenging, and perhaps partially
explains the lack of research in for-profit higher education. (Pace, 2011, paras. 1–
2)

4
Another explanation for the dearth of information was offered in LFPEI’s annual meeting
in June 2014. The meeting minutes note “a hindrance to sharing” that may be the result of
“a fear among for-profit librarians about what we are allowed to share about our
universities” (ACRL, 2014, p. 2). The proprietary nature of the institutions may therefore
create a barrier to sharing information.
LFPEI hosted a free online conference in 2014, and the convener of that
conference reported some of the participation statistics on the electronic mailing list. On
the first day of the conference, users logged in to the 9 sessions more than 600 times; the
most popular session had 143 attendees (O’Connor, 2014). Following the conference,
subscribers praised the effort, with one person enthusing, “I learned SO much” (Keller,
2014, para. 1). These anecdotes indicate that there is a demand for research,
presentations, and learning opportunities among librarians at FPCUs.
One subscriber stated that “some organizations simply don’t understand what the
skillsets of the 21st-century librarian are” (Naus, 2014, para. 2), indicating a lack of
knowledge transfer within these institutions. Other subscribers echoed the sentiment in a
thread discussing “non-library contributions” expected of library staff members at their
institutions. Several people described their role in their institution as a “junk drawer”
assigned numerous “random duties” (Harmon, 2014, para. 1) that they consider unrelated
to the traditional role of the librarian in an academic library. Throughout the archives of
the LFPEI electronic mail list, some of the specific responsibilities mentioned include
proctoring exams, managing the institution’s book store, and creating tutorial resources
for students about study skills, time management, and test-taking. While some

5
subscribers maintained that the expectation for librarians to perform non-library tasks is
“very typical for all types of organizations or communities” (Koz, 2014, para. 1), others
considered the blurring of job descriptions to be unique to FPCUs, but common in all
departments, not just the library (Fuller, 2014). Crump (2014) reported an extreme
experience: “I’ve been told that if it weren’t for ACICS [the Accrediting Council for
Independent Colleges and Schools] requirements, my job would not exist” (para. 2). This
evidence points to the need for more information and training surrounding OL issues in
the libraries at FPCUs.
J. Y. Davis et al. (2011) have noted the dearth of evidence available to support
libraries in FPCUs. They reported that they “were unable to find any published research
on academic libraries in proprietary schools” (p. 570) while writing the literature review
for their study on that topic. A literature search reveals little else published in this area
since J. Y. Davis et al.’s study.
There is also a scarcity of documented research regarding the application of OL in
academic libraries. In a literature review, Limwichitr, Broady-Preston, and Ellis (2015)
identified key challenges in building a learning organization within a university library
context. The authors urged a clarification of the concepts relating to OL for academic
libraries so that library leaders can better implement these concepts. They cited a lack of
current literature where these concepts are clearly outlined for effective application in
academic libraries. Recent years have shown an uptick in published studies gauging OL,
or aspects of OL, in an academic library context, including Yu and Chen (2015), Islam et
al. (2015), Loo and Dupuis (2015), and Chidambaranathan and Rani (2015b). However,

6
only one researcher, in a doctoral dissertation, has investigated OL in the libraries at
FPCUs. Bertram-Elliott (2015) measured levels of OL in academic libraries, including 15
libraries in FPCUs. While the researcher’s findings provided useful information, the
FPCU libraries made up only 4% of the study participants. Evidence more specific to and
focused on OL at FPCUs is needed, and such is the purpose of this study—to assess and
explore OL in libraries at FPCUs.
Definition of Terms
Double-loop learning: Correcting an error in a way that involves significant
changes to the normal way of doing things. It involves not only “detecting error but
questioning the underlying policies and goals as well” (Argyris, 1977, p. 116) and
“changing mental models, norms, policies and assumptions underlying day-to-day actions
and routines” (Van Grinsven & Visser, 2011, p. 380).
Full-time equivalent (FTE): A measure, based on a mathematical formula, to
determine “a single value providing a meaningful combination of full-time and part-time
students” or employees (National Center for Education Statistics, 2018).
Information literacy: “The set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective
discovery of information, the understanding of how information is produced and valued,
and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in
communities of learning” (ACRL, 2016, para. 5).
Innovation: “The implementation of a new or significantly improved
product/service or process” (Dias & Escoval, 2015, p. 53).

7
Knowledge management (KM): A practical approach to “measuring,
disseminating, storing, and leveraging knowledge” (Easterby-Smith & Lyles, 2012, p. 3)
in order to contribute to OL and performance.
Knowledge society: A theory that emphasizes that knowledge, rather than capital,
natural resources, or labor, will be the predominant resource of the global economy in the
1990s and beyond (Drucker, 1993).
Knowledge transfer: The process by which learning moves from individual, to
team, to organization on the “continuum of learning” (Forman, 2004, p. 17).
Learning organization: “Organizations where people continually expand their
capacity to create the results they truly desire, where new and expansive patterns of
thinking are nurtured, where collective aspiration is set free, and where people are
continually learning how to learn together” (Senge, 1990, p. 3).
Organizational learning (OL): The process by which an organization creates,
retains, and transfers knowledge in order to correct errors and continuously improve
(Argote, 2012).
Single-loop learning: Correcting an error without significant changes to the way
things are normally done (Argyris & Schön, 1978). Learning that is “action-oriented,
routine, and incremental, occurring within existing mental models, norms, policies and
underlying assumptions” (Van Grinsven & Visser, 2011, p. 380).
Transactional leadership: A method of leadership that is characterized by
promising a reward in exchange for good performance (i.e., contingent rewards;
Odumeru & Ogbonna, 2013).

8
Transactive memory system: A memory system in which two or more individual
memories are connected through communication (Wegner, 1987).
Transformational change: A type of change that “affects institutional culture, is
deep and pervasive, is intentional, and occurs over time” (Eckel & Kezar, 2011, p. 27); a
process intended to intentionally disrupt current culture and work processes to create
improved performance (Miller, 2013).
Transformational leadership: Leading through empowering, inspiring, and
energizing employees by espousing a shared vision and eliciting acceptance of that
vision, and by facilitating employees in looking beyond their own self-interest to embrace
the good of the group (Bass, 1990).
Significance of the Study
This study marks an original contribution to academic library management and
leadership by addressing a problem local to the LFPEI interest group of ACRL in order to
strengthen the body of knowledge surrounding OL in academic libraries at FPCUs. With
it, I sought to minimize the gap in practice between what FPCUs are currently doing and
the processes that can help them create OL cultures in their libraries. There is a dearth of
literature addressing OL in the libraries of FPCUs; in this study, I gathered information to
help increase the knowledge available. Researchers have found that an OL culture
contributes to organizational performance, both in the business world (García-Morales,
Jiménez-Barrionuevo, & Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez, 2012; Jain & Moreno, 2015), and in
academic libraries (Yu & Chen, 2012).

9
More knowledge about the processes involved in OL in libraries at FPCUs may
lead to higher levels of OL in these libraries and, therefore, better performance and
improved services for library users. Because academic libraries contribute to student
engagement (Soria, Fransen, & Nackerud, 2017), student learning (Pan, Ferrer-Vinent, &
Bruehl, 2014), academic performance (Allison, 2015; Kot & Jones, 2015), and retention
(Eng & Stadler, 2015; Mezick, 2015; Soria, Fransen, & Nackerud, 2013), the effects of
improved library services for the students who attend FPCUs may be positive and long
lasting.
A second original contribution I make in this study involves narrowing the gap in
practice between what FPCUs are currently doing and the processes that can help them
create OL cultures in their libraries. More knowledge about OL and its implications could
lead to positive social change by equipping libraries to better contribute to student
learning and success. In turn, the libraries would be more likely to grow and develop,
becoming more effective, positively influencing the ever-increasing populations of
students who attend FPCUs.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
In this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study, I assessed and explored OL
in the libraries of FPCUs. The research questions relate directly to the study’s problem,
that libraries of FPCUs are not on a par with libraries in traditional institutions, and
purpose, to assess and explore OL in FPCUs in the United States. In addressing the
quantitative research questions, I assessed OL in these libraries by measuring their

10
capacity for OL and determining which library demographic variables are related to OL
in the libraries of FPCUs. The library demographic variables included the following:
•

number of FTE students enrolled in the institution,

•

type of institution (e.g., 2 year, 4 year),

•

number of FTE library employees employed at the institution,

•

number of FTE librarians employed at the institution,

•

whether the head of the library has a Master of Library and Information
Science (MLIS) degree (or similar),

•

number of years the participant has been employed at the institution,

•

number of years the participant has been employed in libraries,

•

the participant’s highest degree attained,

•

whether the participant has an MLIS degree,

•

the participant’s library position.

For the qualitative research question, I explored the experiences of library staff members
and how they view OL in their libraries.
The research questions are as follows:
RQ1–Quantitative: What capacity for OL is present in libraries at FPCUs?
RQ2–Quantitative: Which FPCU library demographic variables are most strongly
related to OL capacity?
H02: None of the library demographic variables will be significantly related to OL
capacity for libraries in FPCUs.

11
Ha2: At least one library demographic variable will be significantly related to OL
capacity for libraries in FPCUs.
RQ3–Qualitative: How do library staff members in FPCUs experience OL in their
libraries?
Review of the Literature
While OL is the foundation for this study, other disciplines are important for
understanding the study’s context in relation to the literature and practice. I conducted
literature searches in such subject-specific databases as ERIC, EBSCO’s Education
Research Complete, and Library, Information Science & Technology Abstracts, as well
as more general databases like ProQuest Central and Gale’s Academic Search Complete.
Search terms included organizational learning, higher education, academic libraries, forprofit OR proprietary, knowledge management, leadership, learning organization,
double-loop learning, organizational change, innovation, student engagement, and
retention. Exploring this literature led to additional sources and searches related to the
concepts listed in the following paragraphs.
Through the literature review I discovered that OL is a complex and
multidisciplinary field (Dodgson, 1993; Law & Chuah, 2015) that includes such concepts
as the learning organization, KM, organizational change, leadership, and innovation.
Given that this study is centered on academic libraries, it is important to explore and
understand evidence of the value of academic libraries to the modern institution of higher
education, including links to student achievement, student retention, student learning, and
student engagement. I will also discuss efforts to calculate academic library return on

12
investment (ROI), showing a quantitative measure of the literal value of investing in
academic libraries.
Along with these topics, I will take a closer look at the FPCU industry in the
United States, including its portrayal in the media and recent growth. Finally, I will
explore the intersections of each of these topics, including the study of OL in academic
libraries and the few studies on libraries at FPCUs.
Theoretical Foundation: Organizational Learning
Though Law and Chua (2015) maintained that there is no single framework for
studying OL, the theoretical framework I chose to ground this study is Argyris and
Schön’s (1978) theory. Argyris and Schön described OL as “a metaphor” for the end
result of “members of the organization act[ing] as learning agents for the organization,
responding to changes in the internal and external environments of the organization by
detecting and correcting errors . . . and embedding the results of their inquiry” (pp. 28-29)
into the larger organizational culture. Simply put, OL is “a process of detecting and
correcting error” (Argyris, 1977, p. 116) in organizations.
As Argote, McEvily, and Reagans (2003), Edmondson and Moingeon (1998), and
others have found, the OL literature is fragmented and spread across global disciplines as
varied as human resources (Camps, Oltra, Aldás-Manzano, Buenaventura-Vera, &
Torres-Carballo, 2015), higher education (Dee & Leišytė, 2016), engineering (Jain &
Moreno, 2015), psychology (Kump, Moskaliuk, Cress, & Kimmerle, 2015),
manufacturing (Meihami & Meihami, 2012; Yu, Jacobs, Salisbury, & Enns, 2013),
healthcare (Nembhard & Tucker, 2016), and of course, libraries (Al-Harrasi, 2014;

13
Baughman & Kaske, 2002; Crawley-Low, 2013; Limwichitr et al., 2015; Yu & Chen,
2012). Researchers define OL differently, and the concept has evolved through the years
(Popova-Nowak & Cseh, 2015). However, the definitions have common themes (Dixon,
1999).
For one, inherent in the idea of OL is the expectation that more learning will help
an organization be more effective (Argote, 2012; Argyris & Schön, 1978; Fiol & Lyles,
1985; Senge, 1990). Second, an organization’s learning is dependent upon its
environment (Cangelosi & Dill, 1965; Daft & Weick, 1984). Next, most understandings
of OL take into account that members of an organization have common assumptions or
mental models that may inhibit learning (Argyris & Schön, 1978; De Geus, 1988; Senge,
1990). Finally, a common theme in definitions of OL is that an organization can change
and adapt for future success through learning (Argote, 2012; Fiol & Lyles, 1985; Senge,
1990).
Experts in the field also agree that individual learning is important to OL
(Antonacopoulou, 2006; Hayes & Allinson, 1998; Kim, 1993; Senge, 1990; Simon,
1991). Argote, McEvily, and Reagans (2003) listed the knowledge of individual workers
as one of three factors that affect the rate of learning in organizations. The other two
factors were sharing knowledge among individuals within the organization and
coordinating knowledge across the organization (Argote et al., 2003; Reagans, Argote, &
Brooks, 2005). Individual learning within organizations comprises training and
professional development. In many professions, such as health care, education, and law,
continuing education (CE) is mandated as a condition to maintain licensure or

14
employment, with the expectation that the CE will positively influence both individual
and organizational performance (N. Davis, 2014; Earley & Porritt, 2014; Meštrović &
Rouse, 2015; Rienties, Brouwer, & Lygo-Baker, 2013). Individuals who take advantage
of voluntary training and professional development opportunities are often intrinsically
motivated to do so. A combination of intrinsic factors and extrinsic motivators may be
the best way forward in encouraging employees to learn and grow their professional
knowledge (Cerasoli, Nicklin, & Ford, 2014; Gerhart & Fang, 2015).
Researchers throughout the OL literature have posited that while individual
learning is important, “organizational learning is not simply the sum of each member’s
learning” (Fiol & Lyles, 1985, p. 804; see also Cohen, 1991; Hedberg, 1981; Law &
Chuah, 2015; Stinchcombe, 1990). When individuals leave the organization, their
knowledge resulting from individual learning can leave the organization as well (Carley,
1992). Individual knowledge can become organizational knowledge only if it is
communicated and managed properly within the organization, becoming part of
institutional customs and memory and persisting even as individuals leave the
organization.
In addition to incorporating individual knowledge into organizational memory,
researchers have also investigated how group or team learning within organizations
translates into OL (Liang, Moreland, & Argote, 1995; Oltra & Vivas-López, 2013;
Tanyaovalaksna & Li, 2013). In a printed interview with Lee, Rittiner, and Szulanski
(2016), Argote recounted that while studying OL curves in industrial firms (see for
example, Argote, Beckman, & Epple, 1990; Argote & Epple, 1990; Epple, Argote, &

15
Devadas, 1991), she and colleagues heard the same phrase repeatedly from the workers
they interviewed, “knowing who was good at what” (p. 87). Around the same time,
Argote read a study by Wegner (1987) discussing transactive memory in personal
relationships and decided to apply the idea of transactive memory to OL (see for
example, Liang et al., 1995; Reagans et al., 2005). Transactive memory is akin to
collective memory—two or more individual memory systems are connected through
communication (Wegner, 1987).
In one study, Argote and colleagues found that group training facilitated group
performance because it helped foster transactive memory systems among the group
members (Liang et al., 1995). In a later study, Reagans et al. (2005) observed the effects
of transactive memory at work in teams of surgeons performing total joint replacement
procedures. They found that teams with experience working together performed better,
but in the case of a decline in knowledge through team member turnover, experienced
team members could compensate for the inexperience of a new team member with little
effect on performance (Reagans et al., 2005). In other words, the knowledge and
experience of an individual leaving the organization does not have to negatively influence
the organization if the individual shared his knowledge with team members who still
belong to the organization.
The nuances of individual learning, group learning, and OL are all tied to how
learning occurs in the first place. When learning takes place, it is either through singleloop learning or double-loop learning. Single-loop learning, also called behavioral
learning, is correcting an error without significant changes to the way things are normally

16
done. Argyris and Schön’s (1978) classic example is of a thermostat that detects when a
room is getting too cold and turns the heat on to correct the temperature of the room.
Double-loop learning, also called cognitive learning, occurs when correcting an error
involves significant changes to the normal way of doing things. For example, if the
thermostat began questioning whether it should be set to 75 degrees, it would not only be
“detecting error but questioning the underlying policies and goals as well as its own
program” (Argyris, 1977, p. 116). Single-loop learning results in maintaining the status
quo, while double-loop learning leads to progress.
While both single-loop and double-loop learning are essential and comprise OL
(Van Grinsven & Visser, 2011), double-loop learning is more effective for long-lasting
OL that can lead to innovation and growth (Argyris & Schön, 1978; Fiol & Lyles, 1985).
In their study, Kantamara and Ractham (2014) found that single-loop learning leads to
surface change and is therefore not a success factor for long-lasting and sustainable deep
change. Double-loop learning, however, does lead to deep change. Argyris (1977)
claimed that most organizations are good at single-loop learning; they have to be to
survive, even in the short term. However, organizations do not make good use of the
double-loop learning that could increase their effectiveness.
Learning organization. One concept related to OL is the learning organization,
which Senge (1990) popularized almost 30 years ago. Learning organizations are
“organizations where people continually expand their capacity to create the results they
truly desire, where new and expansive patterns of thinking are nurtured, where collective
aspiration is set free, and where people are continually learning how to learn together”

17
(Senge, 1990, p. 3). Senge outlined five disciplines that must be present and working
together in order for a learning organization to be possible: systems thinking, personal
mastery, mental models, building shared vision, and team learning. While he maintained
that no one discipline is more important than another—all must develop as an ensemble
in order for a learning organization to emerge—he also explained that systems thinking is
the discipline that “integrates the disciplines, fusing them into a coherent body of theory
and practice” (Senge, 1990, p. 12). Systems thinking in learning organizations is the link
that coheres disparate departments and employees into a single healthy entity enabled for
growth.
Easterby-Smith and Lyles (2012) explained that while OL is the theoretical basis,
the learning organization is the practical application. Ortenblad (2001) maintained that
Easterby-Smith and Lyles’s distinction is but one of three found in the literature. The
second distinction is that a “learning organization is a form of organization while
organizational learning is activity or processes (of learning) in organizations” (Ortenblad,
2001, p. 126). A third distinction is that the learning organization requires effort, while
OL is a “natural state” of organizations (Dodgson, 1993, p. 380). In other words, all
organizations learn, some better than others, but a concerted effort to become a learning
organization is above and beyond the norm. In this study, I will use the distinction
Easterby-Smith and Lyles espoused. While the learning organization is based on the
theory of OL, Senge (1990) and those who came after (Garvin, 1994; Giesecke &
McNeil, 2004; Goh, 1998; Heorhiadi, La Venture, & Conbere, 2014; Swieringa &
Wierdsma, 1992) go a step farther with the idea of the learning organization, delineating

18
prescriptive actions members of organizations can take to improve learning in their
organizations.
The differentiation between OL and the learning organization served as a useful
springboard for relating the results of my study to professional development for library
employees at their local sites to facilitate positive social change. After measuring and
exploring the current levels of OL in libraries at FPCUs, I was able to incorporate ideas
from the learning organization literature to create potential solutions.
Knowledge management. KM is a part of OL (Law & Chuah, 2015), but is also
a learning trend all of its own. First developed in the mid-1990s, KM is a practical
approach to “measuring, disseminating, storing, and leveraging knowledge” (EasterbySmith & Lyles, 2012, p. 3) in order to contribute to OL and performance. Drucker (1993)
coined the term knowledge society to emphasize that knowledge, rather than capital,
natural resources, or labor, would be the predominant resource of the global economy in
the 1990s and beyond. Interest in capitalizing on this valuable economic resource sky
rocketed, manifesting itself as KM.
Like OL theory, KM finds its roots in varied disciplines including philosophy,
cognitive science, management science, and economics (Kakabadse, Kakabadse, &
Kouzmin, 2003). It has become a lens researchers use to examine varied disciplines as
well. Kakabadse et al. (2003) outlined five distinct models of KM: philosophy-based,
cognitive, network, community, and quantum. The cognitive model best matches the role
of knowledge in Argyris and Schön’s (1978) theory of OL that guided this study. In the
cognitive model of KM, knowledge is an asset and organizations must be able to

19
effectively create, acquire, share, store, and call upon organizational knowledge to solve
problems (Drucker, 1991; Kakabadse et al., 2003; Kogut & Zander, 1992; Winter, 1998).
Agarwal and Islam (2014) identified eight parts of the KM cycle as related to
knowledge: creation, acquisition, capture, organization, transfer, application, evaluation,
and reuse. Knowledge transfer speaks to how learning moves from individual, to team, to
organization on the “continuum of learning” (Forman, 2004, p. 17). Knowledge transfer,
along with the other aspects of KM, facilitates moving learning from single-loop to
double-loop, and ensures that knowledge gained through individual learning by members
of the organization translates into organizational knowledge. KM is an important piece of
OL. The research behind KM informed the development of questions to ask participants
during the qualitative interview phase of the study. For example, knowing that sharing
information is important for OL, I asked participants what they do with their notes after a
webinar or conference.
Transformational leadership. Another concept related to OL is transformational
leadership, which is leading through empowering, inspiring, and energizing employees,
by espousing a shared vision and eliciting acceptance of that vision, and through
facilitating employees in looking beyond their own self-interest to embrace the good of
the group (Bass, 1990). Characteristics of transformational leadership include charisma,
inspiration, intellectual stimulation, and individualized consideration (Bass, 1990).
Scholars often talk about transformational leadership in contrast to transactional
leadership (Bass, 1990), which is characterized by a leader promising a reward in
exchange for good performance, or in other words, contingent rewards (Odumeru &

20
Ogbonna, 2013). Based on the definitions, transformational leaders tend to help
employees embrace their intrinsic motivation, while transactional leaders use extrinsic
means to motivate their employees.
OL is often linked to the transformational leadership style. Imran, Ilyas, and
Aslam (2016) received responses to a structured questionnaire from 204 bank employees
in Pakistan—a 53% response rate—and found a positive effect of transformational
leadership on OL using a linear regression analysis. Likewise, Manshadi, Ebrahimi, and
Abdi (2014) and Noruzy, Dalfard, Azhdari, Nazari-Shirkouhi, and Rezazadeh (2013),
working in an Iranian university and manufacturing companies, respectively, found
positive and meaningful relationships between transformational leadership and OL.
Noruzy et al. (2013) stated that “transformational leadership directly influenced
organizational learning” (p. 1073). In their study of 280 managers, Noruzy et al. used a 5item Likert scale developed by Podsakoff, MacKenzie, and Bommer (1996) to measure
transformational leadership, and a 4-item Likert scale developed by García-Morales,
Lloréns-Montes, and Verdú-Jover (2008) to measure OL. Through structural equation
modeling, they found a direct relationship (β = 0.35) between transformational leadership
and OL (Noruzy et al., 2013). Additionally, Manshadi et al. (2014) used similar
methodology, though different measures, to isolate the aspects of transformational
leadership—idealized influence and individual consideration—that best predicted OL.
In contrast, Vargas (2015) analyzed the literature using analytic-synthetic
methodology and concluded that the modern leader should be able to invoke different
leadership styles simultaneously in order to facilitate OL—that is, a combination of styles

21
would be most effective. Specific to libraries, Castiglione (2006) called for an assessment
of transformational versus transactional leadership in relation to OL in libraries.
However, over 10 years later, no researchers have answered that call.
Variables, such as transformational leadership, that increase the likelihood of an
OL climate were reflected in this study in two ways. First, I incorporated questions about
leadership, more specifically, the processes used to solve problems in the library, into my
qualitative interview questions to obtain a better understanding of the overall OL
environment of the libraries in FPCUs. Second, because transformational leadership is
likely to increase OL, identifying aspects of that style may prove to be helpful in
improving the OL climates of these libraries. I included such insights in the project
resulting from this study.
Organizational change. OL is often associated with organizational change.
Organizational change takes place when an organization transitions from its current state
to a new, desired state. That change is said to be sustainable, or transformational, when
the new processes and ways of working become the norm, and when the changes are
incorporated into the shared theory in-use of the organization (Buchanan et al., 2005).
Theory in-use represents the actuality of what the organization does, as opposed to the
espoused theory, which is what the organization says it does. For example, an
organization may say it supports employee learning at all levels (espoused theory), but in
actuality does not reward professional development or permit paid time off for training
(theory in-use). Often, the people within the organizations, both staff and management,
are not aware of the gap between their espoused theories and theories in-use.

22
Implied in this idea of sustainability in organizational change is that the change, at
least when intentionally implemented, is a positive one, though that is not always the
case. In general, researchers have found that OL facilitates organizational change (Boyce,
2003; Mayer, LeChasseur, Donaldson, & Cobb, 2013; Zucchermaglio, Bagnara, &
Stucky, 2012), especially when the OL is based in double-loop learning (Argyris, 2004;
Argyris & Schön, 1978).
Modern organizations, and especially libraries (Limwichitr et al., 2015; Michalak,
2012), must constantly adapt. The Internet has changed the information landscape, and
libraries have a constant need to prove their value and become leaders of technological
developments that affect information (Attis, 2013). Because of this, the positive
relationship between organizational change and OL speaks to the importance of an OL
strategy. Studies on organizational change in academic libraries revolve around either OL
(Limwichitr et al., 2015; McGuigan, 2012) or leadership (Carter, 2014; Farkas, 2013;
Martin, 2016; Sucozhañay et al., 2014; Yi, 2015). While the leaders of academic libraries
may not always be able to control the changes affecting them, they can proactively
strengthen the OL dynamics of their libraries to better recognize and adapt to change.
Innovation. Innovation is a much-touted concept in the literature, and is often
positively associated with OL. Dias and Escoval (2015), for example, defined innovation
as “the implementation of a new or significantly improved product/service or process” (p.
53). Most other definitions also incorporate this concept of implementing something new.
Recent studies originating in Pakistan (Kalyar & Rafi, 2013), Iran (Tohidi,
Seyedaliakbar, & Mandegari, 2012), Spain (Santos-Vijande, López-Sánchez, &

23
Trespalacios, 2012), Portugal (Dias & Escoval, 2015), and China (Zeng, Gonzalez, &
Lobato, 2015) all concluded that OL had a significant positive relationship with
innovation.
Though most of these studies used quantitative questionnaires, Dias and Escoval
(2015) took a mixed-methods approach, incorporating questionnaires, interviews, and a
nominal group technique, which is a group brainstorming session structured to encourage
everyone’s participation (Tague, 2005). They found three levels of learning organizations
among 95 hospitals in Portugal. The levels were based on how many OL tactics the
hospitals used: 0-4 for basic, 5-8 for moderate, and more than 9 for advanced. The
advanced learning organizations were 5 times more likely to develop innovation than the
basic learning organizations (Dias & Escoval, 2015). In contrast with the results
discussed thus far, Calisir, Gumussoy, and Guzelsoy (2013), studied 150 companies in
Turkey and concluded that the relationship between commitment to learning and product
innovation was insignificant. However, in this study, the researchers defined commitment
to learning as “the readiness of the organization to change the way it does things by
combining existing knowledge or incorporating new knowledge” (Calisir et al., 2013, p.
179). Though this concept is most definitely related to OL, the nuanced differences may
account for the discrepant results.
Chiva, Ghauri, and Alegre (2014) took issue with the traditional view that the
relationship between OL and innovation is one of linear causality. Instead, they suggested
that OL and innovation form a complex system interacting with each other. For example,
an OL environment may encourage innovation, but innovation can also help produce new

24
knowledge, which feeds into OL processes (Chiva et al., 2014). Both Argyris and
Schön’s (1978) double-loop learning theory and Senge’s (1990) emphasis on systems
thinking support complex over linear relationships between such variables.
Taking the concept a step further, Sheng and Chien (2016) investigated the effect
of OL on two distinct kinds of innovation—incremental and radical. They found that
while OL has a strong positive effect on incremental innovation, it may inhibit radical
innovation, at least in high tech companies in Taiwan.
Finally, Balk, Kwant, and Neudecker (2014) explored innovation in a library
setting—the National Library of the Netherlands. They developed a checklist of factors
that determine innovation capacity of libraries, and included knowledge and OL as one of
the factors. They further divided that factor into four sub factors: requisite variety:
diversity of teams, innovation budget/transaction budget, learning from failure, and
absorptive capacity for external knowledge. Balk et al. applied their checklist to two case
studies of innovation at the National Library of the Netherlands to ensure the factors they
identified were valid in a real-life scenario of innovation. In other words, did each factor
contribute to the success of the innovative project? Together, the cases ticked 11 of the 14
factors on the checklist, which the authors concluded “demonstrates the relevance of the
checklist” (Balk et al., 2014, p. 165). However, it is interesting to note that of the four
knowledge and OL factors, only two—requisite variety: diversity of teams and
innovation budget/transaction budget—appeared in the case scenarios. Further research
would be needed to determine what effect, if any, the four knowledge and OL factors
actually have on the success of innovative projects in libraries.

25
As in the case of organizational change, innovation is an essential aspect of doing
business in the modern world. Developing an OL culture can help organizations become
more innovative. OL is an important factor of success, and cultivating OL capabilities
could have important positive outcomes for the libraries in FPCUs.
Libraries. As OL theory has been applied to a wide range of disciplines, it is no
surprise that researchers have studied academic libraries through the lens of OL and its
subcategories. As early as 1993, researchers explored the implications of OL and the
learning organization on academic libraries (Fowler, 1998; Phipps, 1993; Riggs, 1997).
More recently, research surrounding OL concepts in academic libraries has focused on
individual learning as a pathway to OL (Leong, Phillips, Giddens, & Dickson, 2014; T.
Yu, 2013; Yu & Chen, 2015), KM (Agarwal & Islam, 2014, 2015, Chidambaranathan &
Rani, 2015b, 2015a; Islam, Agarwal, & Ikeda, 2014; Islam et al., 2015), the application
of OL principles to special projects (Al-Harrasi, 2014; Beagle, 2012; Crawley-Low,
2013; Loo & Dupuis, 2015), and predictors of OL (Bertram-Elliott, 2015;
Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015b; Huang, 2014).
In a literature review, Limwichitr, Broady-Preston, and Ellis (2015) identified key
challenges in building a learning organization within a university library context. One
point to note is that some librarians may become confused by the distinction between
their role in helping students and faculty learn, and their own individual learning to
contribute to the organizational knowledge of the library (Limwichitr et al., 2015). The
authors urged a clarification of the concepts relating to OL for academic libraries so

26
library leaders can better implement these concepts. They cited a lack of current literature
where these concepts are clearly outlined for effective application in academic libraries.
Past OL researchers suggested that individual learning is an important first step
for OL (Antonacopoulou, 2006; Argote et al., 2003; Hayes & Allinson, 1998; Kim, 1993;
Senge, 1990; Simon, 1991). Leong et al. (2014) asked three key rhetorical questions
regarding continuing professional development for library and information science
professionals: (a) “Are we willing to learn?” (b) “Do we have opportunities to learn?”
and (c) “Are we able to apply what we learn?" (p. 6). The first question speaks to the idea
of motivation. Leong et al. concluded that leaders and managers play an important role in
promoting the motivation for individuals to learn within an organization. Pursuant to the
second question, leaders also support individuals in opportunities to learn by providing
the time and the budget for them to do so. Finally, knowledge transfer is an important
next step. Library employees must share what they’ve learned with their colleagues in
order to transfer the knowledge into OL (Leong et al., 2014).
Yu and Chen (2015) similarly investigated individual learning and its
contributions toward OL culture using survey research methods with 478 library
employees from 162 colleges and universities. They focused on academic libraries in
Taiwan to learn what methods library employees were using to learn, and what effect
these methods have on organizational knowledge performance. They found that most
library employees learn through informal self-learning rather than more formal
workshops, degree-based courses, training, or seminars (Yu & Chen, 2015). Additionally,
the authors suggested that “creating continuous learning opportunities” and “creating

27
systems to capture and share learning” contribute most significantly to OL culture (Yu &
Chen, 2015). In another study, Bertram-Elliott (2015) found that the best predictor of OL
capacity in academic libraries was support for professional development, even if it was
only encouragement without financial support. Each of these studies identified the
importance of incorporating information about individual learning, perhaps in the form of
professional development, into the overall OL picture.
However, in a study conducted in Taiwan, Huang (2014) found that librarians
were learning, but the knowledge was not necessarily transferring to the organizational
level, demonstrating the importance of KM to OL. Two groups of researchers, in
particular, have completed quite a bit of research in this area over the last several years.
Agarwal and Islam (2014) explored the tools available to use in KM implementation in
libraries, but found that no single set of tools was applicable to every library or every
situation; furthermore, technology tools are meant to support KM activities, but more
important are the people and processes involved. Islam, Agarwal, and Ikeda (2014) found
that librarians were more familiar with the concept of KM than previously thought. The
study was extensive, surveying 101 librarians from 35 different countries. However, a
related study by Agarwal and Islam (2015) concluded that most libraries did not yet have
a formal KM program. Taken together, these findings suggest that though librarians are
aware of KM, they do not implement it. An exploratory qualitative survey with openended questions, administered by the same group of researchers (Islam et al., 2015)
indicated that KM in libraries can improve communication and promote a culture of
sharing, with 94% of respondents believing that KM can help libraries provide more

28
innovative service. However, this study was preliminary—its low response rate (24%)
and small sample size (n = 17) discount the reliability of the data.
At the same time, Chidambaranathan and Rani (2015a, 2015b) researched KM in
a survey of 122 library employees from 16 academic libraries in Qatar. They found that
certain types of organizational cultures, namely clan culture (high commitment
workplace, focused on teamwork), adhocracy culture (high creativity/innovation
workplace, focused on autonomy and initiative), and market culture (results-oriented,
competitive workplace, focused on achievement) are positively correlated with KM, with
Pearson coefficients of 0.69, 0.61, and 0.35, respectively (Chidambaranathan & Rani,
2015a). The fourth type—hierarchy culture, which is characterized by a formal and
structured workplace with a focus on dependability—had a slightly negative relationship
with KM, r = -0.07 (Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015a). Leaders wishing to promote KM
in their libraries would therefore probably not benefit as much from creating a hierarchy
culture. The same researchers tested correlations between certain demographic and
employment-related characteristics and KM activities (Chidambaranathan & Rani,
2015b). The demographics of the library employees—including gender, level of
education, age, and nationality—were not related to KM activities in the libraries
(Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015b). Similarly, many of the employment-related
characteristics, including the hierarchy of positions and job tenure of respondents, were
not significantly correlated with KM activities (Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015b). One
factor—the type of institution—was related to KM; libraries at the private Qatar
Foundation institutions scored higher than the libraries at government-run institutions

29
(Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015b). Both of these studies resulted from analyses of the
same data set, collected with a 62% response rate in Qatar. Even still, the application of
the results outside of that country is questionable.
Several libraries have applied OL principles to guide special projects. For
example, Al-Harrasi (2014) successfully applied OL to facilitate collaboration between
Omani academic libraries. Beagle (2012) viewed learning commons through the lens of
OL and concluded that a learning commons is the “effect conduit” (p. 534) between
individual and OL, which means that it facilitates the transfer of knowledge from
individuals to the organization by providing a designated place to share information.
Crawley-Low (2013) investigated the OL implications of the University of
Saskatchewan’s Library Leadership Development Program through qualitative surveys
with 21 library employees who completed the program. The researcher found that “the
library’s investment in learning” (Crawley-Low, 2013, p. 60) enabled more than 50
library employees to better embody the principles that lead to OL.
Finally, Loo and Dupuis (2015) took a micro-level view of OL by applying its
principles to the process of library enhancement planning. Through a qualitative
evaluation methodology, they concluded that “organizational learning is about action: to
broadly gather information about an organization, to create knowledge from it, and then
to use this knowledge to improve the organization” (Loo & Dupuis, 2015, p. 675). They
also listed best practices for OL in academic libraries:
•

“receptivity to change,

•

alignment with institutional goals and outcomes,

30
•

systems thinking,

•

collaborative efforts,

•

assessment,

•

learning,

•

communication, and

•

continuous and cyclical activities” (Loo & Dupuis, 2015, pp. 675-676).

The best practices and varied applications of OL as outlined in the literature identify the
key conditions that are important to note when qualitatively assessing OL in libraries at
FPCUs.
In addition to Chidambaranathan and Rani’s (2015b) work on the predictors of OL in
academic libraries, several other researchers have explored this topic recently as well.
Huang (2014) surveyed 286 academic librarians in Taiwan and found the following:
•

larger libraries engaged in more organizational knowledge activities than
smaller libraries;

•

permanent staff members engaged in more organizational knowledge
activities than temporary staff members;

•

managers engaged in more organizational knowledge activities than nonmanagers;

•

librarians with more years of experience engaged in more OL activities than
newer librarians;

31
•

librarians with higher levels of education scored higher for knowledge
acquisition activities, but not for knowledge absorption, sharing, obstacles, or
transfer (Huang, 2014).

Huang’s findings indicate that large libraries with permanent staff members would be
more likely to have high levels of OL capabilities than small libraries with many
temporary (i.e., adjunct) staff members, at least in Taiwan.
In a quantitative survey of 376 library employees in the United States, BertramElliott (2015) found predictors similar to those in Huang’s (2014) study. The researcher
used Chen’s (2006) instrument to measure OL in the libraries studied. Bertram-Elliott
noted higher OL capacity for the libraries of respondents who had administrative duties
and higher ranks (e.g., managers). Likewise, libraries of employees with more experience
were found to have greater OL capacity than those with newer library workers.
Adding a new layer to Huang’s (2014) findings on library size, Bertram-Elliott
(2015) found that libraries serving fewer FTE students and with fewer students per
librarian had higher OL scores. Huang measured library size by the number of library
staff members, with no consideration of students served or librarian-to-student ratios.
Bertram-Elliott considered these additional aspects of library size and found that high
numbers of library staff members combined with low numbers of FTE students produced
some of the highest OL scores. The results indicated that library staff members with a
comfortable work load due to sufficient staff size can spend more time learning and
sharing their knowledge to increase OL in the library.

32
Bertram-Elliott’s (2015) research was the only study found in the literature related
specifically to OL in libraries in FPCUs. Of the 376 respondents, 15, or 4%, were from
FPCUs. Based on this small sample, the researcher noted that the mean OL score for
libraries in FPCUs was 2.16, compared to an overall average of 2.17. Both scores fall into
the medium level of OL capacity, according to Bertram-Elliott’s categories. BertramElliott maintained that libraries should be functioning in the high level of OL in order to
meet the current challenges facing academic libraries. While these data on OL in libraries
in FPCUs is a start, the number of participating FPCU library employees was small. A
study focused solely on this type of library would better gauge the OL capacity of
libraries in FPCUs.
Review of the Broader Problem
The value of academic libraries. The traditional assumption has long been that
academic libraries benefit students. However, as the role of the library has shifted away
from a repository for books, and more resources become available electronically,
institutions and their stakeholders have begun to question what value academic libraries
offer in a digital world (Oakleaf, 2011). As a result, academic librarians have conducted
and published research to concretely demonstrate the benefits of academic libraries.
Oakleaf (2015) credited Kuh and Gonyea (2003) with ushering in the era of measuring
academic library value. Since then, the advantages of academic libraries for students in
four key areas have emerged: learning, engagement, retention, and achievement. These
areas do overlap, particularly in that learning and engagement contribute to both retention
and achievement (Kuh, Cruce, Shoup, Kinzie, & Gonyea, 2008; Webber, Krylow, &

33
Zhang, 2013). Other researchers have explored the ROI of academic libraries (Kingma &
McClure, 2015), commonly considered to be cost centers (Goldstein, 2012) or even
“bottomless pits” (Munn, 1968, p. 58) in an institutional budget.
Student achievement. Achievement, typically expressed as grade point average
(GPA), is a common measure for assessing student outcomes in higher education.
Researchers have conducted more than 15 studies in recent years that positively correlate
aspects of academic libraries with higher student GPA. Most of these focus on library
use. For example, Cherry, Rollins, and Evans (2013) used library online login statistics
and GPA data for 2,900 undergraduate students—the entire undergraduate population of
the university—to calculate the relationship between the two variables. They found that,
in general, the higher a student’s GPA, the more times that student logged in to the
library’s online resources, based on the average number of log-ins per unique login ID,
broken up into five GPA ranges (Cherry et al., 2013). Additionally, the researchers found
a correlation between number of log-ins and GPA based on the academic disciplines of
the students. Of the eight disciplines, the researchers found weak correlations in six, a
moderate correlation in one, and a small negative correlation in one. These results do not
prove causation or report on what students did once they logged in to the library’s online
resources, but do suggest a link between library use and academic achievement.
Likewise, Soria, Fransen, and Nackerud (2013, 2014) used student log-in data,
combined with attendance at workshops or course-integrated instruction, to calculate
relationships between library use and GPA of 5,162 first-year, non-transfer students at a

34
large public university. They found that students who used the library during their first
semester had GPAs about 0.2 points higher than those who did not use the library,
p < .001 (Soria et al., 2013, 2014). Furthermore, Soria et al. found that six specific kinds
of library use were most significantly and positively linked with student achievement:
using library workstations, using online databases, using electronic journals, checking out
books, consulting with a peer research assistant, and meeting with a reference librarian.
Soria, Fransen, and Nackerud (2017) extracted data for 1,068 students from their
previous data set of first-year, non-transfer students at a large public university to
investigate further. This set of students had taken the Student Experience in the Research
University (SERU) survey, which included questions on academic library usage. The
updated study provided additional insight into library use and student GPA, specifically
that students who participated in library instruction sessions (in class or separate
workshops) were more likely to have a higher GPA during that semester.
Allison (2015) conducted similar research linking library usage to GPA, but
included graduate students as well as undergraduates. The researcher collected data for
two academic years: 20,040 students in 2011-2012 and 21,564 students in 2012-2013,
focusing specifically on students enrolled at the university in both academic years
(14,722 students) and students enrolled during the 2011-2012 academic year but not the
2012-2013 academic year (7,078 students). Allison defined library use as library
checkouts and off-campus log-ins to online library resources. The findings indicated that
undergraduate students with higher-than-average GPAs used the library more than
undergraduate students with lower-than-average GPAs (Allison, 2015). Again, a

35
limitation is that the results do not indicate causation. It is unclear whether using the
library causes students to get better grades, or whether good students are naturally more
prone to use the library.
Like in previous studies, Kot and Jones (2015) linked library usage—in this case
measured by use of library workstations, use of library study rooms, and attendance at
research clinics—to student GPA. However, they used a propensity score matching
method to construct groups of library users and nonusers among 8,652 full-time
undergraduate students at a large, public research university, meaning that students were
grouped according to background characteristics, making it possible to better estimate the
effect of library usage over other characteristics. Their results indicated that some groups
of students were more likely than others to use library resources, regardless of GPA. For
example, on-campus students were less likely to use library computer work stations than
students who did not live on campus (Kot & Jones, 2015). After adjusting for student
characteristics, the treatment group had average GPAs higher than the control group, with
using a library study room at least once during the term providing the largest difference
in GPA.
Student retention. Another area where academic libraries add value to the higher
education experience is in student retention. Persistence between the first and second year
of undergraduate studies, and through to graduation, is a commonly used measure of
quality for higher education. Researchers have indicated that the academic library can be
instrumental in preventing student attrition. Tinto (1999) discussed four conditions that
best support student retention: information/advice, support, involvement, and learning.

36
Libraries contribute to each of these factors, with student learning addressed in this
literature review as one of the four areas in which researchers have found academic
libraries benefit students. I will discuss information/advice, support, and involvement in
terms of student retention.
First, libraries can provide information and advice to students, even unrelated to
library resources and services. Grallo, Chalmers, and Baker (2012) recorded student
questions at the library reference and circulation desks for 2-week periods at several
points throughout three semesters. They found that 47% of questions were unrelated to
library research and concluded that “students were looking to the library for help with
learning how to function in their new environment” (Grallo et al., 2012, p. 189).
Second, libraries can support students in their studies. Fleming-May, Mays, and
Radom (2015) discussed the learning community in which the library participated at the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville. The program was invitation-only and targeted
students wait-listed for admission with the goal of helping them transition from high
school to college during the summer before their first college semester. In this context,
librarians taught a series of workshops intended to orient students to the resources
available to them in the library and prepare them for the research assignments their
instructors would assign in their courses. According to posttest results, 81% of students
said they would be more likely to ask a librarian for help with research after attending the
workshops, versus 57% in the pretest reporting sometimes, often, or never asking for help
with research (Fleming-May et al., 2015). Further, the researchers administered a follow-

37
up survey 6 months after the workshops; 82% of students reported having used the library
in the previous semester.
Murray (2015) administered a mixed-methods survey to library deans or directors
at 271 public universities in the United States. The survey contained Likert-style
questions to gauge libraries’ self-reported involvement in 10 high-impact practices for
student retention, as identified by the American Association of Colleges & Universities
(AAC&U). The survey also included prompts for qualitative responses on how the library
supported the high-impact practices. The 10 high-impact practices are:
•

first-year seminars and experiences,

•

common intellectual experiences,

•

learning communities,

•

writing-intensive courses,

•

collaborative assignments,

•

undergraduate research,

•

diversity and global learning,

•

service learning/community-based learning,

•

internships, and

•

capstone courses/projects (Kuh, 2008).

In all, the library deans and directors reported high involvement in the 10 practices,
regardless of how long the dean or director had been in the position, or what faculty rank
librarians at the institution held (Murray, 2015). In supporting the 10 practices, libraries
are supporting the students, one of Tinto’s (1999) four conditions for optimal retention.

38
Finally, library use can be considered a way students involve themselves in the
campus community, which then contributes to student retention. For example, Haddow
(2013) quantitatively analyzed library use data—measured by log-ins to electronic
resources and physical library checkouts—and student persistence information of 6,330
undergraduate students in their first 18 months of study at a university with campuses in
Australia, Malaysia, and Singapore. Haddow analyzed retention and library use data at
three points for students who were enrolled in April 2010, June 2010, April 2011, and
June 2011. The author compared library use data from students who persisted in their
studies with those who withdrew, and found that withdrawn students had no library use,
based on the data collected, more than twice as often as students who remained enrolled.
For example, based on students enrolled in April 2011 (n = 4,883), 58.3% of students
who had withdrawn by June 2011 had zero library logins, compared with 17.6% of
students who persisted to June 2011. Likewise, 29.3% of students who persisted to June
2011 had more than 26 library logins, compared to 5% of withdrawn students (Haddow,
2013).
Murray, Ireland, and Hackathorn (2016) performed research similar to Haddow’s
(2013), but reached more conclusive results. Murray et al. analyzed records from 3,757
freshman and sophomore students at a large, public university in the Midwest United
States. The records included library use—measured by physical check outs, use of
electronic resources, library computer lab usage, use of the interlibrary loan service,
participation in library instruction sessions, enrollment in credit-bearing information
literacy courses, use of the library-managed writing center, and use of the library-

39
managed oral communication center—with different kinds of library use analyzed as
separate variables, as well as collated into library use as a whole (Murray et al., 2016).
They found that library use as a whole predicted retention—freshman students who used
the library during their first spring semester were 9.54 times more likely to persist into
the following fall semester, and sophomore students who used the library during the
spring semester were 4.23 times more likely to persist into the following fall semester.
The two library use variables that best predicted retention overall were check outs and
use of electronic resources (Murray et al., 2016).
Because student retention is a “complex interplay of forces” (Tinto, 1993, p. 3), it
is difficult to show causation between specific factors and their influence on student
attrition. Demonstrating links between library use and retention, rather than establishing
that lack of library use is a cause of attrition, is the primary weakness in studies on the
topic. However, in lieu of better data, the available studies do suggest a positive
relationship between library use and retention.
Student learning. Menchaca (2014) recently wrote that the need to track and
improve undergraduate student learning is at a critical mass in higher education in the
United States, citing Arum and Roksa’s (2010) widely read research spotlighting the
“limited learning on college campuses” (p. 120). Menchaca called on libraries to become
“the training facilities where undergraduates go to develop the ‘habits of mind’ they need
to succeed” (p. 364). Library involvement in student learning typically centers on
information literacy. Information literacy is “the set of integrated abilities encompassing
the reflective discovery of information, the understanding of how information is produced

40
and valued, and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating
ethically in communities of learning” (ACRL, 2016, para. 5). To help students learn the
skills and abilities information literacy encompasses, librarians use a variety of practices
and pedagogies categorized in toto as information literacy instruction or library
instruction.
Pan et al. (2014) conducted a study at the University of Colorado Denver by
engaging in librarian-faculty collaboration to create curriculum models centering on
information literacy skills for beginning science students. The researchers created two
complementary models, one taught in the fall semester and the other in the spring
semester, and tested the models over 3 academic years. Their data were quantitative and
qualitative, collected throughout the 3-year period and including follow ups with some
students 1 and 2 years after the students completed the curriculum models. They found
that the information literacy skills students learned in the target courses transferred to 21
other courses, including three in other disciplines, based on student-reported information
in a qualitative survey (Pan et al., 2014). In a companion study by the same authors,
Bruehl, Pan, and Ferrer-Vinent (2015) elaborated on the results of the qualitative followup survey. Based on coding of responses, the researchers found that the majority of
students who responded (37 out of 88 polled) reported they valued the information
literacy skills they gained during the two courses; 51% reported they continued to use the
skills in their other coursework, and 19% reported they used the skills to satisfy their
personal curiosity about science topics (Bruehl et al., 2015).

41
Another team of researchers, Squibb and Mikkelsen (2016), also used
collaboration between faculty and librarians to help students learn information literacy
skills. In their study, librarians and writing faculty designed a project called Teaching
Research and Information Literacy (TRAIL), which embedded librarians into
introductory composition courses at a research university. The team assessed TRAIL
using a mixed-methods approach that combined course grades, GPAs, student reflections,
final student papers, and faculty debriefs (Squibb & Mikkelsen, 2016). The researchers
evaluated the qualitative data based on an original rubric designed to ascertain a student’s
level of performance on six information literacy abilities, including appropriate source
selection, overcoming research challenges, and incorporating new information into
existing practice. For each ability, evaluators rated students as marginal, emerging,
developing, or advanced. Overall, 17.2% of students scored at the advanced level and
53.5% scored at the developing level (Squibb & Mikkelsen, 2016). Faculty members
teaching the composition courses agreed that students in the courses using TRAIL
exhibited better information literacy by the end of the course, especially in their abilities
to “engage with research as an ongoing process” (Squibb & Mikkelsen, 2016, p. 170),
than students in non-TRAIL courses.
Embedding librarians into first-year courses proved successful for Rae and Hunn
(2015) as well. Their project consisted of a librarian-created online module available to
over 1,000 students enrolled in an introductory business course. The module covered
eight academic and information literacy topics:
•

navigating the library website,

42
•

unpacking the question,

•

scholarly and peer-reviewed journal articles,

•

searching the library catalogue,

•

writing the plan,

•

searching Google Scholar,

•

writing the essay, and

•

referencing (Rae & Hunn, 2015, p. 97).

The researchers collected mixed-method assessment data over two semesters, including
inferred evidence such as usage statistics for the module, performance measures using
student artifacts, and solicited evidence in the form of study surveys, focus groups, and
interviews. In both semesters, more than 90% of students accessed the module, and the
final essay grades for students who accessed the module were higher than for the students
who did not (Rae & Hunn, 2015). While these data do not speak directly to student
learning, the focus group and interview responses provided evidence that students learned
as a result of using the module. For example, one comment from a student was “Had no
idea what to do and resource gave me lots of ideas of what to do” (Rae & Hunn, 2015, p.
104). A comment from a tutor for the business course affirmed that the module “was a
valuable learning and teaching tool” (Rae & Hunn, 2015, p. 105) to which they often
referred students.
As educators, including librarians, continue to look for authentic means of
assessing student learning, the influence of typical pedagogies and practices will become

43
clearer. In the meantime, the available research demonstrates that librarians contribute to
student learning in the realm of information literacy.
Student engagement. Student engagement plays a role in achievement, retention,
and learning, and so is an important area of influence in higher education. According to
reports in the literature, libraries play a role in supporting student engagement and have
employed unique and creative ways of doing so. Walsh (2014), for example,
implemented a gamification platform, which was designed to make normal library
activities more competitive and fun. To evaluate the effects of the platform, Walsh
analyzed usage data, results of two mixed-methods surveys, and qualitative unprompted
feedback on social media. For example, one user posted on Facebook: “Currently using
the Lemontree app, and I’ve got to say gamifying my visits to the library is a smart move.
Heck, got me up here more often” (Walsh, 2014, p. 46). One evaluation survey targeted
users who had been registered on the platform for at least one semester. Of 762 users in
that population, the researcher received 156 responses, for a 20.5% response rate. Of the
respondents, 60% felt that using the gamification platform changed their library usage
behavior, including borrowing more books, coming into the library more often, and using
more electronic resources. In qualitative responses, participants mentioned
“encouraging/incentivising/engaging” (Walsh, 2014, p. 48) as a theme 49 times. Walsh’s
results indicated that students felt engaged with the library because of the gamification
platform, but the results were self-reported and have not been linked to evidence of
students actually changing their behaviors because of gamification.

44
Another example of an academic library program designed to increase student
engagement is the use of therapy dogs. Jalongo and McDevitt (2015) presented a case
study of three pet therapy visits in three semesters at an academic library as a way for
students to de-stress during finals. Across the events, 449 participants completed surveys,
which included some quantitative questions and some qualitative questions. The
qualitative responses revealed high levels of student engagement. For example, one
student wrote: “These dogs made me want to go to the library more than anything
academically related has and they are a great stress reliever” (Jalongo & McDevitt, 2015,
p. 264). Other experiences with play-based programs in academic libraries are reported
throughout the literature (Galway, Gard, & Collinson, 2014; Hiebert & Theriault, 2012),
but have not been scientifically evaluated to determine links to student engagement.
In addition to unique programs like gamification and therapy dogs, traditional
library use contributes to student engagement as well. Soria, Fransen, and Nackerud
(2017) studied 1,068 non-transfer first-year students at a large, state university in the
United States. Based on student results on the SERU survey, which measures student
engagement along with other factors, and student library use statistics—consisting of use
of online library services, use of physical collections, and interactions with library staff
members—Soria et al. used hierarchal regressions analyses to calculate relationships
between student engagement and library use. They found positive and significant
correlations between three specific types of library use and student engagement: use of
library books (traditional checkouts, eBooks, or interlibrary loan requests), use of online
library resources, and use of reference services (Soria et al., 2017). They also found that

45
students’ library usage explained a significant amount of the variance in their engagement
levels, even after controlling for other variables.
Though the evidence linking academic libraries to student engagement is not fully
developed, the formalized studies that exist indicate that libraries contribute to student
engagement. They provide programs and activities that encourage students to get
involved in the campus community. Importantly, using the academic library in and of
itself has been linked to higher student engagement, though direct causation cannot be
determined.
Return on investment. In recent years, as libraries have developed new ways to
evaluate themselves and their contributions, some researchers have adapted the business
idea of ROI to calculate the monetary benefits of academic libraries based on the money
institutions of higher education spend on their libraries. Though some, such as Neal
(2011), reject such strategies in favor of more robust qualitative exploration of the
benefits of academic libraries, many champion ROI as a way for libraries to communicate
to administrators and other stakeholders in the medium that makes sense for that
audience: dollars (Kelly, Hamasu, & Jones, 2012; Lown & Davis, 2009). Though most
researchers conducting ROI projects in academic libraries seek to measure value in terms
of assistance with faculty and graduate research, some attempt to tie library value to the
undergraduate level by addressing the library’s monetary value in terms of student
retention.
In determining what value means when calculating an academic library ROI,
several researchers looked toward the library’s most expensive and potentially most

46
beneficial resources: academic databases and journals. Pan, Wiersma, Williams, and
Fong (2013) used both quantitative and qualitative methods to measure the value the
library resources brought to the University of Colorado (CU) as a whole. Their methods
included ROI, cost benefit analysis, citation analysis of scholarly articles published by
faculty, and in-person interviews with faculty.
To calculate ROI, Pan et al. (2013) determined—based on faculty interviews and
curriculum vitae—what articles faculty read or cited for their most recent research
projects, and which of those the faculty accessed through the library. Then, they
determined the cost to the library for those resources and how much faculty members
would have had to pay for the articles if they purchased them directly from the publishers
instead of accessing them through the library. Pan et al. calculated separate ROIs for each
campus they studied: CU Boulder, ROI = 144%; CU Denver, ROI = 66%; and CU
Anschutz Medical Campus, ROI = -19%. In this scenario, the ROI represents the benefit
to faculty members for every $1 the library spent on journal subscriptions; for example,
for every $1 CU Boulder spent on journal subscriptions, faculty members would have
received $144 in potential savings (Pan et al., 2013). The variant results from the CU
Anschutz Medical Campus may be attributable to the fact that faculty at the medical
campus pay fees for articles the library accesses for them through interlibrary loan, while
faculty at the other two campuses do not. The calculated ROIs are specific not only to
CU, but to the individual campuses the researchers studied; the results are therefore not
generalizable. However, the results do indicate that providing resources is one area in
which academic libraries provide value.

47
Elsayed and Saleh (2015) also calculated ROI for the library at their institution,
King Abdulaziz University (KAU) in Saudi Arabia, and set forth a ROI model for other
librarians in Arab countries to follow. The researchers divided their study into two
phases. In the first, they calculated ROI based on total downloads from library
subscription databases. They determined an ROI of 6.67:1, meaning that the university
would lose $6.67 for every $1.00 it did not spend on library databases. The authors in this
scenario reversed the usual phrasing because KAU funds most research. In the second
phase, Elsayed and Saleh calculated a second ROI based on a citation analysis of 52
research studies funded through KAU’s Deanship of Scientific Research. Based on that
data, they determined a ROI of -0.99:1, but determined their sample size was too small
for that result to be conclusive.
Several studies on academic library ROI were part of a larger project called
LibValue, completed in three phases over 6 years (King & Tenopir, 2013; Tenopir, 2010,
2012, 2013; Tenopir et al., 2010). Kingma and McClure (2015), researchers instrumental
throughout the LibValue project, used contingent valuation methodology, including
surveys of faculty and students, to determine the ROI of the Syracuse University library.
They randomly sampled faculty members, sending online surveys to 222 and receiving
responses from 91, which represents a 41% response rate and 9% of the total faculty
population. They used a convenience sample to solicit survey responses from 841
students, receiving 782 responses, which represents a 93% response rate and 4% of the
total student population. Based on estimations of library value in economic,
environmental, and social terms, Kingma and McClure calculated that their library

48
provided $70.2 million in value of time and money to faculty and students each year,
with a ROI of 4.13:1, or $4.13 in value for every $1.00 the university spent on the library.
The authors of two recent studies sought to determine ROI in terms of an
academic library’s contribution to student retention. Crawford (2015), for example, drew
existing data on library expenses, library use, and student retention at 1,328 colleges and
universities in the United States from the Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data
System (IPEDS) and the Academic Library Survey. To determine relationships between
the variables, Crawford employed t tests, analysis of variance, and bivariate Pearson’s
product moment correlations, finding a correlation of 0.490, significant at the 0.01 level,
between library expenses per FTE and retention rate. Additionally, Crawford found a
correlation of 0.554, significant at the 0.01 level, between library expenses per FTE and
graduation rate, based on achieving a bachelor’s degree within 4 years (Crawford, 2015).
Eng and Stadler (2015) took an approach similar to Crawford (2015) in that they
sought to discover correlations between library expenses and student retention based on
national statistics. They collected their data using the ACRL Metrics database, and
looked at 2 years—1,179 institutions in 2010 and 1,194 institutions in 2011. Using a
Pearson correlation coefficient to analyze the variables, Eng and Stadler found moderate
positive relationships between total library expenditures and retention for both years they
studied. In 2010, r = 0.531 for the relationship between total library expenditures and
undergraduate retention; in 2011, r = 0.592 (Eng & Stadler, 2015). In both the Crawford
and Eng and Stadler studies, the results indicated a positive ROI in that the more an

49
institution invests in its library, the higher the retention and graduation rates of its
students.
However it’s calculated, the growing body of research surrounding the value of
academic libraries indicates that academic libraries have positive effects on the students
they serve, in terms of achievement, retention, learning, and engagement. They provide
economic value to faculty members and other researchers through the resources they
make available. Finally, investing in academic libraries can make a difference for an
institution’s bottom-line in terms of supporting tuition-paying students in staying
enrolled.
For-profit colleges and universities. FPCUs are colleges and universities in the
United States that are not tax-exempt, but rather pay taxes like a business. Milton
Friedman, a widely known economist, suggested in an interview with Spencer (1991) that
the terms taxable and nontaxable fit better with the realities of higher education than nonprofit and for-profit. The taxable institutions may be publicly traded, regionally
accredited, and owned by larger parent companies. They also may be independently
owned by a family or individual, accredited nationally or programmatically, and operated
privately. Kinser (2006) identified three categories of FPCUs: enterprise colleges, super
systems, and Internet institutions. Enterprise colleges are small and privately owned and
operated. Super systems are the FPCU corporations that own multiple institutions with
multiple campuses nationally and even worldwide. Finally Internet institutions have no
physical campuses and offer all their degree programs and courses online. Some schools
could fit into more than one category.

50
Ruch (2001), focusing specifically on regionally accredited, publicly traded FPCUs,
outlined 10 distinctions between FPCUs and traditional colleges and universities:
•

tax-paying versus tax-exempt,

•

receive funding from investors versus donors,

•

accumulate money as private investment capital versus endowments,

•

serve stockholders versus stakeholders,

•

traditional management model versus shared governance,

•

motivated by profit versus motivated by prestige,

•

focus on the “application of learning” versus the “cultivation of knowledge”
(p. 18),

•

market-driven versus discipline-driven,

•

emphasize the quality of outcomes versus the quality of inputs, and

•

power is centralized in the customer versus in the faculty.

The final point means that FPCUs are focused on customer service, identifying the
student as the customer (Iloh, 2016; Schilling, 2013).
History. FPCUs have their historical origins in the very earliest institutions of
higher education in the United States. As early as the 1600s, FPCUs were founded as
alternatives to elite religious and philosophical schools like Harvard (Beaver, 2009).
While schools for the elite members of society focused on the theoretical—Greek, Latin,
philosophy, theology, and so forth—the curriculum of early FPCUs was steeped in the
practical—writing, languages, surveying, bookkeeping (Bennett, Lucchesi, & Vedder,
2010; Ruch, 2001). The FPCUs provided opportunities for minorities, women, and lower-

51
class people to train for skills-based jobs. At this time and for the next several hundred
years, FPCUs were small, proprietary institutions, often family-owned.
Changes in the FPCU industry began in 1972, when the Higher Education Act
was reauthorized and made students at FPCUs eligible for federal financial aid for the
first time (Bennett et al., 2010). Bañuelos (2016) argued that “while federal aid gave
students the funds to attend FPCUs, labor market forces motivated them to seize these
opportunities” (p. 575). Over the next 30 plus years, FPCUs continued to grow, in size
and number, to meet the demand created by students with federal aid dollars. Many of
these students were mid-career adults, or women raising children, and felt that traditional
colleges and universities did not meet their needs (Bañuelos, 2016; Bennett et al., 2010;
Ruch, 2001). They found the convenience and flexibility they needed in the FPCUs.
The influx of federal financial aid money to FPCUs also led to an increase in
fraud, which in turn led to heavy federal regulation. According to Bennett et al. (2010),
by the 1990s, most of the illegitimate schools had been weeded out. Because of this, and
because of the move toward regional accreditation, starting with the University of
Phoenix and the Keller Graduate School of Management in 1989 (Bañuelos, 2016), the
FPCU industry began to enjoy unprecedented legitimacy that matched its incredible
growth.
Growth. From 1986 to 2008, traditional colleges and universities grew less than
2% per year on average, while FPCUs grew at an average rate of 8.4% (Bennett et al.,
2010). Additionally, the FPCU share of the higher education market grew from 2.4% in
1986 to 9.2% in 2008 (Bennett et al., 2010). Gilpin, Saunders, and Stoddard (2015)

52
attributed this growth to a responsiveness to labor market changes not found in traditional
colleges and universities. Douglass (2012), on the other hand, explained that the rapid
growth of the for-profit sector in U.S. higher education is a direct result of growing
demand and lack of supply in the higher education market. Because public and non-profit
private colleges could not keep up with the demand, FPCUs filled the gap, enrolling the
students the traditional colleges and universities could not or would not serve.
FPCU enrollment peaked in 2010 and the sector is now in decline. Down in
enrollments, prestige, and legitimacy, FPCUs are fighting government regulations and
allegations of predatory behavior against consumers (Blumenstyk, 2016a, 2016b; Field,
2015). Between 2010 and 2015, undergraduate enrollment at FPCUs decreased from 1.7
million students to 1.1 million students, a 38% percent drop (National Center for
Education Statistics, 2017). In contrast, public institutions of higher education saw just a
4% drop in undergraduate enrollment, and private nonprofit institutions of higher
education actually saw undergraduate enrollment increases of 6% collectively (National
Center for Education Statistics, 2017).
Libraries. One aspect of FPCUs that is rarely mentioned in the literature, and
even more rarely studied empirically, is their libraries. Ruch (2001) suggested that in the
FPCU world, libraries are “basically regarded as an expensive and somewhat marginal
utility” (p. 41), in which the institutions would not invest if not for the requirements of
their accreditors. Some have no physical library spaces at all (Kirp, 2003; Ruch, 2001), or
maintain online collections from a standard package that may or may not support the
curriculum (J. Y. Davis et al., 2011). Librarians at FPCUs have reported an institutional

53
lack of respect for libraries and librarians, who are not “taken seriously” and whose
positions are simply “part of compliance” (Watson, 2014, p. 6). However, the picture
painted with these anecdotal brushstrokes is not complete. As Ratzan (2002) editorialized
15 years ago, “the plural of anecdote is not evidence” (p. 169). Unfortunately, empirical
studies about libraries in FPCUs are scarce.
In fact, J. Y. Davis et al. (2011) reported that they “were unable to find any
published research on academic libraries in proprietary schools” (p. 570), and their study
remains some of the only research on the topic. As library consultants for the Ohio Board
of Regents, the researchers reviewed the libraries of 30 FPCUs in Ohio, collecting
qualitative data on their strengths and weaknesses. Thirteen key weaknesses emerged:
•

lack of understanding of the purpose of an academic library;

•

lack of a library advocate in the organization;

•

lack of an appropriately credentialed librarian;

•

not understanding the differences between a public library and an academic
library;

•

lack of space;

•

limited use of Web site;

•

overreliance on electronic resources;

•

inadequate bibliographic control;

•

lack of standard services;

•

lack of demand on the part of students and faculty;

•

lack of curricular needs for a library;

54
•

lack of interest in lifelong learning; and

•

lack of academic qualifications in leadership (J. Y. Davis et al., 2011, pp.
574–577).

Strengths included (a) focusing on the student, (b) career services, (c) responsiveness to
needed teaching improvement, (d) using tools from the business world, and (e) use of
public libraries (J. Y. Davis et al., 2011, pp. 578–580).
J. Y. Davis et al. (2011) concluded that while some of the larger, corporate
FPCUs they visited were on par with the libraries at traditional colleges and universities,
“the majority of career schools had libraries that were inadequate” and that lacked “the
foundational support accorded to libraries at traditional, nonprofit institutions and,
therefore, trail them in both the scope and quality of their library services” (p. 580). Their
most noteworthy recommendation was that FPCUs employ properly credentialed,
professional librarians. They found that even in institutions that lacked support for the
work and purpose of academic libraries, a “hardworking, well-qualified librarian” (J. Y.
Davis et al., 2011, p. 580) could, over time, successfully collaborate with students,
faculty members, and administrators to raise the profile and substance of the library on
campus.
Since J. Y. Davis et al. (2011) published their study and called for additional
research into the libraries at FPCUs, several researchers have obliged. Wagner (2013)
investigated student use of library reference services at one campus of a multi-campus
FPCU. Wagner surveyed students registered in two sections of the College Composition I
course. Though the return rate was high—30 students out of a potential 39 students, or

55
76.9% of possible students, completed the survey—the small sample size affects the
degree to which the results represent the campus population of 377 full-time students and
limits the degree to which the results can be generalized to other FPCUs. The survey
contained 10 quantitative questions with an option to answer Other and qualitatively
explain that response. Respondents were all in their first or second semester at the
campus. Wagner concluded that because the majority of students surveyed (21 of 30)
indicated they had never used the campus library, the campus librarian should better
market the library to students. The results support the idea that libraries are considered
marginal or nonessential on some FPCU campuses.
In a case study, Guy and Eimer (2016) explored the interdepartmental
collaboration between librarians, faculty, and student advisors at Rasmussen College, a
FPCU. In November 2014, the college shifted to a one-stop support model (OSSM),
making the student advisor the primary point of contact for students with questions about
any aspect of their student services, financial aid, and even academic issues. Previously,
the campus-support model meant that each campus employed a librarian to serve the
students on that campus directly. Under the new model, librarians were assigned an entire
discipline to support, rather than a specific campus. In the OSSM, librarians rarely
interacted directly with students. Instead, the student advisors interacted with students
and learned the basics of multiple student support services and academic departments to
answer student questions. The librarians focused on teaching the advisors the basics of
the library, and teaching faculty members the more advanced aspects of the library, so
that the advisors and faculty members could, in turn, teach the students (Guy & Eimer,

56
2016). The case study highlighted how one FPCU library operated to serve students and
faculty.
Very few research-based studies focus on the libraries in FPCUs. With hundreds
of journals dedicated to library science and education, this dearth of evidence is
surprising. The most comprehensive study on libraries in FPCUs is already more than 5
years old. Leaders of professional organizations, like ACRL, may not understand the
unique challenges and circumstances librarians in FPCUs face and so are unable to
properly support these members, leading to a gap in practice between the ACRL’s
recommended standards for academic libraries (ACRL, 2011) and the actual conditions in
libraries at FPCUs.
Implications
Based on the findings of this study, I wrote a white paper or manual to educate
staff members at libraries in FPCUs, such as members of ACRL’s LFPEI interest group,
about OL and its implications, which could lead to positive social change through
libraries being better able to contribute to student learning and success. In turn, the
libraries would be more likely to grow and develop, becoming more effective, positively
influencing the ever-increasing populations of students who attend FPCUs. I will also
present the white paper to the leaders of the LFPEI interest group. They could use the
white paper to better understand the challenges and successes of the interest group
members in their unique academic environments.
The manual addresses the basics of what OL is and information from the literature
on practical steps library employees can take to promote and create an OL environment in

57
their libraries. The findings from this study informed the manual as well by reporting the
library demographic characteristics found to be related to OL capacity. Additionally,
having found through the survey and the qualitative interviews that library employees in
FPCUs did not receive sufficient support in the form of money or time for their
professional development efforts, I will want to ensure the manual is accessible to them.
Summary
Despite the successful application of OL in the arenas of higher education and
libraries, a problem exists in the potential gap in practice between what FPCUs in the
United States are currently doing and the processes that can help them create OL cultures
in their libraries. As FPCUs continue to gain popularity and their academic libraries serve
greater numbers of students, understanding how they work and how they can be more
effective will be critical for alleviating the gaps in practice at libraries of FPCUs.
Archives from LFPEI indicate that barriers such as a lack of extrinsic incentives and the
proprietary nature of FPCUs could help explain the lack of literature. However, there is a
demand among library employees at FPCUs for research, presentation, and learning
opportunities.
A study focused on OL in the libraries of FPCUs can strengthen the body of
knowledge and, by disseminating evidence on the topic, may contribute toward higher
levels of OL in these libraries and narrowing the gap in practice between what FPCUs are
currently doing and the processes that can help them create OL cultures in their libraries.
Through this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study, I asked three research
questions—two quantitative and one qualitative—in an effort to assess and explore OL in

58
the libraries of FPCUs. These research questions were informed by an extensive review
of the literature and grounded in the theoretical foundation of OL. Based on the findings
of this study, creation of an online manual to educate staff members at libraries in
FPCUs, such as members of ACRL’s LFPEI interest group, about OL and its
implications could lead to positive social change through libraries being better able to
contribute to student learning and success.
In Section 2 of this project study, I will discuss the quantitative and qualitative
methodology, including rationale for the research design, setting, and sampling
procedures. I will also describe the data collection and analysis for both the quantitative
and qualitative sequences of the study.

59
Section 2: The Methodology
Through this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study, I sought to assess and
explore OL in FPCU libraries in the United States. Section 2 includes details of the
mixed-methods design and approach; in it, I describe the setting and sample, data
collection strategies, data analysis, and limitations of the study.
Mixed Method Design and Approach
For this study, I employed a sequential explanatory mixed-method design. First, I
administered a quantitative survey to academic library staff members at FPCUs to
measure the capacity for OL in these libraries using Chen’s (2006) Processes and Phases
of Organizational Learning Questionnaire (PPOLQ). I also collected library demographic
information such as number of FTE library employees and number of FTE students
enrolled at the institution. Then, I conducted a qualitative phase of interviews with library
staff member volunteers who returned the survey and expressed interest in participating
in the interview phase of the study. The interviews focused on OL processes and habits in
their libraries. The information from these interviews strengthened my understanding of
the quantitative results, and served to answer the third research question of how library
staff members in FPCUs experience OL in their libraries.
Through triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data, I created a multifaceted
picture of OL in the libraries of FPCUs. The data from the quantitative survey informed
the questions asked during the qualitative interviews. Furthermore, integration of the
quantitative and qualitative aspects of the study also occurred during data analysis.
Specifically, I compared the themes identified during the qualitative analysis through

60
coding with the statements from the PPOLQ to identify and corroborate whether the data
indicate single-loop learning or double-loop learning occurring in the libraries at FPCUs.
The mixed-methods approach allowed me to identify information about both the
level of OL taking place in libraries of FPCUs, and the OL experiences of the employees.
Researchers have focused their definitions of mixed-methods research on both the
methods themselves (e.g., a mixed-methods study is one that combines both quantitative
and qualitative approaches in the methodology; Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, & Turner, 2007),
and on the philosophies behind the approach (e.g., focusing on a multifaceted view of a
problem or situation; Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011).
I subscribe to Creswell and Plano Clark’s (2007) claim that mixed-methods
research “provides a better understanding of research problems than either [the
quantitative or qualitative] approach alone” (p. 5), and that the data collected from this
combined approach have “breadth and depth” that lead to better “understanding and
corroboration” (Johnson et al., 2007, p. 123). Because the topic I studied—OL in the
libraries of FPCUs—is not well represented in the literature, approaching the problem in
two different but mutually-substantiating ways may set a better precedent for future
researchers who explore the same issue.
Setting and Sample
The setting for this study was the LFPEI interest group of ACRL. The population
for the study was library employees in FPCUs in the United States. However, for
practical purposes, the target population was the 584 subscribers to the LFPEI electronic
mailing list at the time I conducted the study.

61
Quantitative Sequence
For the quantitative survey portion of the study, I recruited participants via
convenience sampling. Convenience sampling means that “the researcher selects
participants because they are willing and available to be studied” (Creswell, 2012, p.
145). I administered the survey online via the LFPEI electronic mailing list, and any
subscriber on that list could have opted to participate. Subscribers to the electronic
mailing list need not be official members of the interest group.
A power analysis using G*Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007) to
determine the necessary sample size indicated that based on the seven independent
variables I used for the multiple regression analysis, my target response rate would have
been 8%-18%. This means that I would have needed approximately 49 to 103 subscribers
to participate to meet the criteria of alpha = .05, and power of .8 to identify a large effect
size of .35 or medium effect size of .15, respectively. In actuality, 39 people responded to
the survey. I eliminated one of those respondents from the data because the respondent
did not work in a FPCU and therefore did not meet the selection criteria for the study.
The actual response rate was 6.5%.
In an effort to increase responses, I sent out reminder postings on the electronic
mailing list after the initial survey posting on July 11, 2017. The first reminder posting
was 2 weeks after the initial posting (July 26, 2017), and the second reminder posting
was 1 week after that—3 weeks after the initial posting (August 2, 2017). After I sent out
the second reminder email, I became concerned about the response rate for the survey. It
was clear that the current rate of responses would not allow me to reach the intended

62
sample size. Therefore, with Walden IRB approval, on August 4, 2017, I also posted the
survey invitation in the LFPEI group on Facebook. According to the tracking statistics
provided by Facebook, 20 people in the group viewed my post. However, it resulted in
only one additional survey response.
As is typical for online surveys, the landing page for the survey was an informed
consent statement. Participants were asked to agree with the statement by clicking a
button in order to begin the survey. To protect the participants’ confidentiality, I did not
ask them to identify themselves as a part of the survey, except voluntarily in order to state
their interest in participating in the follow-up qualitative interview portion of the study. In
that case, the participants were able to voluntarily disclose their email address.
The survey respondents reported various levels of experience, education, and
positions within the FPCU libraries. Table 1 lists the self-reported characteristics of
survey respondents in this study.

63
Table 1
Characteristics of Survey Respondents
Respondent characteristics

Frequency

Percent

Position/rank

Student worker
Staff/paraprofessional
Professional librarian
Professional other
Department/area supervisor
Head of the library

0
1
13
0
9
15

0
3
34
0
24
39

Highest degree attained

No college degree
Associates degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree
Doctorate degree

0
0
1
36
1

0
0
3
95
3

Do you have a MLS?

Yes
No

36
2

95
5

Total years of experience

0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
16-20 years
More than 20 years

5
10
5
5
13

13
26
13
13
34

Years at current institution

0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
16-20 years
More than 20 years

22
13
0
1
2

58
34
0
3
5

Note: N = 38.

64
Figures 1 through 5 depict the various demographics of the survey respondents in
a visual format that clarifies the makeup of the sample for this study. A typical
respondent to the survey was the head of a library with a MLS or similar degree, working
in libraries at least 11 years, but at their current institution for 5 or fewer years. However,
just as likely, a respondent was a professional librarian with a MLS or similar degree,
working in libraries 6-10 years, but at their current institution for 5 or fewer years. The
library workers at FPCUs represented in the sample were varied, though almost all
respondents reported a master’s degree as their highest degree attained, and that master’s
degree was a MLS or similar degree.

3%
39%

Staff/Paraprofessional
34%

Professional Librarian
Department or Area
Supervisor
Head of the Library

24%

Figure 1. Position or rank of survey respondents.

65

3%2%
Bachelor's Degree
Master's Degree
Doctorate Degree
95%

Figure 2. Highest degree attained by survey respondents.

5%
Yes
No

95%

Figure 3. Do survey respondents have a MLS or similar degree?

66

13%

0-5 years

34%

6-10 years
27%

11-15 years
16-20 years

13%

More than 20 years
13%

Figure 4. Total number of years survey respondents have worked in libraries.

3% 5%
0-5 years
6-10 years

34%
58%

16-20 years
More than 20 years

Figure 5. Number of years survey respondents have worked at current institutions.

67
Table 2
Characteristics of Survey Respondents’ Institutions
Institution characteristics
Student enrollment FTE

Frequency Percent
Fewer than 500
500-999
1,000-2,999
3,000-4,999
5,000-6,999
7,000-8,999
9,000-10,999
11,000 or more

9
4
6
1
3
2
0
13

24
11
16
3
8
5
0
34

Associate’s college
Baccalaureate college
Master’s college or university
Doctoral university
Special focus institutions

5
15
7
7
4

13
39
18
18
11

Yes
No

34
4

89
11

Number of library employees
FTE

Fewer than 1
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26 or more

0
15
7
8
3
0
5

0
39
18
21
8
0
13

Number of librarians FTE

Fewer than 1
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26 or more

2
15
11
4
2
1
3

5
39
29
11
5
3
8

Institutional type

Does the head of the library
have a MLS?

Note: N = 38.

68
The survey respondents were employed at FPCUs of various sizes and types.
Table 2 lists the self-reported characteristics of the institutions for the survey respondents
in this study. Figures 6 through 10 depict the various demographics of the survey
respondents’ institutions in a visual format that clarifies the makeup of the sample for this
study. A typical respondent to the survey was from a baccalaureate college with 1,000 or
fewer FTE students working in a library headed by a librarian with a MLS or similar
degree and staffed by fewer than 5 total library employees, most of them librarians.
However, just as likely, a respondent was from a master’s or doctoral university with
11,000 or more FTE students, in a library headed by a librarian with a MLS or similar
degree, and 11 or more library employees, most of them librarians. The FPCUs in the
United States represented in the sample were varied, though almost all have libraries
headed by a librarian with a MLS or similar degree.

Fewer than 500
24%
34%

500-999
1,000-2,999
3,000-4,999

10%
5%
8% 3%

16%

Figure 6. FTE student enrollment at the FPCU.

5,000-6,999
7,000-8,999
11,000 or more

69

Associate's college
11%

13%

Baccalaureate college

18%

Master's college or
university
40%

Doctoral university

18%
Special focus institutions

Figure 7. Type of institution based on Carnegie classification.

11%

Yes
No

89%

Figure 8. Does the head of the library have a MLS or similar degree?

70

13%

1-5

8%

40%

6-10
11-15
16-20

21%

26 or more
18%

Figure 9. Number of FTE library employees at the FPCU.

3%
5%

Fewer than 1

8% 5%

1-5
6-10

11%
39%

11-15
16-20

29%

21-25
26 or more

Figure 10. Number of FTE librarians employed at the FPCU.

71
Qualitative Sequence
For the qualitative interview portion of the study, my original plan was to use
purposeful, intensity sampling to select 9-12 library employee volunteers who returned
the survey and expressed interest in participating in the interview phase of the study.
Purposeful sampling means selecting the participants that would best help answer my
qualitative research question (Merriam, 2009). Intensity sampling is a type of purposeful
sampling in qualitative research that is used to “illuminate both the unusual and the
typical” (Palinkas et al., 2015, p. 535) cases so as to focus on the conventional case, but
also explore the more uncommon. I planned to base my selection of the interview
participants on their survey data, with most of the cases I chose being respondents whose
OL scores were around the mean, and including a few whose scores were outliers in
either direction.
However, as is common in qualitative studies (Merriam, 2009), it is difficult to set
a concrete number of participants ahead of time. In actuality, 10 survey respondents
indicated their willingness to participate in the interview. In an effort to reach the target
number of interviews, I contacted all 10 volunteers for interviews, six of whom
ultimately replied and participated. I sent follow-up emails to the four who did not
respond, but still received no response. Therefore, no selection was possible; the sample
was based on convenience.
The interview participants (M = 2.43, SD = 0.24) did represent both uncommon
and typical examples from the overall survey respondents (M = 2.34, SD = 0.28). The
highest OL score of the interview participants was 2.8, which was also the highest in the

72
entire survey sample and falls outside of one standard deviation from the mean of all
survey respondents as well as the from the mean of the subgroup of interview
respondents. The lowest OL score of the interview participants was 2.1, which falls just
within one standard deviation from the mean of all survey respondents, but outside of one
standard deviation from the mean of only interview participants. The remaining four
interview participants had OL scores within one standard deviation of the mean for all
survey respondents and for only the interview participants. Figure 11 shows how the
interview participants’ OL scores compared with all survey respondents’ OL scores.

Figure 11. OL score ranges of all survey respondents and interview participants only.
Based solely on OL score, the interview participants represented both the typical
(within one standard deviation) and the atypical respondents (outside of one standard
deviation in either direction). The sample of interview participants provided a
comprehensive view of how most library employees at FPCUs approach OL and how
some library employees may approach OL differently.

73
To establish a researcher-participant working relationship during the qualitative
interview phase of the study, I attempted to be as neutral as possible to the participants’
responses, avoided reacting to what they said, and did not give any indication of my
personal views (Merriam, 2009). It was also important to actively listen to what the
participant had to say so that I could better understand the participant’s point of view
without imposing my own (Lodico, Spaulding, & Voegtle, 2010). The interview
participants were not people I knew prior to the study and I had no position of authority
over them in any way. Other considerations included introducing myself to the
participants and reminding them of the confidentiality of their responses (Lodico et al.,
2010). One aspect that had the potential to affect my relationships with the participants
was that I was also a library employee in a FPCU. This may have helped me to better
understand their perspectives, but also harbored the potential risk of assuming their
experiences were like my own. I addressed this concern through developing an interview
protocol (Appendix D) with questions written in neutral, unbiased language and
adherence to the protocol questions during interviews.
To protect the participants of this study during the qualitative phase, I received
institutional review board (IRB) approval from Walden University to carry out the
research. I also created consent forms for interview participants to sign prior to the
interviews. The consent form included a description of the study, an assurance of
confidentiality, and a reminder that their participation was completely voluntary (Lodico
et al., 2010). I ensured confidentiality by personally handling all notes and recordings.
Physical notes were kept in a locked drawer, and digital recordings were kept on a

74
password-protected computer. Additionally, I assigned alphanumeric codes to each
participant and used the code instead of the participant’s name on all notes and
recordings. Participants were not asked or required to divulge the name of the institution
for which they worked, and if they voluntarily shared that information, the name of the
institution was redacted in all notes and transcripts.
Data Collection Strategies
Quantitative Sequence
In the quantitative sequence of the study, which occurred first, I administered a
quantitative survey to academic library staff members at FPCUs to measure the capacity
for OL in these libraries using Chen’s (2006) PPOLQ. I will store the raw data on a flash
drive in a locked cabinet at my home for at least 5 years following the study.
Instrumentation. I used the first 20 items of the PPOLQ (Appendix B) to
measure OL capacity, which addressed RQ1. I received permission to use this instrument
from the author (Appendix E). These items are statements, and the respondent marked
how often each statement is true for them or their library: frequently, sometimes,
seldom/never, and uncertain. The statements were designed to gauge perceptions of
communication and learning within libraries and were based in part on Crossan, Lane,
and White’s (1999) 4Is framework. In the 4Is framework, individuals, groups, and
organizations share information via four related processes: intuiting, interpreting,
integrating, and institutionalizing (Crossan et al., 1999). These four processes occurring
on the appropriate levels—intuiting and interpreting at the individual level, interpreting

75
and integrating at the group level, and integrating and institutionalizing at the
organizational level—lead to OL (Crossan et al., 1999).
Chen (2006) also used Argyris and Schön’s (1978) OL theories of single and
double loop learning to develop the questionnaire. Specifically, the statements that make
up items 1-20 of the questionnaire are largely designed to determine whether the
respondent’s library is practicing single or double loop learning, with Chen’s assessment
being that libraries with high OL capacity are using double-loop learning most of the
time, libraries with medium OL capacity use both single and double-loop learning, and
libraries with low OL capacity use single-loop learning most of the time.
The PPOLQ also contains items 21-33, but those statements were not relevant to
this study because they focus specifically on institutional evaluation (IE) and how IE
affects the OL environment (e.g., “IE caused this library to make more changes”; Chen,
2006, p. 100). IE was outside the scope of this study.
Scoring. Though Chen (2006) did not develop numerical ranges to determine a
library’s OL capacity based on a respondent’s answers to items 1-20 of the PPOLQ,
Bertram-Elliott (2015) did so in a later study. In this study, the researcher used the first
20 items in Chen’s PPOLQ to measure the OL capacity of academic libraries. To do so,
Bertram-Elliott assigned each answer choice a numerical value: 3 for frequently, 2 for
sometimes, 1 for seldom/never, and 0 for uncertain, and calculated a mean score for each
respondent. Finally, Bertram-Elliott developed the following scale to interpret OL scores:
•

0.0-0.4: Little to no OL;

•

0.5-1.4: Low OL;

76
•

1.5-2.4: Medium OL;

•

2.5-3.0: High OL (p. 151).

In my study, I used a similar approach. Items 1 and 14 in the PPOLQ were worded in
such a way that an answer of frequently would denote low OL, not high OL. For those
two items, therefore, I reversed the scoring as follows: 1 for frequently, 2 for sometimes,
3 for seldom/never, and 0 for uncertain.
Reliability and validity. Chen (2006) described the efforts undertaken to assure
the reliability and validity of the PPOLQ. Reliability for survey instruments indicates
consistency, that is, a group of people responding to the survey would produce
approximately the same responses each time over repeated attempts (Lodico et al., 2010).
Chen used a pilot test to hone the wording of the questionnaire so that the instructions
and items “made sense and expressed similar meaning to all participants” (p. 97), thereby
increasing the questionnaire’s reliability. A commonly used measure of reliability,
particularly internal consistency reliability, for research instruments is the Cronbach’s
(1951) alpha coefficient. Nunnally (1975) set the standard for Cronbach’s alpha
coefficient at 0.70, though the closer that coefficient is to 1, the more reliable the
instrument is considered to be. Bertram-Elliott (2015), who also administered the PPOLQ
online through an electronic mailing list, calculated the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for
Chen’s (2006) PPOLQ to be 0.87. For this study, I calculated the Cronbach’s alpha
coefficient for the PPOLQ to be 0.76.

77
Validity in survey research indicates whether the survey measures what it was
intended to measure, and is the most important aspect of a survey (Lodico et al., 2010).
Chen (2006) explained that to ensure the validity of the PPOLQ, he did the following:
•

had a panel of experts review the questions,

•

used similar published instruments as guidelines, and

•

held a focus group discussion to evaluate the questions.

Library demographic information. Along with the PPOLQ, I asked respondents
to answer several library demographic questions in order to collect data for the
independent variables corresponding to RQ2. Appendix C contains the full list of
questions and response choices, but some examples of information I gathered include
number of FTE librarians and number of FTE students enrolled at the institution. The
reason for gathering these data is twofold. First, Huang (2014) determined that larger
libraries had higher OL capacities than smaller libraries, so library size, the number of
library employees, may be related to OL capacity in this study as well. Second, both
Huang and Bertram-Elliott (2015) found that librarians with more years of experience
engaged in more OL activities than newer librarians, meaning that librarian experience
may be predictive of OL capacity. Another question asked how long the respondent has
worked at the current institution. Several researchers, including Carley (1992), Rao and
Argote (2006), and Lopez and Sune (2013) suggested that high employee turnover
contributes to low OL, particularly in institutions where individual knowledge is not
adequately converted to group or institutional knowledge.

78
Administration. I created the online survey—comprised of the PPOLQ and the
library demographic questions—using Google Forms online survey software and
administered the survey by sending the link, with a request to participate, in an email to
the LFPEI electronic mailing list. To complete the survey, willing participants needed to
click on the link within the email and answer questions online. This method of
administering a survey has become increasingly common in the social sciences, and
though the method has some weaknesses, researchers consider it a valid option
(Avcıoğlu, 2014). Online surveys provide benefits that are difficult to overlook, including
low cost, flexibility, access to geographically diverse and scattered populations, and
convenience (Roberts & Allen, 2015; Teo, 2013). In a study of 367 respondents who had
been randomly sorted into two groups to receive either online or paper-based surveys,
Teo (2013) found measurement equivalence between the two methods.
A known weakness of online survey administration is low response rate
(Creswell, 2012; de Leeuw, 2012; Van Selm & Jankowski, 2006), which I experienced in
this study as well. One researcher evaluated nine studies and determined that while the
average response rate for paper-based surveys was 56%, the online response rate was
only 33% (Nulty, 2008). However, the researchers in all but one of the studies Nulty
analyzed administered the paper-based survey face-to-face and the online survey
asynchronously, accounting for the large discrepancy in response-rate. In the one study
where the researcher did not administer the paper-based survey face-to-face (Watt,
Simpson, McKillop, & Nunn, 2002), there were similar response rates between the two
methods—32.6% for online and 33.3% for paper-based. Shih and Fan (2008) evaluated a

79
larger number of studies—39—in their meta-analysis and found that on average, the
response rate for mailed surveys was higher at 45% than the response rate of 34% for
online surveys. In a separate meta-analysis, Manfreda, Bosnjak, Berzelak, Haas, and
Vehovar (2008) evaluated 45 studies that compared online surveys to any other kind of
survey method, including telephone and mail, and found that response rates for online
surveys averaged 11% lower than response rates for other methods of survey
administration. Olson (2014) attributed lower response rates for online surveys partially
to “survey fatigue” (p. 93) and argued that respondents and non-respondents could differ
in significant ways, negatively affecting the results of the survey.
Despite the low response rate, my study benefited from an online survey
distributed via electronic mailing list because I was able to reach members of the target
population throughout the United States in a convenient, inexpensive, and time-efficient
way. In an effort to increase responses, I sent out reminder postings on the electronic
mailing list after the initial survey posting. The first reminder posting was 2 weeks after
the initial posting, and the second reminder posting was 1 week after that—3 weeks after
the initial posting. As an additional follow up, I also posted the survey information and
link in the LFPEI Facebook group. However, only one additional response resulted from
that tactic.
Qualitative Sequence
In the qualitative sequence of the study, which followed the quantitative phase, I
interviewed six library staff member volunteers who returned the survey from the
quantitative phase and expressed interest in participating in the interview phase of the

80
study via a question at the end of the library demographic questions in the second part of
the survey. Interested respondents provided their email address in their survey response
so I could contact them regarding the interview phase. The interviews focused on OL
processes and habits in their libraries.
Interview protocol. I produced the interview protocol (Appendix D) based on a
review of the literature identifying factors that may contribute to OL. For example,
researchers widely believe that individual learning is important to OL (Antonacopoulou,
2006; Hayes & Allinson, 1998; Kim, 1993; Senge, 1990; Simon, 1991), and therefore it
was appropriate to explore the interview participants’ individual learning practices such
as professional development opportunities and what support, if any, they receive from
their institution for those learning opportunities. Bertam-Elliott (2015) found that the best
predictor of OL capacity in academic libraries was support for professional development,
even if it was only encouragement without financial support.
Likewise, the ways in which learning is disseminated through an organization in
the form of knowledge transfer and other aspects of KM can be significant to
understanding a library employee’s experience of OL (Agarwal & Islam, 2014; Forman,
2004). Due to the volume of research surrounding leadership and OL (Manshadi et al.,
2014; Noruzy et al., 2013; Vargas, 2015), I incorporated questions about leadership into
the interviews to obtain a better understanding of the overall OL environments.
Through the interview protocol, I was able to collect sufficient data to answer my
qualitative research question (RQ3), which was: How do library staff members in FPCUs
experience OL in their libraries?

81
Procedure for interviews. My initial plan was to interview 9-12 participants.
However, only 10 survey respondents expressed their willingness to participate in the
interview phase, and of those 10, only 6 responded to my follow-up email. Each
interview was scheduled to last approximately 1 hour, though most were completed in a
shorter time frame. I did plan for the option of a second interview if an hour was not
enough time, but that proved unnecessary. Because the interview participants were
geographically scattered, I used the online telephone software, Skype, to conduct the
interviews. Seitz (2015) suggested that participants may feel more at ease with this type
of interview because they are in their own space for the interview instead of somewhere
unfamiliar.
In addition to the benefits, there are some challenges related to using Skype as an
interview conduit. Seitz (2015) coalesced the experiences of 45 university student
researchers to develop a list of obstacles and potential solutions for conducting qualitative
interviews via Skype. Potential obstacles include dropped calls, difficulty hearing, and
“loss of intimacy compared to traditional in-person interviews” (Seitz, 2015, p. 230).
However, careful planning can help remedy the majority of these obstacles, including
ensuring both the researcher and participant have a stable Internet connection and the
newest version of the software downloaded (Seitz, 2015). Though technical problems
may be more likely when complex technology like Skype is involved, even traditional
face-to-face interviews have some risk of technical issues, such as a recorder
malfunctioning (Oates, 2015). Skype has been established as a viable means of

82
conducting interviews in qualitative research (Deakin & Wakefield, 2013; Hamilton,
2014; Oates, 2015; Sullivan, 2012).
Keeping track of data. In addition to capturing audio recordings of the Skype
interviews for repeated playback and understanding, I also took notes during the
interviews. As Merriam (2009) suggested, I took notes less on the content of what the
participant said, and more on my own reactions and thoughts based on the participants’
responses. I also took notes on emerging trends I saw coming out in the interviews. I kept
a research log using the application Evernote on my smartphone. As I thought of ideas or
made connections with my data, I logged those thoughts electronically. I also transcribed
the interview recordings manually.
Triangulation. I built triangulation into the qualitative data collection and
analysis process by interviewing multiple people, allowing me to compare and contrast
their experiences and find links between multiple sources of data (Creswell, 2012). For
example, when more than one participant reported the same experience or thought, it
built credibility for that experience or thought as a trend rather than an isolated
phenomenon. I considered the themes with mentions from the most number of
participants to be the most significant in answering the qualitative research question.
Another aspect of triangulation in this study was the use of the demographic data
collected during the quantitative sequence. These data provided additional information
through the interview sequence about each participant’s library environment. The survey
data also provided a way to compare and contrast the libraries of interview participants to
triangulate with the interview data.

83
Role of the researcher. One consideration that could have affected my
relationships with the participants that I have not already addressed is that from 20132015, I held volunteer leadership roles within ACRL’s LFPEI interest group. From 20132014, I was the incoming convener, and from 2014-2015, I was the convener. These roles
provided me with some additional insight into the members of the interest group and their
experiences in their libraries. This had the potential to influence my data collection and
analysis in that those experiences helped create my perspective and preconceived
opinions on the topic of libraries in FPCUs. The first step I took in reducing this potential
bias was identifying it and being aware of it. Other strategies built into the research
design that helped minimize bias have already been discussed, including purposefully
collecting interview data from employees at libraries with varying levels of OL capacity,
triangulation, and using a carefully developed interview protocol.
Data Analysis and Results
The quantitative data collection processes resulted in the following data: an OL
score for each respondent and responses to library demographic questions. I collected
these data using an online survey. The OL scores, which represented OL capacity, helped
answer the first quantitative research question: What capacity for OL is present in
libraries at FPCUs? Along with the OL scores, the library demographic variables
contributed to the second quantitative research question: Which FPCU library
demographic variables are most strongly related to OL capacity? The qualitative data
collection processes resulted in interview recordings, transcripts, and notes. I collected

84
these data through Skype interviews. These data helped address the qualitative research
question: How do library staff in FPCUs experience OL in their libraries?
RQ1: Quantitative
The first research question I sought to answer was a quantitative research
question: What capacity for OL is present in libraries at FPCUs? To answer this question,
I calculated an OL score for each survey respondent after all responses were received and
the survey had been closed. To do so, I assigned each response choice on the PPOLQ a
numerical value: 3 for frequently, 2 for sometimes, 1 for seldom/never, and 0 for
uncertain, except in the cases of Items 1 and 14, which were reversed and therefore had
the following scoring: 1 for frequently, 2 for sometimes, 3 for seldom/never, and 0 for
uncertain. The OL score was the mean score for all the responses for each respondent. To
further analyze these data, I computed descriptive statistics for the OL scores for all
respondents, including mean, median, and standard deviation. I also determined which
category each respondent, and the respondents in aggregate, fell into based on BertramElliott’s (2015) ranges:
•

0.0-0.4: Little to no OL;

•

0.5-1.4: Low OL;

•

1.5-2.4: Medium OL;

•

2.5-3.0: High OL (p. 151).

This information helped to answer RQ1.
The mean OL score for the 38 survey respondents was 2.34, which falls into the
medium OL range based on Bertram-Elliott’s (2015) ranges. Of all the respondents, 68%

85
(n = 26) earned OL scores in the medium range, while 32% (n = 12) earned OL scores in
the high range. Descriptive statistics for OL scores are displayed in Table 3.
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for OL Scores
OL score range
Measure
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
Range
N

Medium

High

2.21
2.25
0.24
0.90
26

2.62
2.58
0.12
0.30
12

All
scores
2.34
2.35
0.28
1.25
38

In general, the answer to the first research question is that a medium capacity for OL is
present in libraries at FPCUs. According to Chen (2006) and Bertram-Elliott (2015),
scores in the high category are necessary for optimizing operations because high OL
capacity indicates consistent double-loop learning.
Bertram-Elliott’s (2015) study used the same ranges and method of calculating
OL scores as I did in this study, though the focus was on academic libraries in general,
not only libraries at FPCUs. Bertram-Elliott’s study included 15 FPCU library
respondents, 4% of the total sample, with an average OL score of 2.17. Though the score
is within the medium range, it is lower than the mean score of 2.34 for the 38 respondents
in my study, all from FPCUs.

86
RQ2: Quantitative
The second research question I sought to answer was also a quantitative research
question: Which FPCU library demographic variables are most strongly related to OL
capacity? My hypotheses were as follows:
H02: None of the library demographic variables will be significantly related to OL
capacity for libraries in FPCUs.
HA2: At least one library demographic variable will be significantly related to OL
capacity for libraries in FPCUs.
To answer this question, I conducted a multiple regression analysis to see what, if any,
relationships existed between the dependent variable (OL score) and each of the seven
independent variables. The seven independent variables were:
•

number of FTE students enrolled at the institution,

•

Carnegie classification of the institution,

•

number of FTE librarians employed at the institution,

•

whether the head of the library (director, dean, and so on) had an MLIS or
equivalent degree,

•

number of years the respondent had worked at the institution,

•

whether the respondent had an MLIS or equivalent degree, and

•

the respondent’s position.

My original plan was to include 10 independent variables, however, I left three
out of the calculations to avoid multicollinearity in the data. The three independent
variables I eliminated were:

87
•

the number of total FTE library employees at the institution,

•

the number of years the respondent has worked in libraries total, and

•

the respondent’s highest degree attained.

The survey included in Appendix C shows the possible categories for each of these
variables. I used SPSS software for the multiple regression analysis to determine whether
any of the independent variables were predictive of the dependent variable.
Assumptions. Before conducting the analysis, I checked the appropriate
assumptions about the data to ensure that a multiple regression analysis would be a good
fit for these data. OL score is a continuous variable because it is a scale for which we
know both the order of the values as well as the differences between them. OL score as
the dependent variable therefore meets the requirements of the first assumption. The
second assumption is that there are at least two independent variables and they are either
continuous or categorical. In this case, there were seven independent variables, all
categorical.
The third assumption relates to independence of observations. I used SPSS to
calculate a Durbin-Watson statistic of 2.06 for my data, which indicates independence of
residuals. The fourth assumption requires that linear relationships exist between the
dependent variable and each of the independent variables, as well as between the
dependent variable and the independent variables together. I used SPSS to create a
scatterplot of the studentized residuals against the predicted values. The scatter plot,
which is Figure 12, showed a linear relationship between the dependent variable and the
independent variables together.

88

Figure 12. Scatter plot of relationship between dependent variable and combined
independent variables.
The independent variables are all categorical, so did not need to be considered in the
assumption of linear relationships between the dependent variable and each independent
variable separately.
The fifth assumption is that the data shows homoscedasticity of residuals. This
indicates that the variance in OL score is similar across all values of the dependent
variables. I used a macro program from Daryanto (2013) called Heteroskedasticity Test
plugged into SPSS to calculate the heteroscedasticity of the residuals using the BreuschPagan test and the Koenker test. Both showed that the data has homoscedasticity. The pvalue of the Breusch-Pagan test was .102 and the significance of the Koenker test was
.119, where values above .05 indicate homoscedasticity in both cases.

89
The sixth assumption is that the data do not show multicollinearity. Though my
original plan was to include 10 independent variables, at this point I removed three to
avoid multicollinearity. I eliminated:
•

the number of total FTE library employees at the institution,

•

the number of years the respondent has worked in libraries total, and

•

the respondent’s highest degree attained.

The number of FTE library employees at the institution who are librarians is a subset of
another variable: the number of FTE library employees at the institution. Therefore, the
variables are too similar to include both in a multiple regression analysis. Likewise, the
number of years a respondent has worked at the current institution is a subset of the
respondent’s total number of years worked in libraries. Because of my interest in the
question of employee turnover, I decided to include the former rather than the latter.
Finally, all but two respondents indicated that their MLIS or equivalent degrees were
their highest attained. Therefore, I thought the results would be less meaningful than if
the question had been answered with more variety.
After eliminating three variables, the data did not show multicollinearity. Based
on computations of correlations using SPSS, none of the variables had correlations
greater than 0.7. Additionally, the collinearity statistics for the data, as calculated using
SPSS, showed that all the tolerance values were greater than 0.1 and all the VIF values
were less than 10.
The seventh assumption is that the data do not include significant outliers, highly
influential points, or high leverage points. These data include no significant outliers, as

90
evidenced by the fact that all cases are less than three standard deviations from the mean.
The data also do not include any influential points, as reflected by there being no Cook’s
distance values above 1. However, I did find high leverage points. Two cases had
leverage points that were in the dangerous zone (above .5) and 12 had leverage points
that were in the risky zone of above .2 but below .5. Because these high leverage points
did not contribute to high influence and because the high leverage points might have been
due to the presence of two dichotomous variables, I determined to note the cases with
high leverage points, but not to remove them from the analysis.
Finally, the eighth assumption required that the residuals be approximately
normally distributed. Based on the histogram in Figure 13, the data are reasonably
normally distributed.

91

Figure 13. Histogram of normal distribution of residuals of dependent variable, OL score.

Results. With the data sufficiently meeting the assumptions, I conducted a
multiple regression analysis to determine whether any of the seven independent variables
were predictive of OL scores. Table 4 shows the coefficients for each of the significant
independent variables, including significance results for those coefficients.

92
Table 4
Variables Significantly Related to OL Score
Independent variable

B

Students: 500-999

-.64

Students: 1000-2999

Beta

t

p

.25

-.70

-2.52

.024

-.49

.12

-.64

-3.93

.001

Students: 5000-6999

-.33

.15

-.31

-2.17

.046

Carnegie: Doctoral university

-.49

.15

-.67

-3.31

.005

Librarians: 26 or more

-.85

.22

-.82

-3.88

.001

.20

.09

.35

2.14

.050

Position: Head of the library

SE

The independent variable that had the most statistically significant relationship
with OL score was the number of FTE students. All three of the statistically significant
groups (500-999 students, 1000-2999 students, and 5000-6999 students) showed a
negative relationship with OL score; the pattern that emerged is that the more students
enrolled at an institution, the lower the OL score for the library. Combined with the
statistically significant finding that libraries who employed 26 or more librarians also had
a negative relationship with OL score, I concluded that larger libraries serving larger
institutions were more likely to have lower OL scores. The finding that libraries at
institutions classified as Doctoral Universities in the Carnegie classification also had a
negative relationship with OL score further supports this idea because institutions with
that classification tend to be larger research universities. Bertram-Elliott (2015) similarly
found that libraries serving fewer students and with fewer students per librarian had
higher OL scores.

93
The inverse relationship between size and OL score could be due to increased
difficulty communicating within the library when there are a larger number of employees.
Another possibility is that library employees with fewer colleagues or at smaller schools
must be more resourceful, and therefore compensate for fewer human resources with
better OL strategies, especially due to the importance of retaining institutional knowledge
when a member of a small staff leaves the institution.
Another finding that neared significance (p = .05) and should be mentioned was
that survey respondents who were the head of the library were more likely to have higher
OL scores. A possible explanation for this finding is that library directors and deans may
have a broader view of all the processes and connections at work in the library and
therefore be more likely to respond to the survey questions with full information about
their library. A professional librarian from the same library may rate their library lower
on some of the PPOLQ statements simply because the librarian is not aware of all the
strategies in place. Additionally, some of the PPOLQ statements focused on individual
practices related to OL, for example, “I give feedback to my library colleagues when they
explain their ideas to me” and “the library gives me substantial supports (e.g., finance,
time off) to professional development I undertake.” Library directors and deans may
engage in these activities more often because of the nature of their jobs, or have greater
support for professional development because of the importance of their role in the
library versus a librarian.

94
RQ3: Qualitative
The third research question I sought to answer was a qualitative research question:
How do library staff members in FPCUs experience OL in their libraries? To answer this
question, I coded textual data from interview transcripts and notes to find recurring
themes and major topics. As is common in qualitative research, data analysis took place
throughout the qualitative phase, even before all the interviews had been completed.
Creswell (2012) laid out six steps for analyzing and interpreting qualitative data:
collection, preparation, reading, initial coding, coding for description, and coding for
themes. Many of the steps were simultaneous and iterative. First, I transcribed the
interviews so that they were in text format and easier to code. I began with open coding,
which involved identifying and labeling categories. Then, I further analyzed the data by
sorting the categories into themes based on patterns and relationships.
Of the six interview participants, only two said they had heard the term
organizational learning before this study and then explained the concept correctly. Three
indicated they were unfamiliar with the term, and one indicated familiarity with the term,
but then was not able to explain it accurately. However, it was apparent through the
interviews that all the participants were familiar with the concepts involved in OL, even
when they did not know the term. In fact, the two participants who could accurately
explain OL were from libraries with OL scores of 2.45 and 2.1, falling into the medium
category, while one of the participants who had not heard the term before was from a
library with a high OL score of 2.8—the highest score in this study. From this, I

95
concluded that a knowledge of the term organizational learning and an understanding of
what OL entails are separate.
Several themes emerged early in the data collection, including a common theme
of external pressures from the larger institution making OL more difficult for the library.
Other themes included communication, decision making, and employee turnover.
Interview participants also mentioned various OL strategies they used in their libraries.
External pressures. Four of the six interview participants described institutional
problems or pressures that externally affected the OL capabilities of the library. One
interview participant described an unstable and “chaotic” institutional environment that
contributed to high turnover in library staff and inconsistent expectations for the library
as a department. The participant blamed “the external pressures of just the craziness,
utterly ridiculousness that is our culture” for an average of 100% turnover every year in
library employees, with the exception of the participant, who had been with the
institution for about 6 years.
Another participant talked about a large organizational change that completely
shifted the way the library was staffed and the work the library staff members did almost
overnight. The participant said that the administration of the institution did not consult
staff in the library, or other affected departments, before making the change, or even
warn them it was coming: “that was definitely a top of the college down decision. That
was pushed on to everybody . . . . It was this is how it’s going to be done.” The change
necessitated the library staff members to develop new procedures and organizational

96
structures, including a large reduction in the number of library staff, as well as new
strategies for communicating with one another and external departments.
A third participant commented that their “challenges tend to be within the context
of what challenges the institution is facing.” That institution grew quickly, expanding to
multiple campuses within just a few years and causing changes to the library’s staffing
models and other procedures.
Several participants mentioned pressures due to accreditation or licensing
requirements, and challenges with budgets set by the overall institutional leadership. One
participant discussed the budget issue in regard to employment at a different FPCU
previous to the current position saying that the institution’s administration would respond
“no, we can’t afford to do that because they needed to funnel budget into admissions and
recruitment" when approached to approve library initiatives.
In the first example from the library with the high turnover, the interview
participant directly attributed some of their OL practices to combatting that challenge,
specifically a robust onboarding system that incorporated a formal 6-week process with
daily tasks and assessment points:
I started [designing the onboarding process] when I first came on board and after
the past year, I guess it was a year and 3 months, I realized that I have a whole
new staff and I thought this is crazy. So that’s when I started building everything
as best as I could. And with the new turnover of staff, I would say those training
materials probably get updated or touched about every 3 months.

97
Of the three interview participants whose libraries had OL scores in the high range, two
reported significant external pressures from the larger institutional environment that made
OL more challenging. Conversely, two of the three interview participants whose libraries
had OL scores in the medium range reported little pressure of that kind, with one stating
“we’re just kind of left to our own devices.” One possibility based on these data is that
the external pressures may have helped foster OL. Knowing the challenges they faced,
the library staff members were proactively taking steps to keep their libraries as stable as
possible despite the external conditions.
Communication. All six interview participants talked about communication in
their libraries, including the difficulties surrounding communication, the benefits of it,
and the strategies they used to communicate better. One participant commented:
“communication is always a challenge and that’s part of this knowledge transfer."
Participants approached this challenge in various ways.
The staffing structures at the participants’ libraries were all unique, with many
instances of team members who worked in different physical locations. Some had library
teams that were all completely remote and online. Others had some campus-based library
staff members and some remote library staff members: “And there’s a team of online
librarians and then there’s the on-ground librarians and there’s not always good
communication between them.” Another situation was library staff working at campuses
that are geographically scattered. One of the participants I interviewed was a solo
librarian working to build the campus-based library at a brand new college. Even the one
participant who described a more traditional structure, with library colleagues working

98
down the hall from one another, also mentioned a part-time team member who worked
from home.
Again, the challenge of making a team work when the team members were in
different physical locations forced the library staff members to proactively find ways to
communicate better. One participant explained:
We found that one meeting in a week wasn’t enough so we were also finding that
every other week we would do—we call it a wake up with the library team
meeting. People are just supposed to like have their cup of coffee at their
computer while we meet. It’s as informal as our meetings get. There’s no agenda;
it’s just an opportunity every other week for us to talk about things that maybe
never made it on an agenda or that kind of thing.
Two participants used almost the exact same phrase to express the “constant
communication” between members of their library teams. Another expressed that
“communication is very key.” A third participant discussed the importance of informal
communication:
I would say [communication is] pretty high, like I said, the supervisor’s office is
just down from my cube. I’m in there, oh, probably four or five times a day just
discussing you know an interesting article I saw or a little side project I’ve been
working on and you know progress of that, whether he’s heard of anything we
need to work on, you know, to pass on to me, things of that nature. Like I said,
I’m in there like probably four or five times a day.

99
While this participant’s library team was able to achieve informal communication
through face-to-face interactions, other library teams whose members I interviewed could
achieve it through instant messaging and other technological strategies
One participant talked about the communication that happens with colleagues
outside of the library, saying “most of the activities that I perform to get my job done, to
move library services forward and be successful, involve my relationships and
interactions with people that are not within my reporting line." This statement spoke to
the interconnectivity of the library and other departments within the institution.
Whether within a library team or with others outside of the library,
communication played a significant role in OL at the libraries whose librarians took part
in the interviews. Because of the obvious link between communication and transferring
knowledge, it is a critical OL process.
Decision making. Within each interview, and based on the interview protocol
(Appendix D), I asked each participant to walk me through the process their library
undertook recently to solve a problem or challenge. Their answers highlighted the various
decision making strategies within their libraries. Overall, four of the participants
described extremely collaborative approaches to decision making. One described a more
fragmented, fend-for-yourself type of environment. The final participant described a topdown approach to decision making.
One participant described meeting with the library leaders about a concern with
the workload the librarians were expected to take on. The participant presented potential
solutions: “I certainly made sure that I brought a list of suggestions when I initially had

100
that conversation with managers.” The managers were “receptive to the feedback and
they immediately started making changes as much as they could.” Ultimately, however,
the details of those changes would “definitely be mostly collaborative,” though, “some of
it has to be top-down when bigger decisions are made” that might affect other
departments.
Another participant described the library’s collaborative process to work on
creating online subject guides: “So the lead librarian and I sat together and we kind of
hashed out the first, what we wanted the first 10 topics to be.” Another participant talked
about the process of designing the physical library space with a stakeholder who was very
involved in the process. The participant proposed a library layout based on the parameters
of the room and the goals of the space. When the stakeholder had a certain vision these
recommendations did not meet, the stakeholder “proposed changes” but also relied
heavily on the participant’s expertise with libraries. The participant explained that the
stakeholder “wanted to know what I thought.” The end result was a consensus that made
everyone happy.
A fourth participant explained a collaborative process, but with layers of
approvals:
So, for example, if we’re working on an initiative that will impact [some of the]
campuses, my direct authority with regards to the provost, so the provost
supervises the conversations, but I only really include him if there’s a problem.
But my main goal is to get buy-in from the executive directors of the . . .
campuses that are impacted, as well as the academic dean buy-in, as well as the

101
buy-in from the individual librarians making sure that initiative is carried out.
And then it goes through an academic council as well which is comprised of
basically all program directors and then also academic department leaders.
By the time the decision is approved in this scenario, many people have signed off on it,
which likely means a more successful implementation, but with a lot of initial work to get
to that point.
The fifth participant described an environment in which there was not much
support from other library colleagues. The only librarian on the campus, the participant
was connected to librarians on other campuses through email and a corporate library
group that oversaw the libraries as a whole. The participant needed to weed, or downsize,
the physical library collection on campus because the library space was decreasing in
size. The participant related the process used to reach out to colleagues for help, with
little success: “I contacted the corporate people to see if they had any recommendations.
And they didn’t really.” The participant then reached out to librarians on other campuses,
but none had experience with a massive weeding project, “so I didn’t get much help from
them.” The participant finally did research and made a plan that involved incorporating
the opinions of faculty members on the campus. The process described was one of
isolation and fragmentation between the campuses and the corporate library employees.
Finally, one of the participants spoke about the top-down process used for making
decisions for the library and team, emphasizing the participant’s own role as the person
who ultimately must take responsibility for the decision: “If it’s a library-related issue,

102
then I have to determine the most appropriate response to meet the expectations.” This
strategy may come from the heavy business environment described at the institution:
It’s all based on the business case that I make for what I want to do, how do I
want to approach a resolution of the problem. And that’s, that’s pretty much the
answer to any question in my organization is what, what do you provide for the
business, the business argument for proceeding in the way you wish to proceed,
and so that’s what I really had to be very conscious of in every decision making
situation and it does not usually that [pause] that it’s a [pause and laughs] how to
put this, um, among my team members it’s not a democratic consensus decision.
It’s, it’s generally I’m meeting the expectations of stakeholders at a higher level
and so when, sometimes when I’m presenting the solution that has to do with
business needs that are outside the realm of libraries. It’s, so I have a bigger
picture of what, what arguments are going to hold water, so to speak, with the
powers that be.
However, the participant clarified that if the decision was “internal-facing” with no
“visible impact on students or on the institution itself,” then “nobody else cares how we
do it.” In those cases, the decision-making process is more collaborative: “We talk about
it as a team, I do some assigning, I also allow a lot of flexibility with who feels that they
really want to tackle something while someone else doesn’t.” Circumstances played a
role in decision-making at this participant’s institution.

103
Collaborative decision making in which the library leader acted more as a
facilitator for a team decision may have contributed to higher OL because members of the
team were able to share their knowledge to help move the organization forward.
Employee turnover. Employee turnover was a trend I expected in the data;
however, it was less pronounced than I anticipated. Just two of the participants indicated
that turnover was high in their library. One participant had the most extreme case, with
“100% turnover . . . every year.” The participant stated that “a lot of staff are leaving the
institution on a fairly regular basis” and that turnover is “huge.” A second participant
stated: “There seems to be more turnover now. You know, in the for-profit world things
are a little shaky. And so I think there’s some insecurity.” The participant identified being
at the institution for more than 16 years, and stated “I’m turning into an old timer,”
though other librarians at the institution had been there the same amount of time or
longer.
Three of the participants reported a steady workforce in the library with “very
little turnover.” However one of those admitted that with the recent and rapid growth of
the institution, most of the library staff members were fairly new hires anyway:
Turnover is not, um, tremendous. They’re very new in their roles, so I don’t, I
can’t predict what will happen in 10 years. I don’t, I just don’t know. [pause] I
think that for right now it feels stable. It feels like people are not getting ready to
walk out the door.

104
The conversation about turnover was not applicable to the sixth participant, who less than
a year before our interview was hired as the first library employee at a new institution,
and was still the only library staff member employed.
OL strategies. Interview participants mentioned a variety of OL strategies,
largely related to communication (transferring knowledge) and professional development
(creating knowledge). Two strategies mentioned by each of the six participants were
webinars and funds from their institution for professional development. Five out of the
six interview participants mentioned conferences, a local archive, and conference calls or
regular team meetings. The full list of OL strategies mentioned in the interviews can be
found in Table 5.

105
Table 5
Mentions of OL Strategies by Interview Participants

OL strategy
Webinars
Funds for professional development
Conferences (virtual or face to face)
Local archive
Conference calls/regular team meetings
Professional membership
Reading (books, articles)
Local library email list
External courses/trainings
One on one meetings with director/supervisor
Informal conversation/instant messaging
Employee professional development plans
Local academic conference (sponsored by institution)
Training manuals/documents
Live trainings (from the library)
Vendor-sponsored training
Library strategic/long range plan
Formal onboarding process
Training tools/learning modules
Workshops
Faculty development sessions
Local/corporate learning management system
Taskforces/teams
Cross-training library employees
Project management system

No. of participants
who mentioned
6
6
5
5
5
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Webinars. All six participants mentioned participating in webinars as a strategy
for professional development. One participant said they attended “three to four
[webinars] each week,” while another summed it up as “a whole host of webinars.” One
participant specified participation in free webinars, while another emphasized library
support for participation in webinars that “have a cost” or “fee associated to it.” Some

106
named specific sources for the webinars, namely the National Library of Medicine, the
Medical Library Association, the Association of College & Research Libraries, and
“vendors” like ProQuest or EBSCO.
Webinars, especially free webinars, are likely the simplest and most convenient
way for library staff members to gain new knowledge. They are accessible, ubiquitous,
and are available on a variety of topics. Library staff members could create new
knowledge for their organizations by learning through these webinars. If they also took
the step of sharing what they have learned with other members of their libraries, they
further supported OL in that transfer of knowledge.
Funds for professional development. While each participant said they received
some sort of financial support from their institution for professional development, the
extent of that support differed. One said that the institution would pay for professional
organization membership, but not for conferences, workshops, or other professional
development sessions. Another stated that funding was variable and depended on the
year’s budget:
It depends on the institutional budget for the year. Last year was a bad one for my
department in that all of our travel funding was cut. So for the last year, I paid for
three conferences out of my own pocket. And I felt like that was absolutely
critical.
The participant reported that through the current year’s library budget, the administration
did allow for conference attendance with institutional funding.

107
However, others indicated steady financial support for these types of activities,
citing professional memberships, conferences, workshops, books, and courses all paid for
through the institution. One participant shared thoughts on why the institution might be
so supportive:
They’ve been very supportive and open because, and I hate to say it this way, but
they are not familiar of how libraries work, what needs to get done in order to
make it happen, and so whatever I need to do that would [pause] make it easier
for me to do my job, they’ve been very supportive of.
The participant stated that the institutional leaders had been reasonable and open to
funding professional development opportunities for library employees.
Conferences. Five of the six participants mentioned attending conferences as an
OL strategy. Some specified face-to-face conferences, while others named virtual
conferences. One participant explained how the process of library employees attending
conferences worked at the school:
They can pursue additional funding for service training, additional money for
conferences and then bring back those best practices so that we can actually work
as a strategic organizational unit and support all of our programs and campuses
rather than the piecemeal that we’ve been doing as individual campuses pop up.
Participants mentioned specific conferences like the ACRL Conference, the Medical
Library Association Annual Meeting, the annual Charleston Library Conference, Library
2.0, Digital Shift, Forward Focus, and several state library association conferences. One
participant stated:

108
So we do have a professional development budget to attend library conferences.
But what’s nice is, you know, I can also, I’ll also be attending a nursing
conference as well. So really I’ve also attended instructional design conferences.
So by no means does it have to be related to my master’s degree in that sense. So
they’re very supportive in that sense.
The participant explained not needing to limit attendance to library-specific conferences,
as long as the focus of the conference was relevant to work responsibilities.
Another participant, who worked as a solo librarian at a newly-founded college
described transferring knowledge from the conference to others at the institution who
were not directly involved with the library:
I always give them like a little write up, you know, of, of, you know, just kind of
little points and then how the content that I learned, how I can apply it here at the
institution, and it’s—what’s interesting is that this is not something that they
asked me for, it’s just something that I give them. And they’ve been like oh my
gosh, I can’t believe that this is so, you know, that they’re always like really
pleasantly surprised.
Others also detailed sharing highlights and notes from conferences at library team
meetings, or in the library’s local archive of documents.
Local archive. Five of the six participants mentioned using a local archive in
which to store documents or other shared resources for library employees. In some cases,
this was a local intranet site. Others mentioned the software SharePoint from Microsoft,
which is typically included in the Microsoft Office suite many companies license.

109
Another participant talked about plans to implement an institutional repository that would
be used institution-wide, but would include an area specifically for library employees and
the resources they need. These local archives are accessible, digital spaces that library
teams use to store training documents or other sources of knowledge. They are a strategy
for retaining knowledge within the organization.
Team meetings. Five of the six participants reported meeting with the library
team regularly and consistently. Often these were weekly meetings that took place by
teleconference or via online meeting tools. Several cited these team meetings as the
forum during which library team members could share what they learned at a recent
conference, webinar, or other training. Such regular meetings were an effective strategy
for transferring knowledge within the library, especially when team members were
encouraged to share their knowledge, rather than passively listening to a director or other
team leader talk.
Integration of Quantitative and Qualitative Data and Findings
This study used the sequential explanatory method; the qualitative phase of
research followed the quantitative phase and helped to explain the quantitative results in
more depth (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). In this type of study, integration of the
quantitative and qualitative data and findings happens only in a discussion of the ways
the results of each phase are connected. I will discuss in what ways the qualitative results
help explain the quantitative results. Both sets of findings were integrated to reach
conclusions about OL in the libraries at FPCUs.

110
OL strategies. As indicated, interview participants mentioned a variety of OL
strategies in use at their libraries. Table 6 details the number of OL strategies mentioned
compared with the OL score of the participant’s library.
Table 6
OL Scores and Strategies Mentioned by Participant

OL score

OL score range

No. of OL strategies
mentioned

2.10
2.25
2.45
2.50
2.50
2.80

Medium
Medium
Medium
High
High
High

11
10
16
14
7
8

The number of OL strategies mentioned does not have a linear relationship with
the OL score. This could be due to the nature of the interviews. I did not ask participants
to name all the OL strategies their institutions employed, but simply counted each time a
participant happened to mention a specific strategy. Therefore, the strategies the
participants named cannot be assumed to be an exhaustive list of all OL strategies the
institution used.
External pressures. Though interview participants described external pressures
that affected their libraries, the PPOLQ results told a different story. Item 17 on the
PPOLQ is “This library develops new routines because the library reflects on itself, not
because of external pressures.” Overall, 42.1% of survey respondents answered
Frequently, indicating that external pressures are not having a large effect on OL; 55.3%
answered Sometimes and just one respondent answered Seldom/Never. The numbers are

111
even more striking when only the interview participants are taken into account: 66.7%
answered Frequently and 33.3% answered Sometimes. Contrasted with the findings in the
interviews, this may indicate that survey respondents felt more in control of their library’s
progress than they actually were.
Funds for professional development. One of the PPOLQ items included in the
survey was “The library gives me substantial supports (e.g., finance, time off) to
professional development I undertake.” Table 7 outlines the responses to that survey
question. The average score for that item was low, 1.95, when all responses are taken into
consideration; the mean for only the interview participants was slightly lower at 1.83.
Table 7
Responses for the Supports for Professional Development Survey Question
Group

Mean

Median

Frequently Sometimes Seldom/never Uncertain

All survey
respondents

1.95

2

36.8%

23.7%

29.0%

7.9%

Interview
participants

1.83

2

50.0%

0.0%

33.3%

16.7%

However, the interview participants all described some form of financial support for
professional development. The apparent dissonance between the survey results and the
interviews may indicate that the library employees do not consider the support they
receive to be substantial or sufficient.
OL scores. The OL scores for all survey respondents versus the subgroups of
interview participants provided further information about how the two groups were

112
related. Table 8 shows the descriptive statistics for each group. Mean OL scores for both
groups indicated OL capacity in the medium range for both groups.
Table 8
Descriptive Statistics for OL Scores
Measure
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
Range
N

All responses

Interview participants

2.34
2.35
0.28
1.25
38

2.43
2.48
0.24
0.70
6

Though the interview participants were fairly representative of the total group
studied based on the descriptive statistics, they were from institutions with slightly higher
OL scores than the overall survey respondents. The qualitative data, therefore, may not
provide as clear a picture of libraries with lower capacities for OL.
Validity and Trustworthiness
The key to valid and trustworthy findings is valid and reliable instruments. I
previously discussed the reliability and validity of the PPOLQ, but in the qualitative
phase of my study, I was the instrument through which data were collected. According to
Merriam (2009), “ensuring validity and reliability in qualitative research involves
conducting the investigation in an ethical manner” (p. 209). One way to do so is by using
member checks, which involves getting feedback from the participants on the emerging
findings: “participants should be able to recognize their experience in your interpretation
or suggest some fine-tuning to better capture their perspectives” (Merriam, 2009, p. 217).
No interview participants in this study modified content during a member check.

113
Another tactic is to spend enough time gathering data until you hear the same
experiences over and over again—a strategy called “adequate engagement in data
collection” (Merriam, 2009, p. 219). Though I was limited in the number of interviews I
conducted, the data I gathered was sufficient to see trends in experiences. Along with this
method, it is a good idea to actively seek data that differs from the norm, which was
accomplished with the interview participants in this study.
Conclusion
Through this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study, I assessed and
explored OL in FPCUs in the United States. In the first phase of the study, I administered
a quantitative survey to academic library staff members at FPCUs to measure the
capacity for OL in these libraries using Chen’s (2006) PPOLQ. The survey also included
library demographic questions. The data from the quantitative phase of the study helped
answer my first two research questions: what capacity for OL is present in libraries at
FPCUs, and which FPCU library demographic variables are most strongly related to OL
capacity. I calculated OL scores for each of the 38 respondents. I also calculated a mean
OL score for all respondents and concluded that a medium level of OL capacity exists in
libraries at FPCUs in the United States.
I then used those scores and the responses to the library demographic questions to
conduct a multiple regression analysis to determine what, if any, relationships existed
between the dependent variable (OL score) and each of the independent variables (library
demographic variables). I found that the independent variable that had the most
statistically significant relationship with OL score was the number of FTE students—the

114
more students enrolled at an institution, the lower the OL score for the library. I
concluded that larger libraries serving larger institutions were more likely to have lower
OL scores.
In the qualitative phase of the study, which followed the quantitative phase, I
interviewed six library participants who returned the survey from the quantitative phase
and expressed interest in participating in the interview phase of the study. The interviews
focused on OL processes and habits in their libraries. The data from the qualitative phase
of the study helped me answer my third research question: how do library staff members
in FPCUs experience OL in their libraries. Through coding interview transcripts and
notes, I identified several recurring themes relating to OL including the challenge of
external pressures and the importance of communication.
Finally, to integrate the two research phases, I discussed the ways the qualitative
results helped explain the quantitative results. Specifically, links between the results
related to external pressures indicated that library employees in FPCUs may
underestimate the effect external pressures from within their institutions actually have on
their library’s practices. Also, combining the two types of data clarified that while library
employees in FPCUs often receive financial support for professional development
opportunities, it may not be what they consider substantial or sufficient.

115
Section 3: The Project
Based on the findings of my study, I wrote a policy paper. Specifically, this paper
is a training manual that explains OL and recommends strategies for library employees in
FPCUs to foster OL in their environments (Appendix A). I plan to disseminate the
manual by publishing it open access via an institutional repository, or a site like
Education Resources Information Center (ERIC). I would then send an email to the
LFPEI electronic mailing list giving information about the publication, including a link to
access it. It would also come up in online searches for information about OL and FPCUs
because of being indexed in an institutional repository and ERIC.
My goals for this manual include educating library employees in FPCUs about
OL, helping them implement OL strategies in their libraries, and helping them overcome
common challenges to OL. The project has potential to expand into more, such as a
conference presentation, a published article, a workshop, or a series of webinars.
Section 3 includes the rationale for this project type, a review of the literature
relevant to policy or white papers, a detailed description of the project, a plan for
evaluating the project, and possible social change implications resulting from the project.
Rationale
A policy paper was the most appropriate option based on the findings from my
study. An evaluation report would not have been appropriate because this was not an
evaluation study. A curriculum plan also was not appropriate because this study was not
related to a particular curriculum and did not focus on students in a course. Finally, a
professional development or training curriculum and materials would have been a second

116
choice, but it would not have been as useful a project for the population—library workers
in FPCUs—as a position paper or manual for several reasons. For one, a professional
development project requires planning for 3 full days of training. The population of
library workers for this study are geographically distributed throughout the United States,
not in one physical location. While it would be possible to conduct 3 days of training in
an online venue, it might be difficult to engage participants for that time period online
with no meaningful incentives provided. Additionally, many of the respondents in the
sample were from libraries with few staff members; some were solo librarians, which
would make it difficult for them to attend and give their full attention to a 3-day online
workshop. The timing would have to be just right—during a semester break, for example.
But that would be difficult, too, because not all institutions have concurrent breaks.
A freely distributed online manual, on the other hand, would work well for this
population. The library staff members would be able to read it at their own pace, stopping
when they need to assist a library user, and coming back to it without having missed
anything. Through an online repository and electronic mailing lists, the manual could be
distributed widely to library workers in FPCUs, and other types of institutions, across the
country, and even to library workers in other countries working in similar environments.
Learning about OL, including practical strategies for fostering OL, can help library staff
members at FPCUs strengthen their libraries to more effectively support student learning.
A manual would also add to the body of published knowledge about libraries in FPCUs,
helping organizations like the LFPEI interest group better understand the context of

117
library staff members in these institutions and better support them and their leaders,
which may lead to improved educational services for students at these institutions.
Review of the Literature
Whereas in the literature review in Section 1, I focused on OL and related topics
within the literature, which was important for both the creation of the study as well as the
content for the project, in the literature review presented here I focus on the genre used
for the project: a position paper. Several phrases potentially described the format of the
project: position paper, white paper, policy paper, policy recommendation, training
manual, and how-to manual.
In the review of the literature, I searched multidisciplinary databases such as
Academic Search Complete, Expanded Academic ASAP, and ProQuest Central. I created
search strings based on combinations of the following terms: policy recommendation,
white paper, how-to manual, policy paper, position paper, training manual, professional
organization, professional association, create, writing, genre, and format. Predictably,
when limiting to peer-reviewed scholarly sources, these search strings returned examples
of this publication type far more often than information about this publication type. I used
additional strategies such as citation indexing and citation mining to discover additional
sources. Finally, I expanded my search to include websites and other non-scholarly
sources because of the limited academic literature on the topic. I identified saturation at
the point that the same several publications were appearing over and over again in search
results as the only relevant items in the list of results.

118
Terminology
First, a disambiguation of terms is needed. The term white paper denotes a broad
genre that has under its umbrella a number of more specific document types. McPherson
(2010) noted that documents called white papers are present in a variety of fields and
play a variety of roles: “the white paper has simply become a catch-all term for a
document that defies any more precise description” (p. 9). Pershing (2015) defined a
white paper as “a form of an essay that uses facts and logic in a persuasive way to
recommend and promote a solution to a particular problem” (p. 2). Powell (2012) added
that white papers are “strategically crafted to marshal support for an idea” (p. 97). Three
potential goals of a white paper are to “provide useful ideas and information for readers
to use in understanding issues, to solve a particular problem, or to do their jobs better”
(Pershing, 2015, p. 2). These are all objectives that I had for the project described in this
section.
McPherson (2010) concluded that white paper as a genre is “too general to
describe without subcategories” (p. 9). One subcategory is a marketing white paper,
which is “a document that describes a new or improved technology in order to generate
interest in—and promote sales of—that technology” (Malone & Wright, 2018, p. 114).
The marketing white paper was not relevant to this project, though some style and
formatting elements proved useful. Technical white papers are “used to present technical
material to a nontechnical audience” (Willerton, 2013, p. 106), explaining new
technologies and trends to a broad audience. A government white paper is a document
that relates to public policy and typically asserts a position on a policy-related topic

119
(Malone & Wright, 2018). Government white papers may also “be intended to educate
and to invite response” (Lumby & Muijs, 2014, p. 523). While the site for this project is
not a government agency (it is an interest group that is part of a professional
organization), some of the same goals apply here as in government white papers.
Powell (2012) explained that a position paper is a less technical term for a white
paper and used the terms interchangeably. According to Doyle (2013), a policy
recommendation or policy paper is “simply written policy advice prepared for some
group that has the authority to make decisions” (para. 1). Though the terminology is
different, a policy recommendation essentially serves the same purpose as a government
white paper. A training manual or how-to manual is a document that acts as the primary
source of information, rather than as a complement to live sessions with a trainer, in an
educational context (Lanigan, 2010). Because one potential white paper topic, according
to Bly (2010), is “best practices in a specific industry or discipline” (p. 38), training
manuals can be considered a type of white paper or position paper.
Organization and Content
Mattern (2013) emphasized that white papers are formatted in a variety of ways
and there is no one correct way to write one. According to Naidoo and Campbell (2014),
it is important to begin a white paper by describing the problem at hand before
proceeding to outline the solution. Graham (2017) outlined that the content of white
papers should be “educational, practical and useful” (“If there’s no standards,” para. 3).
Campbell and Naidoo (2017) stressed that the design of the white paper should “help
readers navigate the content” (p. 99). For training manuals, Lanigan (2010) recommended

120
dividing content into logical sections, with short paragraphs and transitions between
paragraphs and sections. Sakamuro, Stolley, and Hyde (2018) suggested section headings
that facilitate a reader scanning the document quickly. In support of this advice, Graham
maintained that white paper readers tend to scan and skip around rather than reading
cover to cover.
The title of the white paper is also important. Mattern (2013) stressed an
informational title over an attention-grabbing one, but recommended including both
elements when possible. While marketing white papers may or may not have a title page
(Mattern, 2013), Lanigan (2010) suggested that training manuals should have a title page,
a publisher and copyright page, and a table of contents page, similar to the formatting of a
book. Graham (2017) recommended including an introduction or executive summary at
the beginning.
A white paper should be written in a scholarly voice, avoiding humor or other
informal conventions (Stelzner, 2007). Writing for white papers should be efficient and
concise (Doyle, 2013), highlighting the relevance of the content to the intended audience
and avoiding “wasting the reader’s time” (Powell, 2012, p. 99). This starts with
identifying and understanding the intended audience (Biswas & Paczynska, 2015).
Language should be appropriate to the audience and clear, avoiding jargon (Lanigan,
2010; Naidoo & Campbell, 2014) and employing a “crisp authoritative tone” (Powell,
2012, p. 100). Lanigan (2010) recommended active voice over passive voice to help draw
readers in. Additionally, white papers should employ secondary research in addition to

121
original research, and the sources should be cited (Biswas & Paczynska, 2015; Campbell
& Naidoo, 2017; Naidoo & Campbell, 2014; Sakamuro, Stolley, & Hyde, 2018).
White papers can use images and graphics to support the text, as long as that use
is not gratuitous (Campbell & Naidoo, 2017; Lanigan, 2010; Naidoo & Campbell, 2014).
Powell (2012) suggested that not all white papers used images, but recommended doing
so because images facilitate the application of the paper to an online platform. Sakamuro
et al. (2018) stated that images or other graphics like charts and graphs “deepen the
reader’s understanding and make the white paper more appealing and persuasive” (para.
8). Additionally, Powell recommended “a polished layout” (p. 100) and stressed the
importance of visual design. Lanigan (2010) further suggested the use of white space and
bulleted lists in breaking up text and improving the visual appeal of the document.
Lanigan suggested conducting usability testing for training manuals by selecting several
people who are part of or similar to the intended audience and soliciting their feedback.
Application
A topic appearing throughout the academic literature (e.g., Byman & Kroenig,
2016; Newman, Cherney, & Head, 2016) is the inherent challenge of bridging the gap
between academic or scientific research results and education for practitioners who could
actually create change based on that evidence. Concise, clear, and relatively short
writings like white papers are an oft-mentioned solution (Cairney, Oliver, &Wellstead,
2016; Kon, 2016; Newman et al., 2016).
In the case of government white papers and policy recommendations, Newman et
al. (2016) sought to determine the degree policymakers in Australia actually used

122
academic research to inform decisions. They found that a high percentage of public
servants in Australia used academic research databases and reported using the academic
research they accessed as sources in their own writings (Newman et al., 2016). However,
whether that research ultimately influenced policy decisions was unclear. Additionally, in
their systematic review that included studies from multiple countries and policy topics,
Oliver, Innvar, Lorenc, Woodman, and Thomas (2014) found that the availability of and
access to academic research was a barrier to the use of evidence in policymaking.
Newman et al. recommended that formatting the results and implications of research into
summaries or other easily digestible forms may facilitate the translation of academic
research to practical application. These findings provide good advice not only for
researchers seeking to influence public policy, but also for researchers hoping to address
gaps in practice and have their findings influence practice in any context.
Similarly, Kon (2016) investigated the degree to which hospitals and their
employees applied professional organization policy statements to their own local
procedures. Kon found that clinicians did rely on these policy statements as a means to
save time and provide evidence-based guidance. Again, practitioners may not have the
time or expertise to conduct or compile the research on their own, but they are willing to
implement findings that have been presented to them in an accessible summary format,
such as policy statements. Cairney et al. (2016) also noted the importance of concise
documents like white papers in the dissemination of actionable research results in their
suggestion to scientists to combine evidence and persuasion to strategically package
findings with policymakers in mind.

123
Finally, Byman and Kroenig (2016), who subtitled their article on bridging the
gap between research and policy decisions “A How To Manual,” advised academics to
“produce actionable findings and recommendations” (p. 291). They further recommended
“writing short, spin-off pieces for nonacademic outlets with the policy implications
clearly spelled out” (Byman & Kroenig, 2016, p. 291). These pieces should avoid jargon,
the use of which excludes readers who may not be experts in the field. As Byman and
Kroenig explained: “Policymakers need to know what specifically they should do
differently on Monday morning and authors need to make the importance of their
argument immediately obvious to busy policymakers” (p. 310). These points speak to the
significance of providing specific strategies and how to implement them, as well as
writing in clear and accessible prose. Communication is the goal, not obfuscation.
Another aspect to consider is the ease with which the target audience can find the
white paper. Juricek (2009) identified white papers as grey literature, a phrase that
denotes information published outside of commercial publishing entities, such as
publications from businesses, professional organizations, and government agencies.
Though white papers are sometimes published in traditional academic journals, often they
are only available on the website of the sponsoring organization. This means that white
papers can be difficult to find through library databases, and also require additional
scrutiny on the part of the reader to identify bias and assess reliability (Juricek, 2009).
With librarians and other library employees as the audience for the white paper presented
with this study, it is important to note this limitation and create strategies to overcome it.
For example, indexing the manual in an institutional repository and in ERIC will make it

124
more findable for librarians. Both avenues are often used to increase the discoverability
of grey literature like white papers (Ferreras-Fernández, García-Peñalvo, & Merlo-Vega,
2015).
Project Description
Based on the findings of my study, I wrote a policy paper, specifically a training
manual that explains OL and recommends strategies for library employees in FPCUs to
foster OL in their environments. The basic outline of the manual is:
1. What is organizational learning?
2. Why is organizational learning important?
3. Factors that contribute to organizational learning (from the literature and my
data)
4. Challenges to organizational learning and how to overcome them
5. Strategies for organizational learning (including examples of how to implement
the strategies, from the literature and my data)
6. Promoting organizational learning when you’re not in charge
7. Further reading/resources
The resources I needed to complete this manual were few. First, the results from
my study, as well as evidence from the literature, comprised the base content for the
manual. I had already gathered this information in previous parts of the doctoral study
process. I found that I needed some additional evidence from the literature and searched
to find those missing pieces. I also needed word processing software, to which I already

125
had access. The review of the literature I performed about white papers provided advice
and guidelines for the writing and formatting of the manual, which I incorporated.
The implementation plan has several points, which will begin soon after conferral
of my doctorate degree. I plan to submit the manual for inclusion in two online
repositories: the Walden University ScholarWorks institutional repository
(http://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/) and ERIC (https://eric.ed.gov/). To do this, the first
step will be to convert the manual into PDF format, taking into account any submission
requirements of the repositories. The Walden University institutional repository called
ScholarWorks accepts submissions of work produced by Walden alumni (Walden
University, n.d.). These works are available open access to the public.
ERIC’s submission guidelines are clearly and publicly delineated. ERIC accepts
submissions that are education research, including “individual papers, briefs, reports, or
books” (United States Department of Education, n.d.a, “Allowable Content,” para. 3).
ERIC’s online submission guidelines require that the PDF is 508-compliant (United
States Department of Education, n.d.a), which means that the PDF adheres to the U.S.
Department of Health & Human Services (2018) accessibility guidelines. These
guidelines require the appropriate metadata to be set in the PDF file (document title,
language, and so on), the use of bookmarks for documents longer than nine pages,
hyperlinks to be clear and accessible, correct tagging for lists and headings, and several
other points related to images, tables, and other elements of the document (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2018). ERIC also requires that PDF
submissions include an abstract and cover page (United States Department of Education,

126
n.d.a). Once accepted, ERIC will add the manual to their collection within 30 days
(United States Department of Education, n.d.b). Like with ScholarWorks, submissions to
ERIC are open access.
Once the manual is live on either site, I plan to send an email to the LFPEI
electronic mailing list giving information about the publication and including a link to
access the manual. That link will be to whichever repository has the manual live first. I
will also post the same information and link to the LFPEI Facebook group page for
further dissemination. In addition to those plans for sharing the link to the open access
manual with the target audience, library employees in FPCUs, the manual will also be
discoverable through its indexing in both ScholarWorks and ERIC. ScholarWorks is part
of the larger Digital Commons network, the content of which is findable through search
engine results and through the Digital Commons Network database
(https://network.bepress.com/). Publications indexed in ERIC are likewise findable
through search engines, as well as through library databases because many academic
libraries provide access to ERIC, either through the free, public site, or through the ERIC
dataset commercially sold to libraries through EBSCO (2018).
To help the manual be more findable, metadata is crucial (Gallop, 2017). This
includes an informative title, one that includes many of the relevant key words that
people looking for information on libraries in FPCUs might use in a search. It also
includes assigning the manual key words or subject terms within the repositories.
Appropriate key words and phrases to list for the manual in Appendix A are
organizational learning, academic libraries, and for-profit colleges and universities.

127
I do not anticipate barriers to this implementation plan, as it is fairly
straightforward. However, a potential barrier could be if the manual is not accepted for
inclusion in one of the repositories. I do not foresee this being an issue because the
manual does meet the stated guidelines for inclusion for both platforms. As long as it is
accepted for inclusion in one or the other, the implementation plan will be on track. I am
opting to submit to both repositories for greater discoverability, but inclusion is just one
of the two would also be acceptable.
From there, I may be able to develop journal articles, webinars, conference
presentations, or other opportunities to share the manual content with library employees
in FPCUs. Librarians in other types of institutions, including traditional colleges and
universities, and public libraries, might also benefit from the suggestions, though would
need to modify the advice slightly to better fit their institutions. I am particularly
interested in the possibility of developing a webinar or webinar series because the results
of my study indicated that webinars are a common method for professional development
for library employees in FPCUs.
Project Evaluation Plan
Prior to publication, I plan to have several other librarians review the content of
the manual, as Lanigan (2010) recommended. This will help ensure the writing is clear
and the suggestions useful for the intended audience. I also will include contact
information within the manual inviting responses, suggestions, or questions from readers.
The nature of this project, a freely available online manual, lends itself well to an
outcomes-based evaluation. Suggested analytics for evaluating the effectiveness of a

128
white paper include number of downloads and social shares (Scripted, 2014). The number
of downloads is a common impact metric for documents in online institutional
repositories (Bruns & Inefuku, 2016; Obrien et al., 2016), along with altmetrics like
social media posts and shares (Erdt, Nagarajan, Sin, & Theng, 2016; Holmberg, Haustein,
& Beucke, 2016). These numbers show how widely the white paper has been distributed,
which is also the overall goal of this evaluation plan.
While I would want to track these numbers over time, the most meaningful
numbers would be those showing the number of downloads immediately following the
dissemination of the link through the LFPEI electronic mailing list. Downloads in the 2
weeks following the email would effectively show how many subscribers to the
electronic mailing list saw the email and found it relevant to themselves. I am using 2
weeks because the LFPEI electronic mailing list has a digest option that sends new posts
to subscribers once a week. Subscribers who opt for the digest emails may not see the
email with the link to the manual for a week or more after I send it.
An additional, but less concrete, measure includes overall interest in the
publication. This interest may manifest itself through discussion on the electronic mailing
list, invitations from LFPEI leaders to present at upcoming meetings, or invitations from
ACRL or LFPEI to hold webinars about OL for libraries. These secondary outcomes
relate to the key stakeholders for this project, the members and leaders of ACRL’s LFPEI
interest group.

129
Project Implications
Through online repositories and electronic mailing lists, the manual could be
distributed widely to library workers in FPCUs across the country, and to library workers
in other countries working in similar environments. Learning about OL, including
practical strategies for fostering OL, may help library staff members at FPCUs strengthen
their libraries to more effectively support student learning. An OL culture has been found
to contribute to organizational performance, both in the business world (García-Morales,
Jiménez-Barrionuevo, & Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez, 2012; Jain & Moreno, 2015), and
specifically in academic libraries (Yu & Chen, 2012). More knowledge about the
processes involved in OL in libraries at FPCUs may lead to higher levels of OL in these
libraries and therefore, better performance and improved services for library users.
Because academic libraries contribute to student engagement (Soria, Fransen, &
Nackerud, 2017), student learning (Pan, Ferrer-Vinent, & Bruehl, 2014), academic
performance (Allison, 2015; Kot & Jones, 2015), and retention (Eng & Stadler, 2015;
Mezick, 2015; Soria, Fransen, & Nackerud, 2013), the effects of improved library
services for the students who attend FPCUs may be positive and long lasting.
The manual will also add to the body of published knowledge about libraries in
FPCUs, helping organizations like the LFPEI interest group better understand the context
of library staff members in these institutions, better support them and their leaders, and
may lead to improved educational services for students at these institutions. More
knowledge about OL and its implications could lead to positive social change through
libraries being better able to contribute to student learning and success. In turn, the

130
libraries would be more likely to grow and develop, becoming more effective, positively
influencing the ever-increasing populations of students who attend FPCUs.
Conclusion
In Section 3, I discussed the project I undertook based on the findings of my
study: a policy paper, specifically a training manual that explains OL and recommends
strategies for library employees in FPCUs to foster OL in their environments. I shared my
plan for disseminating the manual through Walden’s ScholarWorks, ERIC, and an email
with a link to the LFPEI electronic mailing list. The goals of the manual include
educating library employees in FPCUs about OL, helping them implement OL strategies
in their libraries, and helping them overcome common challenges to OL. Section 3
included the rationale for the project type, a review of the literature relevant to policy or
white papers, a detailed description of the project, a plan for evaluating the project, and
possible social change implications resulting from the project.

131
Section 4: Reflections and Conclusions
The research study I undertook and presented in Sections 1 and 2 informed the
project described in Section 3. In Section 4, I will offer final reflections and conclusions
on the research, the project, and the processes involved. I will discuss the strengths and
limitations of the project, offer recommendations for possible alternative approaches,
reflect on scholarship, project development, leadership, and change, reflect on the
importance of the overall work, and offer implications, applications, and directions for
future research about OL in the libraries of FPCUs.
Project Strengths and Limitations
The project based on my study, a manual entitled Organizational Learning for
Libraries at For-Profit Colleges and Universities, has both strengths and limitations in
addressing the problem of a gap in knowledge and practice relating to libraries at FPCUs.
The first strength is that it provides concise, action-oriented information that leaders and
other employees at FPCU libraries can immediately apply in their own organizations.
Findings from the literature showed that to translate research into practice, research needs
to be communicated to policymakers or other relevant leaders and stakeholders in concise
formats. Cairney et al. (2016), Kon (2016), and Newman et al. (2016) all recommended
that researchers communicate their findings in easily digestible formats like policy
statements and summaries. Byman and Kroenig (2016) further emphasized that these
writings should avoid jargon and make specific recommendations for action. I followed
these recommendations when creating the manual, so I anticipate that it will be effective
in helping library employees make concrete changes in their organizations.

132
A second strength is that the manual will be widely and freely available. In their
study of 125 PhD theses, Ferreras-Fernández, García-Peñalvo, Merlo-Vega, and MartínRodero (2016) found that open access publishing increased visibility and use of those
theses. Theses, like white papers, are considered grey literature (Juricek, 2009), which are
typically more difficult to find and access through traditional means. Hua, Sun, Walsh,
Glenny, and Worthington (2017) studied 912 journal articles in the field of oncology and
found that open access articles were cited 1.24 times more often than non-open-access
articles. Mikki (2017) conducted a similar study, but focused on the scholarly input of the
country of Norway in particular. Mikki found that open access articles received twice as
many citations on average as non-open-access articles. In a broader, larger-scale study,
Piwowar et al. (2018) examined 300,000 articles from various disciplines and countries
and found that open access articles received 18% more citations than average.
Woszczynski and Whitman (2016) likewise argued in favor of the potential benefits of
open access, including the wider availability of knowledge. The evidence from the
literature supported the idea that scholarly information, even grey literature, published
through open access means has the potential to be more visible and used more widely
than information published in the traditional model behind pay walls. Making the manual
an open access publication is a strength in this project because doing so contributes to
greater visibility.
One limitation of the manual is that while it is straightforward and useful to
measure its dissemination as described in Section 3, it is much more difficult to measure
its effectiveness and whether or not library employees in FPCUs are actually applying its

133
strategies to their work. I could do a follow-up study several years from now to see if the
OL scores for libraries in FPCUs have increased, but there would be no way to attribute
any change in average score to the manual as there are too many other factors involved.
Recommendations for Alternative Approaches
Though I anticipate that the manual I wrote and will publish will be a valuable
contribution toward solving the problem of a gap in knowledge and practice relating to
libraries at FPCUs, other solutions could also be effective. As the results of the study
indicated, library employees at FPCUs often relied on webinars and attendance at
conferences for their professional development. Adapting the same information I
included in the manual into a webinar or series of webinars could, therefore, be an
advantageous alternative. In this alternative, each webinar would be 1 hour long, with a
webinar in the series held for 3 or 4 consecutive weeks on the same day of the week and
at the same time. The webinar series should be offered free of charge because although
some interview participants indicated their participation in fee-based webinars, others
specified that only free webinars were realistic options for them due to funding
constraints. The webinars could be sponsored by ACRL’s LFPEI interest group. A
limitation of this alternative is that unless the webinars were recorded and the recordings
made publicly available, the potential reach of the webinars would not be as wide as with
the published manual.
A presentation or workshop as a part of a larger conference could also be a good
alternative to a published manual. Like webinars, conferences were another means of
professional development often mentioned in the interviews. Depending on the

134
conference, presentations are typically 60-90 minutes long, while workshops can be up to
2 hours long. A limitation would be that the material would need to be condensed to fit
into that time frame. Another limitation is that most conferences are not free, and so
members of the target audience would have additional barriers to receiving the training.
One exception might be a free, online conference, which the LFPEI has sponsored in the
past—one in 2014 and one in 2015—but has not sponsored recently. Again, the limitation
of a narrower reach is also a factor. However, either of these options may be an effective
supplement to the open access published manual.
Another consideration is altering the definition of the problem entirely. According
to my study results, not only did the libraries at FPCUs have average OL scores only on
the medium level (when scores in the high category demonstrate the consistent doubleloop learning that is necessary for optimizing operations; Bertram-Elliott, 2015; Chen,
2006), they also may struggle to neutralize the effect of pressures coming from their
larger institutions such as top-down decision making, chaotic turnover in leadership, or
budget issues. Certainly this secondary problem does reflect in the OL scores, but it was
sufficiently pronounced in the study results to warrant its own exploration. Short of a
macro-level focus on the structure, leadership, and finances of the FPCU industry in
general, solutions may not be close at hand. However, strengthening the OL capabilities
of libraries in FPCUs may equip them with the tools they need to overcome these larger
issues as much as possible.

135
Scholarship, Project Development, and Leadership and Change
Undertaking this research and project were learning and growth experiences for
me. Through the literature review and study processes, I gained a deep understanding of
OL, as well as a better understanding of the academic libraries that serve students in
FPCUs. The most challenging area was data analysis, both for the quantitative and
qualitative portions of the study. My choice to do a mixed-methods study had positive
consequences for my growth as a scholar. I experienced the strengths and limitations of
both kinds of data. My perspective shifted as I began to understand the rich value
inherent in qualitative research. I was surprised to learn that I felt more satisfaction and
fulfilment through the completion of my qualitative research than through the
quantitative research. With the exception of the hours spent transcribing interviews, my
experience collecting and analyzing the qualitative data was enjoyable and meaningful.
Getting to know actual members of the population I was studying through the interviews
gave me a deeper understanding of the challenges they were facing and the variety of
FPCUs in the United States.
Project development was another area of growth for me. Before I started my
research, I felt strongly that my project would be curriculum for a professional
development workshop. As I learned more about library employees in FPCUs through
my research, I realized that a multi-day workshop would present too many participation
challenges for my target audience. It would also not have as far a reach as I desired.
Because of these factors, and also taking my strong writing skills into consideration, I
decided that a position paper, white paper, or training manual would be a better

136
deliverable. The process of planning, writing, and producing the manual helped me to
think about my study in terms of practical application. I focused on strategies that library
employees could use to increase OL in their libraries.
Finally, I grew in leadership and change throughout this experience as well. I
began this program with a passion to bring more awareness to libraries at FPCUs. As
such a librarian myself, I often lamented the lack of information, leadership, and direction
in this unique niche of academic librarianship. My first inclination was to pair my passion
for libraries at FPCUs with my passion for information literacy and library instruction.
However, my attendance at the American Library Association Annual Conference in June
of 2015 changed my plans. I attended a presentation where Bertram-Elliott (2015)
presented findings based on her doctoral dissertation about the links between OL and
leadership in academic libraries. I knew that I wanted to work on something similar for
my doctoral work. The focus on libraries in FPCUs was a natural choice. My primary
goal was to influence and help other librarians in situations similar to ones I had
experienced. This study and project have put me in a position to be a leader among my
colleagues and influence change in the population I studied.
Reflection on the Importance of the Work
The results of this study, along with the guide I have created for my project, will
help library employees in FPCUs better understand OL and how they can improve OL in
their libraries. Improved OL could contribute to organizational performance, including
increased innovation, facilitation of organizational change, and optimized organizational
effectiveness. Because academic libraries contribute to student engagement (Soria et al.,

137
2017), student learning (Pan et al., 2014), academic performance (Allison, 2015; Kot &
Jones, 2015), and retention (Eng & Stadler, 2015; Mezick, 2015; Soria et al., 2013), the
effects of improved library services for the students who attend FPCUs may be positive
and long lasting.
The manual would also add to the body of published knowledge about libraries in
FPCUs, helping organizations like the LFPEI interest group better understand the context
of library staff members in these institutions and better support them and their leaders,
which may lead to improved educational services for students at these institutions. More
knowledge about OL and its implications could lead to positive social change through
libraries being better able to contribute to student learning and success. In turn, the
libraries would be more likely to grow and develop, becoming more effective, positively
influencing the ever-increasing populations of students who attend FPCUs.
Implications, Applications, and Directions for Future Research
Implications
The positive social change implications of this study are twofold. First, although
FPCUs have surged in popularity in the American higher education landscape, with a
166% increase in enrollment between 2000 and 2015 (National Center for Education
Statistics, 2017), there is little published research on the libraries at those institutions.
Though the professional organization, ACRL, has attempted to support library employees
in FPCUs through their LFPEI interest group, a broader understanding of the unique
challenges this group faces would help the leaders of the interest group determine more
effective ways to offer that support.

138
Second, because of the demonstrated links between academic libraries and student
success measures such as engagement (Soria et al., 2017), learning (Pan et al., 2014),
academic performance (Allison, 2015; Kot & Jones, 2015), and retention (Eng & Stadler,
2015; Mezick, 2015; Soria et al., 2013), libraries that can operate more effectively,
possibly through taking steps to increase OL capacity, may also be able to serve their
students more effectively. Many students in the United States opt to attend FPCUs.
Contributing to the success of students at FPCUs contributes to the overall education
levels of the American public.
Recommendations for Practice
Through the results of the study, I determined practices and habits library
employees at FPCUs can employ to increase the level of OL in their libraries. The most
influential of these is communication. Regularly meeting, either formally or informally,
in a dedicated time slot as a library team is beneficial for OL. It is during these meetings
that learning, including learning from professional development opportunities, can be
transferred from the individual to the team. Institutionalizing learning further through
archiving in an institutional repository, library intranet, or other such tool, can help the
library team retain knowledge over time.
Another recommendation is for library leaders to support their employees in
professional development opportunities like webinars and conferences, when possible.
Prioritizing professional development in the library budget can make it more likely that
the institution can financially support individual learning that can then be transferred and
archived for the team as a whole. When it is not feasible to provide financial support,

139
library leaders can encourage employees to take advantage of free training opportunities,
including free webinars, collective knowledge on electronic mailing lists, and libraryrelated publications which can often be obtained freely through interlibrary loan
relationships. Members of library teams can be proactive in seeking out these learning
opportunities, even if their leaders are not providing direct encouragement or support.
Directions for Future Research
My primary recommendation for future research is undertaking this study on a
broader level, with a larger number of participants. Doing so would produce results that
are more generalizable to the entire population of library employees at FPCUs.
Additionally, it might be interesting to study OL capacities and experiences in libraries at
non-profit higher education institutions as well, and then compare and contrast the results
to determine if the libraries at FPCUs are on par with more traditional institutions.
Conclusion
As higher education as a whole shifts to data-driven, outcome-based decisions,
leaders of academic libraries also recognize the importance of using available knowledge
to achieve maximum performance for their patrons. To this end, the business principle of
OL can and should be applied to libraries to increase innovation, facilitate organizational
change, and optimize organizational effectiveness. The libraries at FPCUs may
particularly need the boost in effectiveness that OL may provide because they are
supporting increasing numbers of students in sometimes challenging environments where
changes and forces external to the library can affect library processes.

140
The results of the study indicated that the libraries at FPCUs had a medium
capacity for OL at present. The number of FTE students enrolled at an institution was
highly related to the OL capacity of that institution’s library—the more students the
library served, the lower the library’s OL capacity. Moreover, library employees at
FPCUs suggested through their experiences that collaborative decision making, attending
webinars, funds for professional development like attending conferences, and
communication, such as through regular team meetings, contributed to OL in their
libraries.
I compiled these best practices, along with other advice and recommendations
from the literature, into a manual entitled Organizational Learning for Libraries at ForProfit Colleges and Universities (Appendix A). I plan to publish the manual through
ERIC and Walden’s own ScholarWorks, making it freely available online to library
employees in FPCUs in the United States and around the world. My hope is that the
manual will help library employees strengthen OL in their libraries, leading to more
effective processes that permit the libraries to better support the students they serve.
Better library support for students, in turn, could lead to increased student engagement,
student learning, academic performance, and retention at FPCUs, creating positive social
change for the large number of students enrolled at those institutions.

141
References
Agarwal, N. K., & Islam, M. A. (2014). Knowledge management implementation in a
library: Mapping tools and technologies to phases of the KM cycle. VINE, 44(3),
344–322. doi:10.1108/VINE-01-2014-0002
Agarwal, N. K., & Islam, M. A. (2015). Knowledge retention and transfer: How libraries
manage employees leaving and joining. VINE, 45(2), 150–171.
doi:10.1108/VINE-06-2014-0042
Al-Harrasi, N. (2014). The application of organizational learning theory to Omani
academic library collaboration. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 147,
86–90. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.119
Allison, D. (2015). Measuring the academic impact of libraries. Portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 15(1), 29–40. doi:10.1353/pla.2015.0001
Antonacopoulou, E. P. (2006). The relationship between individual and organizational
learning: New evidence from managerial learning practices. Management
Learning, 37(4), 455–473. doi:10.1177/1350507606070220
Argote, L. (2012). Organizational learning: Creating, retaining and transferring
knowledge. New York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media.
Argote, L., Beckman, S. L., & Epple, D. (1990). The persistence and transfer of learning
in industrial settings. Management Science, 36(2), 140–154. Retrieved from
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mnsc
Argote, L., & Epple, D. (1990). Learning curves in manufacturing. Science, 247(4945),
920–924. Retrieved from http://science.sciencemag.org/

142
Argote, L., McEvily, B., & Reagans, R. (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations:
An integrative framework and review of emerging themes. Management Science,
49(4), 571–582. Retrieved from http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mnsc
Argyris, C. (1977). Double loop learning in organizations. Harvard Business Review,
55(5), 115–125. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/
Argyris, C. (2004). Double-loop learning and organizational change. In J. J. Boonstra
(Ed.), Dynamics of organizational change and learning (pp. 389–402). West
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Argyris, C., & Schön, D. A. (1978). Organizational learning: A theory of action
perspective. Reading, MA: Wesley.
Arum, R., & Roksa, J. (2010). Academically adrift. Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press.
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2014, June). ACRL-LFPEI interest group
meeting minutes. Retrieved from http://connect.ala.org/node/226697
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2016). Framework for information literacy
for higher education. Chicago, IL: Author. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2012, August 3). Librarianship in forprofit educational institutions interest group [Text]. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl/directoryofleadership/interestgroups/acr-iglfpei

143
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2011). Standards for libraries in higher
education. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/standardslibraries#principles
Attis, D. (2013, March). Redefining the academic library: Managing the migration to
digital information services. Presentation. Retrieved from
http://macsphere.mcmaster.ca/handle/11375/14584
Avcıoğlu, G. Ş. (2014). Internet survey applications in social sciences: Response rate,
data quality, sample problems and solutions. Journal of Human Sciences, 11(2),
89–113. Retrieved from https://www.j-humansciences.com/
Balk, H., Kwant, E., & Neudecker, C. (2014). What makes innovation work? Innovation
practice in the National Library of the Netherlands. IFLA Journal, 40(3), 157–
168. doi:10.1177/0340035214545460
Bañuelos, N. I. (2016). From commercial schools to corporate universities: Explaining
the shift in proprietary business education in the U.S., 1970-1990. Journal of
Higher Education, 87(4), 573–600. doi:10.1353/jhe.2016.0019
Bass, B. M. (1990). From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to share
the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18(3), 19–31.
Baughman, M. S., & Kaske, N. K. (2002). Research: Theory and applications: Impact of
organizational learning. Portal: Libraries and the Academy, 2(4), 665–669.
doi:10.1353/pla.2002.0070

144
Beagle, D. (2012). The emergent information commons: Philosophy, models, and 21st
century learning paradigms. Journal of Library Administration, 52(6/7), 518–537.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2012.707951
Beaver, W. (2009). For-profit higher education: A social and historical analysis.
Sociological Viewpoints, 25, 53–73. Retrieved from
http://www.pasocsociety.net/viewpoints
Bennett, D. L., Lucchesi, A. R., & Vedder, R. K. (2010). For-profit higher education:
Growth, innovation and regulation. Washington, DC: Center for College
Affordability and Productivity. Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED536282
Bertram-Elliott, T. A. (2015). The relationship between leadership and organizational
learning in academic libraries (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3713800)
Biswas, B., & Paczynska, A. (2015). Teaching theory, writing policy: Integrating lessons
from Foggy Bottom into the classroom. PS, Political Science & Politics, 48(1),
157-161. doi:10.1017/S104909651400170X
Blumenstyk, G. (2016a, January 6). For-profit colleges may be down, but don’t count
them out. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://www.chronicle.com
Blumenstyk, G. (2016b, September 13). After ITT’s demise, more trouble is likely for
for-profit colleges. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://www.chronicle.com

145
Bly, R. W. (2010). Writing white papers for fun and profit: How to get these 'plum
assignments' that blend elements of articles and brochures. Writer, 123(3), 38-39.
Boyce, M. E. (2003). Organizational learning is essential to achieving and sustaining
change in higher education. Innovative Higher Education, 28(2), 119–136.
Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/journal/10755
Bruehl, M., Pan, D., & Ferrer-Vinent, I. J. (2015). Demystifying the chemistry literature:
Building information literacy in first-year chemistry students through studentcentered learning and experiment design. Journal of Chemical Education, 92(1),
52–57. doi:10.1021/ed500412z
Bruns, T., & Inefuku, H. W. (2016). Purposeful metrics: Matching institutional repository
metrics to purpose and audience. In B. B. Callicott, D. Scherer, & A. Wesolek
(Eds.), Making institutional repositories work (pp. 213-234). West Lafayette, IN:
Purdue University Press.
Buchanan, D., Fitzgerald, L., Ketley, D., Gollop, R., Jones, J. L., Lamont, S. S., …
Whitby, E. (2005). No going back: A review of the literature on sustaining
organizational change. International Journal of Management Reviews, 7(3), 189–
205. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2370.2005.00111.x
Byman, D., & Kroenig, M. (2016). Reaching beyond the ivory tower: A how to manual.
Security Studies, 25(2), 289-319. doi:10.1080/09636412.2016.1171969
Cairney, P., Oliver, K., & Wellstead, A. (2016). To bridge the divide between evidence
and policy: Reduce ambiguity as much as uncertainty. Public Administration
Review, 76(3), 399-402. doi:10.1111/puar.12555

146
Calisir, F., Gumussoy, C. A., & Guzelsoy, E. (2013). Impacts of learning orientation on
product innovation performance. The Learning Organization, 20(3), 176–194.
doi:10.1108/09696471311328442
Campbell, K. S., & Naidoo, J. S. (2017). Rhetorical move structure in high-tech
marketing white papers. Journal of Business and Technical Communication,
31(1), 94-118. doi:10.1177/1050651916667532
Camps, J., Oltra, V., Aldás-Manzano, J., Buenaventura-Vera, G., & Torres-Carballo, F.
(2015). Individual performance in turbulent environments: The role of
organizational learning capability and employee flexibility. Human Resource
Management, 1–27. doi:10.1002/hrm.21741
Cangelosi, V. E., & Dill, W. R. (1965). Organizational learning: Observations toward a
theory. Administrative Science Quarterly, 10(2), 175–203. doi:10.2307/2391412
Carley, K. (1992). Organizational learning and personnel turnover. Organization Science,
3(1), 20–46.
Carter, T. M. (2014). Assessment and change leadership in an academic library
department: A case study. Reference Services Review, 42(1), 148–164.
doi:10.1108/RSR-05-2013-0028
Castiglione, J. (2006). Organizational learning and transformational leadership in the
library environment. Library Management, 27(4/5), 289–299.
doi:10.1108/01435120610668223

147
Cerasoli, C. P., Nicklin, J. M., & Ford, M. T. (2014). Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic
incentives jointly predict performance: A 40-year meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 140(4), 980–1008. doi:10.1037/a0035661
Chen, K.-N. (2006). Library evaluation and organizational learning: A questionnaire
study. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 38(2), 93–104.
doi:10.1177/0961000606063891
Cherry, E., Rollins, S. H., & Evans, T. (2013). Proving our worth: The impact of
electronic resource usage on academic achievement. College & Undergraduate
Libraries, 20(3–4), 386–398. doi:10.1080/10691316.2013.829378
Chidambaranathan, K., & Rani, S. B. (2015a). Knowledge management and
organizational culture in higher educational libraries in Qatar: An empirical study.
Library & Information Science Research, 37(4), 363–369.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2015.11.002
Chidambaranathan, K., & Rani, S. B. (2015b). Knowledge management as a predictor of
organizational effectiveness: The role of demographic and employment factors.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(6), 758–763.
doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2015.08.015
Chiva, R., Ghauri, P., & Alegre, J. (2014). Organizational learning, innovation and
internationalization: A complex system model. British Journal of Management,
25(4), 687–705. doi:10.1111/1467-8551.12026
Cohen, M. D. (1991). Individual learning and organizational routine: Emerging
connections. Organization Science, 2(1), 135–139.

148
Crawford, G. A. (2015). The academic library and student retention and graduation: An
exploratory study. Portal : Libraries and the Academy, 15(1), 41–57.
doi:10.1353/pla.2015.0003
Crawley-Low, J. (2013). The impact of leadership development on the organizational
culture of a Canadian academic library. Evidence Based Library and Information
Practice, 8(4), 60–77. doi:10.18438/B8P593
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research (Custom Laureate Education). Boston, MA:
Pearson.
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2007). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.
Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–334. doi:10.1007/BF02310555
Crossan, M. M., Lane, H. W., & White, R. E. (1999). An organizational learning
framework: From intuition to institution. Academy of Management Review, 24(3),
522–537. doi:10.5465/AMR.1999.2202135
Crump, J. (2014, April 30). Re: non-library contributions to your institution [Electronic
mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrllfpei/2014-04/msg00040.html

149
Daft, R. L., & Weick, K. E. (1984). Toward a model of organizations as interpretation
systems. Academy of Management Review, 9(2), 284–295.
doi:10.5465/AMR.1984.4277657
Daryanto, A. (2013). Heteroskedasticity-SPSS. Retrieved from
https://sites.google.com/site/ahmaddaryanto/scripts/Heterogeneity-test
Davis, J. Y., Adams, M., & Hardesty, L. (2011). Academic libraries in for-profit schools
of higher education. College & Research Libraries, 72(6), 568–582.
doi:10.5860/crl-179
Davis, N. (2014). Recycling the bi-cycle concept. Journal of Continuing Education in the
Health Professions, 34(2), 139–140. doi:10.1002/chp.21194
De Geus, A. P. (1988). Planning as learning. Harvard Business Review, 66(2), 70–74.
Retrieved from https://hbr.org/
de Leeuw, E. D. (2012). Counting and measuring online: The quality of Internet surveys.
Bulletin of Sociological Methodology, 114(1), 68–78.
doi:10.1177/0759106312437290
Deakin, H., & Wakefield, K. (2013). Skype interviewing: Reflections of two PhD
researchers. Qualitative Research, 14(5), 603–616.
doi:10.1177/1468794113488126
Dee, J. R., & Leišytė, L. (2016). Organizational learning in higher education institutions:
Theories, frameworks, and a potential research agenda. In M. B. Paulsen (Ed.),
Higher education: Handbook of theory and research (pp. 275–348).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26829-3_6

150
Dias, C., & Escoval, A. (2015). Hospitals as learning organizations: Fostering innovation
through interactive learning. Quality Management in Health Care, 24(1), 52–59.
doi:10.1097/QMH.0000000000000046
Dixon, N. M. (1999). Organizational learning cycle: How we can learn collectively.
Retrieved from http://site.ebrary.com/
Dodgson, M. (1993). Organizational learning: A review of some literatures. Organization
Studies, 14(3), 375–394.
Douglass, J. A. (2012). The rise of the for-profit sector in US higher education and the
Brazilian effect. European Journal of Education, 47(2), 242–259.
doi:10.1111/j.1465-3435.2012.01521.x
Doyle, S. (2013). How to write a policy recommendation. Retrieved from
https://web.uvic.ca/~sdoyle/E302/Notes/Policy%20Recommendation.html
Drucker, P. F. (1991). The new productivity challenge. Harvard Business Review, 69(6),
69–79. Retrieved from http://www.hbr.org/
Drucker, P. F. (1993). The rise of the knowledge society. Wilson Quarterly, 17(2), 52–69.
Retrieved from http://wilsonquarterly.com/
Earley, P., & Porritt, V. (2014). Evaluating the impact of professional development: The
need for a student-focused approach. Professional Development in Education,
40(1), 112–129. doi:10.1080/19415257.2013.798741
Easterby-Smith, M., & Lyles, M. A. (2012). The evolving field of organizational learning
and knowledge management. In M. Easterby-Smith & M. A. Lyles (Eds.),

151
Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge management (pp. 1–20).
doi:10.1002/9781119207245.ch1/summary
EBSCO. (2018). ERIC. Retrieved from https://www.ebsco.com/products/researchdatabases/eric
Eckel, P. D., & Kezar, A. (2011). Taking the reins: Institutional transformation in higher
education. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Edmondson, A., & Moingeon, B. (1998). From organizational learning to the learning
organization. Management Learning, 29(1), 5–20.
doi:10.1177/1350507698291001
Elsayed, A. M., & Saleh, E. I. (2015). Measuring the return on investment of academic
libraries in Arab countries: a proposed model. Information Development, 31(3),
219–228. doi:10.1177/0266666913512146
Eng, S., & Stadler, D. (2015). Linking library to student retention: A statistical analysis.
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice, 10(3), 50–63.
doi:10.18438/B84P4D
Epple, D., Argote, L., & Devadas, R. (1991). Organizational learning curves: A method
for investigating intra-planet transfer of knowledge acquired through learning by
doing. Organization Science, 2(1), 58–70.
Erdt, M., Nagarajan, A., Sin, S.-C. J., & Theng, Y.-L. (2016). Altmetrics: An analysis of
the state-of-the-art in measuring research impact on social media. Scientometrics,
109(2), 1117-1166. doi:10.1007/s11192-016-2077-0

152
Farkas, M. G. (2013). Building and sustaining a culture of assessment: Best practices for
change leadership. Reference Services Review, 41(1), 13–31.
doi:10.1108/00907321311300857
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical
sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 175-191. doi:10.3758/BF03193146
Ferreras-Fernández, T., García-Peñalvo, F., Merlo-Vega, J. A., & Martín-Rodero, H.
(2016). Providing open access to PhD theses: Visibility and citation benefits.
Program, 50(4), 399-416. doi:10.1108/PROG-04-2016-0039
Ferreras-Fernández, T., García-Peñalvo, F. J., & Merlo-Vega, J. A. (2015). Open access
repositories as channel of publication scientific grey literature, presented at The
3rd International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing
Multiculturality, New York City, 2015. doi:10.1145/2808580.2808643
Field, K. (2015, May 18). As scrutiny intensifies, for-profit colleges face threats on
several fronts. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://www.chronicle.com
Fiol, C. M., & Lyles, M. A. (1985). Organizational learning. Academy of Management
Review, 10(4), 803–813. doi:10.5465/AMR.1985.4279103
Fleming-May, R. A., Mays, R., & Radom, R. (2015). “I never had to use the library in
high school”: A library instruction program for at-risk students. Portal: Libraries
and the Academy, 15(3), 433–456. doi:10.1353/pla.2015.0038

153
Forman, D. C. (2004). Changing perspectives from individual to organizational learning.
Performance Improvement, 43(7), 16–21. doi:10.1002/pfi.4140430707
Fowler, R. K. (1998). The university library as learning organization for innovation: An
exploratory study. College & Research Libraries, 59(3), 220–231.
doi:10.5860/crl.59.3.220
Fuller, H. (2014, April 30). Re: non-library contributions to your institution [Electronic
mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrllfpei/2014-04/msg00036.html
Gallop, A. (2017, February 15). Metadata: The best-kept secret for boosting your white
paper's SEO [Web log post]. Retrieved from https://www.thatwhitepaperguy.com
Galway, P., Gard, L., & Collinson, T. (2014). Engaging students with creative library
staff: The game’s afoot! ALISS Quarterly, 9(2), 16–20. Retrieved from
https://alissnet.org.uk/aliss-quarterly/
García-Morales, V. J., Jiménez-Barrionuevo, M. M., & Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez, L. (2012).
Transformational leadership influence on organizational performance through
organizational learning and innovation. Journal of Business Research, 65(7),
1040–1050. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.03.005
García-Morales, V. J., Lloréns-Montes, F. J., & Verdú-Jover, A. J. (2008). The effects of
transformational leadership on organizational performance through knowledge
and innovation. British Journal of Management, 19(4), 299–319.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2007.00547.x
Garvin, D. A. (1994). Building a learning organization. Business Credit, 96(1), 19-28.

154
Gerhart, B., & Fang, M. (2015). Pay, intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation,
performance, and creativity in the workplace: Revisiting long-held beliefs. Annual
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 2(1), 489–
521. doi:10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111418
Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (2004). Transitioning to the learning organization. Library
Trends, 53(1), 54–67. Retrieved from http://muse.jhu.edu/journal/334
Gilpin, G. A., Saunders, J., & Stoddard, C. (2015). Why has for-profit colleges’ share of
higher education expanded so rapidly? Estimating the responsiveness to labor
market changes. Economics of Education Review, 45, 53–63.
doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2014.11.004
Goh, S. C. (1998). Toward a learning organization: The strategic building blocks. SAM
Advanced Management Journal, 63(2), 15-22.
Goldstein, L. (2012). A guide to college & university budgeting: Foundations for
institutional effectiveness. Washington, DC: National Association of College and
University Business Officers.
Graham, G. (2017, April 21). The white paper FAQ (frequently asked questions) [Web
log post]. Retrieved from https://www.thatwhitepaperguy.com
Grallo, J. D., Chalmers, M., & Baker, P. G. (2012). How do I get a campus ID? The other
role of the academic library in student retention and success. Reference Librarian,
53(2), 182–193. doi:10.1080/02763877.2011.618787

155
Guy, A., & Eimer, L. (2016). Advisors, faculty, and librarians: Collaborating for student
success. Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 0(0), 1–
15. doi:10.1080/1533290X.2016.1206790
Haddow, G. (2013). Academic library use and student retention: A quantitative analysis.
Library & Information Science Research, 35(2), 127–136.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2012.12.002
Hamilton, R. J. (2014). Using Skype to conduct interviews for psychosocial research.
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 32(8), 353–358.
doi:10.1097/CIN.0000000000000095
Harmon, L. (2014, April 29). Re: non-library contributions to your institution [Electronic
mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrllfpei/2014-04/msg00033.html
Hayes, J., & Allinson, C. W. (1998). Cognitive style and the theory and practice of
individual and collective learning in organizations. Human Relations, 51(7), 847–
871.
Hedberg, B. (1981). How organizations learn and unlearn. In Handbook of organizational
design (pp. 8–27). London: Oxford University Press.
Heorhiadi, A., La Venture, K., & Conbere, J. P. (2014). What do organizations need to
learn to become a learning organization? OD Practitioner, 46(2), 5–9.
Hiebert, J., & Theriault, S. (2012). BLASTing the zombies! College & Research
Libraries News, 73(9), 540–569. Retrieved from http://crln.acrl.org/

156
Holmberg, K., Haustein, S., & Beucke, D. (2016). Social media metrics as indicators of
repository impact. In B. B. Callicott, D. Scherer, & A. Wesolek (Eds.), Making
institutional repositories work (pp. 235-248). West Lafayette, IN: Purdue
University Press.
Hua, F., Sun, H., Walsh, T., Glenny, A.-M., & Worthington, H. (2017). Open access to
journal articles in oncology: Current situation and citation impact. Annals of
Oncology, 28(10), 2612-2617. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx398
Huang, Y.-H. (2014). Measuring individual and organizational knowledge activities in
academic libraries with multilevel analysis. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 40(5), 436–446. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2014.06.010
Iloh, C. (2016). Exploring the for-profit experience: An ethnography of a for-profit
college. American Educational Research Journal, 53(3), 427–455.
doi:10.3102/0002831216637338
Imran, M. K., Ilyas, M., & Aslam, U. (2016). Organizational learning through
transformational leadership. The Learning Organization, 23(4), 232–248.
doi:10.1108/TLO-09-2015-0053
Islam, M. A., Agarwal, N. K., & Ikeda, M. (2014). Library adoption of knowledge
management using Web 2.0: A new paradigm for libraries. IFLA Journal, 40(4),
317–330. doi:10.1177/0340035214552054
Islam, M. A., Agarwal, N. K. K., & Ikeda, M. (2015). Knowledge management for
service innovation in academic libraries: A qualitative study. Library
Management, 36(1/2), 40–57. doi:10.1108/LM-08-2014-0098

157
Jain, A. K., & Moreno, A. (2015). Organizational learning, knowledge management
practices and firm’s performance: An empirical study of a heavy engineering firm
in India. The Learning Organization, 22(1), 14–39. doi:10.1108/TLO-05-20130024
Jalongo, M. R., & McDevitt, T. (2015). Therapy dogs in academic libraries: A way to
foster student engagement and mitigate self-reported stress during finals. Public
Services Quarterly, 11(4), 254–269. doi:10.1080/15228959.2015.1084904
Janghorban, R., Roudsari, R. L., & Taghipour, A. (2014). Skype interviewing: The new
generation of online synchronous interview in qualitative research. International
Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-Being, 9.
doi:10.3402/qhw.v9.24152
Johnson, R. B., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Turner, L. A. (2007). Toward a definition of
mixed methods research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), 112–133.
doi:10.1177/1558689806298224
Juricek, J. E. (2009). Access to grey literature in business: An exploration of commercial
white papers. Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship, 14(4), 318-332.
doi:10.1080/08963560802365388
Kakabadse, N. K., Kakabadse, A., & Kouzmin, A. (2003). Reviewing the knowledge
management literature: Towards a taxonomy. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 7(4), 75–91. doi:10.1108/13673270310492967

158
Kalyar, M. N., & Rafi, N. (2013). “Organizational learning culture”: An ingenious device
for promoting firm’s innovativeness. Service Industries Journal, 33(12), 1135–
1147. doi:10.1080/02642069.2012.716828
Kantamara, P., & Ractham, V. V. (2014). Single-loop vs. double-loop learning: An
obstacle or a success factor for organizational learning. International Journal of
Education and Research, 2(7), 55–62. Retrieved from http://www.ijern.com/
Keller, K. (2014, October 23). Re: Facebook Group [Electronic mailing list message].
Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrl-lfpei/2014-10/msg00013.html
Kelly, B., Hamasu, C., & Jones, B. (2012). Applying return on investment (ROI) in
libraries. Journal of Library Administration, 52(8), 656–671.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2012.747383
Kim, D. H. (1993). The link between individual and organizational learning. Sloan
Management Review, 35(1), 37–50. Retrieved from http://sloanreview.mit.edu/
King, D. W., & Tenopir, C. (2013). Linking information seeking patterns with purpose,
use, value, and return on investment of academic library journals. Evidence Based
Library and Information Practice, 8(2), 153–162. doi:10.18438/B8B02M
Kingma, B., & McClure, K. (2015). Lib-Value: Values, outcomes, and return on
investment of academic libraries, Phase III: ROI of the Syracuse University
Library. College & Research Libraries, 76(1), 63–80. doi:10.5860/crl.76.1.63
Kinser, K. (2006). From Main street to Wall street: The transformation of for-profit
higher education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kirp, D. L. (2003). Education for profit. Public Interest, (152), 100-112.

159
Kloda, L. A., Koufogiannakis, D., & Brettle, A. (2014). Assessing the impact of evidence
summaries in library and information practice. Library and Information Research,
38(119), 29–46. Retrieved from
http://www.lirgjournal.org.uk/lir/ojs/index.php/lir/index
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1992). Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the
replication of technology. Organization Science, 3(3), 383–397.
Kon, A. A. (2016). Using professional organization policy statements to guide hospital
policies and bedside recommendations. American Journal of Bioethics, 16(1), 5356. doi:10.1080/15265161.2015.1115152
Kot, F. C., & Jones, J. L. (2015). The impact of library resource utilization on
undergraduate students’ academic performance: A propensity score matching
design. College & Research Libraries, 76(5), 566–586. doi:10.5860/crl.76.5.566
Koz, O. (2014, April 30). Re: non-library contributions to your institution [Electronic
mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrllfpei/2014-04/msg00035.html
Kuh, G. D. (2008). High-impact educational practices: What they are, who has access to
them, and why they matter. Retrieved from http://secure.aacu.org/store/
Kuh, G. D., Cruce, T. M., Shoup, R., Kinzie, J., & Gonyea, R. M. (2008). Unmasking the
effects of student engagement on first-year college grades and persistence.
Journal of Higher Education, 79(5), 540–563. doi:10.1353/jhe.0.0019

160
Kuh, G. D., & Gonyea, R. M. (2003). The role of the academic library in promoting
student engagement in learning. College & Research Libraries, 64(4), 256–282.
doi:10.5860/crl.64.4.256
Kump, B., Moskaliuk, J., Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2015). Cognitive foundations of
organizational learning: Re-introducing the distinction between declarative and
non-declarative knowledge. Frontiers in Psychology, 6.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01489
Lanigan, M. L. (2010). How to create effective training manuals. Tinley Park, IL: Third
House, Inc. Retrieved from https://www.scribd.com/document/197262132/Howto-Create-Effective-Training-Manuals
Law, K. M. Y., & Chuah, K. B. (2015). Organizational learning as a continuous process,
DELO. In K. M. Y. Law & K. B. Chuah (Eds.), PAL driven organizational
learning: Theory and practices (pp. 7–29). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18014-4_2
Lee, S., Rittiner, F., & Szulanski, G. (2016). The past, present, and future of
organizational learning research: A conversation with Professor Linda Argote.
Journal of Management Inquiry, 25(1), 85–92. doi:10.1177/1056492615576974
Leong, J., Phillips, R., Giddens, D., & Dickson, T. (2014). Continuing professional
development for LIS professionals: Maximizing potential in an organizational
context. KIIT Journal of Library and Information Management, 1(1), 5–14.
Retrieved from http://www.publishingindia.com/kjlim/

161
Liang, D. W., Moreland, R., & Argote, L. (1995). Group versus individual training and
group performance: The mediating role of transactive memory. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21(4), 384–393. doi:10.1177/0146167295214009
Limwichitr, S., Broady-Preston, J., & Ellis, D. (2015). A discussion of problems in
implementing organisational cultural change: Developing a learning organisation
in university libraries. Library Review, 64(6/7), 480–488. doi:10.1108/LR-102014-0116
Lodico, M. G., Spaulding, D. T., & Voegtle, K. H. (2010). Methods in educational
research: From theory to practice (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Loo, J. L., & Dupuis, E. A. (2015). Organizational learning for library enhancements: A
collaborative, research-driven analysis of academic department needs. College &
Research Libraries, 76(5), 671–689. doi:10.5860/crl.76.5.671
López, L., & Sune, A. (2013). Turnover-induced forgetting and its impact on
productivity. British Journal of Management, 24(1), 38–53. doi:10.1111/j.14678551.2011.00785.x
Lown, C., & Davis, H. (2009). Are you worth it? What return on investment can and
can’t tell you about your library. In the Library with the Lead Pipe. Retrieved
from http://www.inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org
Lumby, J., & Muijs, D. (2014). Corrupt language, corrupt thought: The white paper The
importance of teaching. British Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 523-538.
doi:10.1002/berj.3093

162
Malone, E. A., & Wright, D. (2018). “To promote that demand”: Toward a history of the
marketing white paper as a genre. Journal of Business and Technical
Communication, 32(1), 113-147. doi:10.1177/1050651917729861
Manfreda, K. L., Bosnjak, M., Berzelak, J., Haas, I., & Vehovar, V. (2008). Web surveys
versus other survey modes. International Journal of Market Research, 50(1), 79–
104. Retrieved from https://www.mrs.org.uk/ijmr
Manshadi, M. D., Ebrahimi, F. P., & Abdi, H. M. (2014). A study of the relationship
between transformational leadership and organizational learning. European
Journal of Experimental Biology, 4(1), 12–20. Retrieved from
http://www.imedpub.com/european-journal-of-experimental-biology/
Martin, J. (2016). Perceptions of transformational leadership in academic libraries.
Journal of Library Administration, 56(3), 266–284.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2015.1105069
Mattern, J. (2013, June 6). How to write a white paper [Web log post]. Retrieved from
https://www.dirjournal.com/blogs/
Mayer, A., LeChasseur, K., Donaldson, M., & Cobb, C. (2013). Organizational learning
as a model for continuous transformation. Planning & Changing, 44(3/4), 221–
236. Retrieved from http://education.illinoisstate.edu/planning/
McGuigan, G. (2012). Addressing change in academic libraries: A review of classical
organizational theory and implications for academic libraries. Library Philosophy
and Practice. Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/755

163
McPherson, C. (2010). Examining the gap between workplace white papers and their
representation in technical communication textbooks (Doctoral dissertation,
Texas Tech University). Retrieved from
http://ejournal.narotama.ac.id/files/MCPHERSON-DISSERTATION.pdf
Meihami, B., & Meihami, H. (2012). Knowledge management a way to gain a
competitive advantage in firms (evidence of manufacturing companies).
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences, 14, 80–91.
doi:10.18052/www.scipress.com/ILSHS.14.80
Menchaca, F. (2014). Start a new fire: Measuring the value of academic libraries in
undergraduate learning. Portal : Libraries and the Academy, 14(3), 353–367.
doi:10.1353/pla.2014.0020
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Meštrović, A., & Rouse, M. J. (2015). Pillars and foundations of quality for continuing
education in pharmacy. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 79(3),
1–11. doi:10.5688/ajpe79345
Mezick, E. M. (2015). Relationship of library assessment to student retention. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(1), 31–36.
doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2014.10.011
Michalak, S. C. (2012). This changes everything: Transforming the academic library.
Journal of Library Administration, 52(5), 411–423.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2012.700801

164
Mikki, S. (2017). Scholarly publications beyond pay-walls: Increased citation advantage
for open publishing. Scientometrics, 113(3), 1529-1538. doi:10.1007/s11192-0172554-0
Miller, L. M. (2013, May 14). Transformational change vs. continuous improvement.
IndustryWeek. Retrieved from http://www.industryweek.com/
Muller, L. (2013, December 19). RE: ALA Proposal Update & Holiday well-wishes
[Electronic mailing list message]. Retrieved from
http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrl-lfpei/2013-12/msg00005.html
Munn, R. F. (1968). The bottomless pit, or the academic library as viewed from the
administration building. College & Research Libraries, 29(1), 51–54.
doi:10.5860/crl_29_01_51
Murray, A. (2015). Academic libraries and high-impact practices for student retention:
Library deans’ perspectives. Portal: Libraries and the Academy, 15(3), 471–487.
doi:10.1353/pla.2015.0027
Murray, A., Ireland, A., & Hackathorn, J. (2016). The value of academic libraries:
Library services as a predictor of student retention. College & Research Libraries,
77(5), 631–642. doi:10.5860/crl.77.5.631
Naidoo, J. S., & Campbell, K. S. (2014). A genre analysis of high-tech marketing white
papers: A report of research-in-progress, presented at 2014 IEEE International
Professional Communication Conference (IPCC).
doi:10.1109/IPCC.2014.7020365

165
National Center for Education Statistics. (2013). Table 701.40. Collections, staff, and
operating expenditures of degree-granting postsecondary institution libraries:
Selected years, 1981-82 through 2011-12. Retrieved from
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_701.40.asp
National Center for Education Statistics. (2017, May). Undergraduate enrollment.
Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cha.asp
National Center for Education Statistics. (2018). FTE of students. Retrieved from
https://surveys.nces.ed.gov/ipeds/VisGlossaryAll.aspx
Naus, S. (2014, April 30). Re: non-library contributions to your institution [Electronic
mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrllfpei/2014-04/msg00038.html
Neal, J. G. (2011, March). Stop the madness: The insanity of ROI and the need for new
qualitative measures of academic library success. Paper presented at the meeting
of the Association of College & Research Libraries, Philadelphia, PA. Retrieved
from https://academiccommons.columbia.edu/catalog/ac%3A130659
Nembhard, I. M., & Tucker, A. L. (2016). Applying organizational learning research to
accountable care organizations. Medical Care Research and Review.
doi:10.1177/1077558716640415
Newman, J., Cherney, A., & Head, B. W. (2016). Do policy makers use academic
research? Reexamining the “two communities” theory of research utilization.
Public Administration Review, 76(1), 24-32. doi:10.1111/puar.12464

166
Noruzy, A., Dalfard, V., Azhdari, B., Nazari-Shirkouhi, S., & Rezazadeh, A. (2013).
Relations between transformational leadership, organizational learning,
knowledge management, organizational innovation, and organizational
performance: An empirical investigation of manufacturing firms. International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 64(5–8), 1073–1085.
doi:10.1007/s00170-012-4038-y
Nulty, D. (2008). The adequacy of response rates to online and paper surveys: What can
be done? Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(3), 301–314.
doi:10.1080/02602930701293231
Nunnally, J. C. (1975). Psychometric theory. 25 years ago and now. Educational
Researcher, 4(10), 7. doi:10.2307/1175619
Oakleaf, M. (2011). What’s the value of an academic library? The development of the
ACRL Value of Academic Libraries Comprehensive Research Review and
Report. Australian Academic & Research Libraries, 42(1), 1–13. Retrieved from
www.tandfonline.com/loi/uarl20
Oakleaf, M. (2015). The library’s contribution to student learning: Inspirations and
aspirations. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 353–358.
doi:10.5860/crl.76.3.353
Oates, J. (2015). Use of Skype in interviews: The impact of the medium in a study of
mental health nurses. Nurse Researcher, 22(4), 13–17.
doi:10.7748/nr.22.4.13.e1318

167
O’Connor, E. (2014, October 22). LF-PEI Virtual Conference: Fantastic Day 1, Looking
Forward to Day 2! [Electronic mailing list message]. Retrieved from
http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrl-lfpei/2014-10/msg00010.html
Odumeru, J. A., & Ogbonna, I. G. (2013). Transformational vs. transactional leadership
theories: Evidence in literature. International Review of Management and
Business Research, 2(2), 355–361. Retrieved from https://www.irmbrjournal.com/
Oliver, K., Innvar, S., Lorenc, T., Woodman, J., & Thomas, J. (2014). A systematic
review of barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence by policymakers. BMC
Health Services Research, 14(1), 1-12. doi:10.1186/1472-6963-14-2
Olson, C., A. (2014). Survey burden, response rates, and the tragedy of the commons.
Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Professions, 34(2), 93–95.
doi:10.1002/chp.21238
Oltra, V., & Vivas-López, S. (2013). Boosting organizational learning through teambased talent management: What is the evidence from large Spanish firms?
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(9), 1853–1871.
doi:10.1080/09585192.2013.777540
Ortenblad, A. (2001). On differences between organizational learning and learning
organization. The Learning Organization, 8(3/4), 125–133.
doi:10.1108/09696470110391211
Pace, J. (2011, October 18). FW: Journal of for-profit colleges? [Electronic mailing list
message]. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/arc/acrl-lfpei/201110/msg00030.html

168
Palinkas, L. A., Horwitz, S. M., Green, C. A., Wisdom, J. P., Duan, N., & Hoagwood, K.
(2015). Purposeful sampling for qualitative data collection and analysis in mixed
method implementation research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and
Mental Health Services Research, 42(5), 533–544. doi:10.1007/s10488-013-0528y
Pan, D., Ferrer-Vinent, I. J., & Bruehl, M. (2014). Library value in the classroom:
Assessing student learning outcomes from instruction and collections. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(3–4), 332–338.
doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2014.04.011
Pan, D., Wiersma, G., Williams, L., & Fong, Y. S. (2013). More than a number:
Unexpected benefits of return on investment analysis. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 39(6), 566–572. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2013.05.002
Pershing, J. A. (2015). White paper. Performance Improvement, 54(8), 2-3.
doi:10.1002/pfi.21505
Phipps, S. E. (1993). Transforming libraries into learning organizations. Journal of
Library Administration, 18(3–4), 19–37. doi:10.1300/J111v18n03_03
Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivière, V., Alperin, J. P., Matthias, L., Norlander, B.,…
Haustein, S. (2018). The state of OA: A large-scale analysis of the prevalence and
impact of open access articles. PeerJ, 6, 1-23. doi:10.7717/peerj.4375
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Bommer, W. H. (1996). Transformational leader
behaviors and substitutes for leadership as determinants of employee satisfaction,

169
commitment, trust, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal of
Management, 22(2), 259–298. doi:10.1177/014920639602200204
Popova-Nowak, I. V., & Cseh, M. (2015). The meaning of organizational learning: A
meta-paradigm perspective. Human Resource Development Review, 14(3), 299–
331. doi:10.1177/1534484315596856
Powell, V. (2012). Revival of the position paper: Aligning curricula and professional
competencies. Communication Teacher, 26(2), 96-103.
doi:10.1080/17404622.2011.643805
Rae, S., & Hunn, M. (2015). Assessing the impact of embedding online academic and
information literacy resources into a first year business course. Evidence Based
Library and Information Practice, 10(4), 95–112. doi:10.18438/B80C76
Rao, R. D., & Argote, L. (2006). Organizational learning and forgetting: The effects of
turnover and structure. European Management Review, 3(2), 77–85.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.emr.1500057
Ratzan, S. C. (2002). The plural of anecdote is not evidence. Journal of Health
Communication, 7(3), 169–170. doi:10.1080/10810730290088058
Reagans, R., Argote, L., & Brooks, D. (2005). Individual experience and experience
working together: Predicting learning rates from knowing who knows what and
knowing how to work together. Management Science, 51(6), 869–881.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1050.0366
Rienties, B., Brouwer, N., & Lygo-Baker, S. (2013). The effects of online professional
development on higher education teachers’ beliefs and intentions towards learning

170
facilitation and technology. Teaching and Teacher Education, 29, 122–131.
doi:10.1016/j.tate.2012.09.002
Riggs, D. E. (1997). A commitment to making the library a learning organization.
College & Research Libraries, 58(4), 297–298. doi:10.5860/crl.58.4.297
Roberts, L. D., & Allen, P. J. (2015). Exploring ethical issues associated with using
online surveys in educational research. Educational Research and Evaluation,
21(2), 95–108. doi:10.1080/13803611.2015.1024421
Ruch, R. S. (2001). Higher ed, inc. : The rise of the for-profit university. Retrieved from
http://site.ebrary.com/
Sakamuro, S., Stolley, K., & Hyde, C. (2018). White paper: Organization and other tips.
Retrieved from https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/546/02/
Santos-Vijande, M. L., López-Sánchez, J. Á., & Trespalacios, J. A. (2012). How
organizational learning affects a firm’s flexibility, competitive strategy, and
performance. Journal of Business Research, 65(8), 1079–1089.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.09.002
Schilling, J. (2013). What’s money got to do with it? The appeal of the for-profit
education model. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 37(3),
153–159. doi:10.1080/10668926.2013.739007
Scripted (2014, January 13). How to measure your white paper's success [Web log post].
Retrieved from https://www.scripted.com

171
Seitz, S. (2015). Pixilated partnerships, overcoming obstacles in qualitative interviews via
Skype: A research note. Qualitative Research, 16(2), 229–235.
doi:10.1177/1468794115577011
Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth discipline: The art and practice of the learning
organization. New York: Doubleday/Currency.
Sheng, M. L., & Chien, I. (2016). Rethinking organizational learning orientation on
radical and incremental innovation in high-tech firms. Journal of Business
Research, 69(6), 2302–2308. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.12.046
Shih, T.-H., & Fan, X. (2008). Comparing response rates from Web and mail surveys: A
meta-analysis. Field Methods, 20(3), 249–271. doi:10.1177/1525822X08317085
Simon, H. A. (1991). Bounded rationality and organizational learning. Organization
Science, 2(1), 125–134.
Soria, K. M., Fransen, J., & Nackerud, S. (2013). Library use and undergraduate student
outcomes: New evidence for students’ retention and academic success. Portal :
Libraries and the Academy, 13(2), 147–164. doi:10.1353/pla.2013.0010
Soria, K. M., Fransen, J., & Nackerud, S. (2014). Stacks, serials, search engines, and
students’ success: First-year undergraduate students’ library use, academic
achievement, and retention. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(1), 84–
91. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2013.12.002
Soria, K. M., Fransen, J., & Nackerud, S. (2017). Beyond books: The extended academic
benefits of library use for first-year college students. College & Research
Libraries, 78(1), 8-22. doi:10.5860/crl.78.1.8

172
Spencer, L. (1991). The perils of socialized higher education. Forbes, 147(11), 294–304.
Squibb, S. D., & Mikkelsen, S. (2016). Assessing the value of course-embedded
information literacy on student learning and achievement. College & Research
Libraries, 77(2), 164–183. doi:10.5860/crl.77.2.164
Stelzner, M. A. (2007). Writing white papers: How to capture readers and keep them
engaged. Poway, CA: WhitePaperSource Publishing.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1990). Information and organizations. University of California
Press. Retrieved from http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft338nb1zq/
Sucozhañay, D., Siguenza-Guzman, L., Zhimnay, C., Cattrysse, D., Wyseure, G., De
Witte, K., & Euwema, M. (2014). Transformational leadership and stakeholder
management in library change. LIBER Quarterly, 24(2), 55-83.
doi:10.18352/lq.9583
Sullivan, J. R. (2012). Skype: An appropriate method of data collection for qualitative
interviews? The Hilltop Review, 6(1), 54–60. Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.wmich.edu/hilltopreview/
Swieringa, J., & Wierdsma, A. F. M. (1992). Becoming a learning organization: Beyond
the learning curve. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Tague, N. R. (2005). The quality toolbox. Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press.
Tam, M. (2014). Outcomes-based approach to quality assessment and curriculum
improvement in higher education. Quality Assurance in Education, 22(2), 158–
168. doi:10.1108/QAE-09-2011-0059

173
Tanyaovalaksna, S., & Li, X. (2013). Is there a relationship between individual learning,
team learning, and organizational learning? Alberta Journal of Educational
Research, 59(1), 1–16. Retrieved from http://www.ajer.ca/
Tenopir, C. (2010). Measuring the value of the academic library: Return on investment
and other value measures. The Serials Librarian, 58(1–4), 39–48.
doi:10.1080/03615261003623005
Tenopir, C. (2012). Beyond usage: Measuring library outcomes and value. Library
Management, 33(1/2), 5–13. doi:10.1108/01435121211203275
Tenopir, C. (2013). Building evidence of the value and impact of library and information
services: Methods, metrics and ROI. Evidence Based Library and Information
Practice, 8(2), 270–274. doi:10.18438/B8VP59
Tenopir, C., Love, A., Park, J., Wu, L., Baer, A., & Mays, R. N. (2010). University
investment in the library, Phase II: An international study of the library’s value to
the grants process. Retrieved from https://works.bepress.com/regina_mays/13/
Teo, T. (2013). Online and paper-based survey data: Are they equivalent? British Journal
of Educational Technology, 44(6), E196–E198. doi:10.1111/bjet.12074
Tinto, V. (1993). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student attrition
(2nd ed.). Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED371658
Tinto, V. (1999). Taking retention seriously: Rethinking the first year of college.
NACADA Journal, 19(2), 5–9. doi:10.12930/0271-9517-19.2.5

174
Tohidi, H., Seyedaliakbar, S. M., & Mandegari, M. (2012). Organizational learning
measurement and the effect on firm innovation. Journal of Enterprise Information
Management, 25(3), 219–245. doi:10.1108/17410391211224390
United States Department of Education. (n.d.a). Grantee and online submission system.
Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/submit/
United States Department of Education. (n.d.b). Online submission frequently asked
questions. Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?submitfaq
United States Department of Health & Human Services. (2018). Making files accessible.
https://www.hhs.gov/web/section-508/making-files-accessible/index.html
Van Grinsven, M., & Visser, M. (2011). Empowerment, knowledge conversion and
dimensions of organizational learning. The Learning Organization, 18(5), 378–
391. doi:10.1108/09696471111151729
Van Selm, M., & Jankowski, N. W. (2006). Conducting online surveys. Quality &
Quantity, 40(3), 435–456. doi:10.1007/s11135-005-8081-8
Vargas, M. I. R. (2015). Determinant factors for small business to achieve innovation,
high performance and competitiveness: Organizational learning and leadership
style. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 169, 43–52.
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.284
Wagner, M. (2013). Proprietary reference: Do students use library help? Reference
Librarian, 54(3), 251–262. doi:10.1080/02763877.2013.770349
Walden University. (n.d.). Information for contributors. Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/submission_information.html

175
Walsh, A. (2014). The potential for using gamification in academic libraries in order to
increase student engagement and achievement. Nordic Journal of Information
Literacy in Higher Education, 6(1), 39–51. doi:10.15845/noril.v6i1.214
Watson, E. (2014). For-profit librarians. American Libraries, 45(11/12), 8–9.
Watt, S., Simpson, C., McKillop, C., & Nunn, V. (2002). Electronic course surveys: Does
automating feedback and reporting give better results? Assessment & Evaluation
in Higher Education, 27(4), 325–337. doi:10.1080/0260293022000001346
Webber, K. L., Krylow, R. B., & Zhang, Q. (2013). Does involvement really matter?
Indicators of college student success and satisfaction. Journal of College Student
Development, 54(6), 591–611. doi:10.1353/csd.2013.0090
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind.
In B. Mullen & G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp. 185–208).
doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4634-3_9
Whitworth, A., Calvo, M. C. T. I., Moss, B., Kifle, N. A., & Blåsternes, T. (2014).
Changing libraries: Facilitating self-reflection and action research on
organizational change in academic libraries. New Review of Academic
Librarianship, 20(2), 251–274. doi:10.1080/13614533.2014.912989
Willerton, R. (2013). Teaching white papers through client projects. Business
Communication Quarterly, 76(1), 105-113. doi:10.1177/1080569912454713
Winter, S. G. (1998). Knowledge and competence as strategic assets. In D. A. Klein
(Ed.), The strategic management of intellectual capital (pp. 165–178). Boston,
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.

176
Woszczynski, A. B., & Whitman, M. E. (2016). Perspectives on open access
opportunities for IS research publication: Potential benefits for researchers,
educators, and students. Journal of Information Systems Education, 27(4), 259276. Retrieved from http://jise.org
Yi, Z. (2015). The management of change in the information age: Approaches of
academic library directors in the USA. Library and Information Research,
39(120), 43–64. Retrieved from
http://www.lirgjournal.org.uk/lir/ojs/index.php/lir/index
Yu, T. (2013). The relationships among individual, team and organizational learning in
Taiwan’s university and college libraries. Retrieved from
http://library.ifla.org/183/
Yu, T., & Chen, C. (2015). The relationship of learning culture, learning method, and
organizational performance in the university and college libraries in Taiwan.
Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services, 65(1), 1–14.
doi:10.1515/libri-2014-1032
Yu, T., & Chen, C. (2012). A study on the relationship between organizational learning
culture and organizational performance in Taiwan’s university and college
libraries. Journal of Educational Media & Library Sciences, 50(2), 173–200.
doi:10.6120/JoEMLS.2012.502/0516.RS.AM
Yu, W., Jacobs, M. A., Salisbury, W. D., & Enns, H. (2013). The effects of supply chain
integration on customer satisfaction and financial performance: An organizational

177
learning perspective. International Journal of Production Economics, 146(1),
346–358. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.07.023
Zeng, S., Gonzalez, J., & Lobato, C. (2015). The effect of organizational learning and
Web 2.0 on innovation. Management Decision, 53(9), 2060–2072.
doi:10.1108/MD-06-2014-0388
Zucchermaglio, C., Bagnara, S., & Stucky, S. U. (2012). Organizational learning and
technological change. Springer Science & Business Media.

178
Appendix A: The Project

Organizational Learning for Libraries at For-Profit Colleges and Universities: A Manual
by
Julie Evener

MLIS, University of South Carolina, 2009
BA, Flagler College, 2008

Project Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Education

Walden University
December 2018

179

Organizational Learning for
Libraries at For-Profit
Colleges and Universities
A Manual
By Julie Evener, MLIS, EdD

180

Organizational Learning for Libraries at For-Profit Colleges and Universities
Copyright © 2018 by Julie Evener

Organizational Learning for Libraries at For-Profit Colleges and Universities by Julie
Evener is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivatives 4.0 International License.

For comments, questions, or suggestions regarding this manual, please contact
EvenerOLLib@gmail.com.

This manual was originally drafted as a component of my EdD degree from Walden
University.

181
Table of Contents
Introduction ..........................................................................................................................1
What is Organizational Learning .........................................................................................2
Why is Organizational Learning Important .........................................................................4
Factors that Contribute to Organizational Learning ............................................................5
Challenges ............................................................................................................................8
Strategies ............................................................................................................................11
Promoting Organizational Learning When You’re Not in Charge ....................................17
Wrap-Up ............................................................................................................................19
Further Reading .................................................................................................................20
Works Cited .......................................................................................................................22

182
Introduction
This manual is intended to be an introduction to the concept of organizational
learning for librarians working in for-profit colleges and universities, though the
suggestions and ideas herein are applicable to librarians working in a variety of
institutions. We’ll discuss what organizational learning is and why it’s important for you
to consider in relation to the work you do. I’ll also share examples of factors that
contribute to organizational learning, as well as factors that make organizational learning
more challenging.
In addition, I provide research-based, concrete suggestions for increasing the
organizational learning capacity of your library. Though many of the suggestions in this
manual would require some degree of leadership authority to implement, the section
“Promoting Organizational Learning When You’re Not In Charge” provides practical
suggestions for lower-level library staff members who want to promote organizational
learning on a grassroots level in their libraries.

1

183
What is Organizational Learning?
Organizational learning is simply defined as the process by which an organization
creates, retains, and transfers knowledge in order to correct errors and continuously
improve (Argote, 2012). The term incorporates such concepts as professional
development, knowledge management, as well as individual and group learning
opportunities.
Inherent in the concept of organizational learning is the expectation that more
learning will help an organization be more effective (Argote, 2012; Argyris & Schön,
1978; Fiol & Lyles, 1985; Senge, 1990). Organizational learning involves a process of
knowledge transfer in which individual learning (e.g., a librarian attending a webinar or
reading this manual) is shared with other individuals and teams within the organization
(e.g., the librarian shares what was learned at the webinar with colleagues at a team
meeting or in an email summary), and ultimately is archived (e.g., in a local library
intranet or institutional repository) and becomes part of institutional customs and
memory. The learning can then remain with the organization even as individuals leave.
Scholars recognize two types of learning: single-loop learning and double-loop
learning. Single-loop learning is correcting an error without significant changes to the
way things are normally done (Argyris & Schön, 1978). It is learning that is “actionoriented, routine, and incremental, occurring within existing mental models, norms,
policies and underlying assumptions” (Van Grinsven & Visser, 2011, p. 380).

2

184
Double-loop learning, in contrast, is correcting an error in a way that involves
significant changes to the normal way of doing things, i.e., not only “detecting error but
questioning the underlying policies and goals as well” (Argyris, 1977, p. 116). It is
learning that involves “changing mental models, norms, policies and assumptions
underlying day-to-day actions and routines” (Van Grinsven & Visser, 2011, p. 380).
As an example, think of the differences between a standard thermostat and new
artificial intelligence enabled smart thermostats. The standard thermostat detects when a
room is getting too cold and turns on the heat to correct the temperature of the room. This
is single-loop learning. A smart thermostat may make determinations about what
temperature is the appropriate temperature for the room in the first place. This is doubleloop learning. Single-loop learning results in maintaining the status quo, while doubleloop learning leads to progress. Single-loop learning is effective for quick, surface
changes, while double-loop learning is effective for long-lasting and sustainable deep
change.
One concept related to organizational learning is the learning organization, which
Peter Senge (1990) popularized almost 30 years ago. Learning organizations are
“organizations where people continually expand their capacity to create the results they
truly desire, where new and expansive patterns of thinking are nurtured, where collective
aspiration is set free, and where people are continually learning how to learn together”
(Senge, 1990, p. 3).

3

185
Essentially, organizational learning is a complex process that helps an
organization, like your library, create, share, and retain knowledge internally so that
knowledge can be better harnessed and applied for progress.
Why is Organizational Learning Important?
In general, organizational learning has been found to contribute to organizational
performance, including facilitating organizational change (Mayer, LeChasseur,
Donaldson, & Cobb, 2013) and increasing innovation (Dias & Escoval, 2015). In
academic libraries, specifically, organizational learning has helped increase innovation
(Islam, Agarwal, & Ikeda, 2015), facilitate lasting change (Whitworth, Calvo, Moss,
Kifle, & Blåsternes, 2014), and optimize organizational effectiveness (Chidambaranathan
& Rani, 2015b).
Modern organizations, and especially libraries (Limwichitr, Broady-Preston, &
Ellis, 2015), must consistently adapt. The Internet has changed the information
landscape, and libraries have a constant need to prove their value and become leaders of
technological developments that affect information (Attis, 2013). Because of this, the
positive relationship between organizational change and organizational learning speaks to
the importance of an organizational learning strategy.
In my research specific to organizational learning in the libraries of for-profit
colleges and universities, I found that, on average, the organizational learning capacity in
these libraries was at the medium level. However, organizational learning capacity at the
high level is necessary for the flexibility and innovation required in today’s environment.
4

186
The bottom line is that organizational learning can help your library progress and better
serve your users. Importantly, organizational learning can also be a catalyst that helps
you better demonstrate the value of your library to your institution.

5

187
Factors that Contribute to Organizational Learning
Research has shown that certain conditions make organizational learning more or
less likely. This section will outline some of those findings.
Library/Institution Size
Though the research is a bit mixed on the specifics, it is clear that the size of an
institution (i.e., number of students) and the size of the library (i.e., number of
employees) contributes to organizational learning. My own research found that the
number of students enrolled at an institution had a negative relationship with
organizational learning score, meaning that the more students there are, the lower the
organizational learning capacity. Similarly, Bertram-Elliott (2015) found that libraries
serving fewer students and with fewer students per librarian had higher organizational
learning scores. The results indicated that library staff members with a comfortable
workload due to sufficient staff size can spend more time learning and sharing their
knowledge to increase organizational learning in the library.
In contrast, Huang (2014) found that larger libraries engaged in more
organizational learning activities than smaller libraries. The discrepancy might be
explained by the idea that more organizational learning activities do not necessarily
translate into better organizational learning.
Transformational Leadership
Transformational leadership is leading through empowering, inspiring, and
energizing employees, by espousing a shared vision and eliciting acceptance of that
6

188
vision, and through facilitating employees in looking beyond their own self-interest to
embrace the good of the group (Bass, 1990). Characteristics of transformational
leadership include charisma, inspiration, intellectual stimulation, and individualized
consideration (Bass, 1990). Transformational leadership can also be linked to
organizational learning.
In their research, Imran, Ilyas, and Aslam (2016) found a positive effect of
transformational leadership on organizational learning. Likewise, Manshadi, Ebrahimi,
and Abdi (2014) and Noruzy, Dalfard, Azhdari, Nazari-Shirkouhi, and Rezazadeh (2013)
found positive and meaningful relationships between transformational leadership and
organizational learning. Noruzy et al. stated that “transformational leadership directly
influenced organizational learning” (p. 1073). Manshadi et al. isolated the aspects of
transformational leadership—idealized influence and individual consideration—that best
predicted organizational learning. Thus, the transformational leader who most effects
organizational learning is one who charismatically models the behavior desired in
employees and respects employees as individuals, including their differences, and helps
them reach their potentials (Manshadi et al., 2014).
Teamwork
Organizations that emphasize teamwork as a part of their culture are also likely to
have higher capacity for knowledge management, which is a key component of
organizational learning (Chidambaranathan & Rani, 2015a). Teamwork facilitates sharing
learning throughout an organization, which is a key factor in transferring knowledge from
7

189
an individual to the organization. Valuing teamwork may also contribute to group
learning, in which experienced members of a group compensate for new team members
with little effect on performance (Reagans, Argote, & Brooks, 2005).
Formalized Knowledge Management Processes
Yu and Chen (2015) found that “creating systems to capture and share learning”
contributed most significantly to organizational learning culture, though Agarwal and
Islam (2014) found that no single set of tools was applicable to every library or every
situation.
Support for Professional Development
Bertram-Elliott (2015) found that the best predictor of organizational learning
capacity in academic libraries was support for professional development, even if it was
only encouragement without financial support.

8

190
Challenges
Several primary challenges to increasing organizational learning capacity in our
libraries are part of the reason for lower-than-needed organizational learning. I discuss
some of the challenges in this section, and then provide strategies to overcome these
challenges in the next section.
Limited Understanding
One issue that poses a challenge to increasing organizational learning in academic
libraries is a limited understanding of the term and what it entails. Limwichitr et al.
(2015) explained that there are many different definitions of organizational learning used
in various disciplines and coming from several perspectives. Among library employees
specifically, there is confusion about the distinction between their role in helping students
and faculty learn, and their own individual learning to contribute to the organizational
knowledge of the library (Limwichitr et al., 2015). In my own research specific to
libraries at for-profit colleges and universities, about 33% of interview participants said
they had heard the term organizational learning before and then explained the concept
correctly. However, it became apparent that all the participants were familiar with the
concepts involved in organizational learning, even when they did not know the term.
Adding to the issue is a lack of published literature addressing organizational
learning in the academic library environment, or at least a lack of literature where these
concepts are clearly outlined for effective application in academic libraries. Though more
and more studies are published in the library and information science literature that focus
9

191
on organizational learning and related concepts, many are still focused on theory rather
than practice.
Large or Scattered Library Teams
A library team that is especially large, or a team that is spread between different
physical locations working on different campuses or working remotely, can be a
challenge to better organizational learning. My research showed a negative relationship
between the number of students enrolled at an institution and the organizational learning
score of that institution’s library, meaning that the more students a library serves, the
lower its organizational learning capacity. One possible reason for this finding is that
communication between library team members becomes more difficult with more
employees or with employees who are spread out geographically. Collegiality and
informal conversations become more difficult.
Heavy Librarian Workloads
Library employees who are overworked, perhaps due to unmanageable student-tolibrarian ratios, have less time to devote to individual learning and sharing their learning
with others. When individual learning does not happen, it is less likely that organizational
learning will take place. A library team under these conditions may maintain the status
quo, and sometimes eke out improvements, but more substantive progress will be
difficult.

10

192
External Pressures
Another challenge to organizational learning is pressure coming from outside
your library, but within the larger institution, and over which the library has no control.
Budget cuts, changes in institutional leadership or structure, or a perception among
institutional leaders and faculty that the library is unnecessary are all examples of
external pressures that can make organizational learning more difficult.

11

193
Strategies
Challenges to organizational learning can be overcome with intentionality in
applying strategies for organizational learning. In fact, my research found that often the
libraries with the most challenges had the highest organizational learning scores, perhaps
because the teams at these libraries had to be more resourceful and proactive to keep their
libraries as stable as possible despite the challenges. While we have seen that there are
some factors that are more likely to contribute to organizational learning, what does that
mean in a practical sense? This section outlines specific strategies library employees can
incorporate into their practice to help increase organizational learning.
Communicate
A key strategy for increasing organizational learning is communication. Regular
communication, both formal and informal, between members of the library team is
crucial.
Schedule regular team meetings. Schedule a dedicated time slot for regular
meetings for the library team as a whole to meet and discuss problems, concerns, and
ideas. Share a meeting agenda several days beforehand to give team members an
opportunity to prepare their thoughts, but also make sure the agenda includes time for an
open forum, where anyone in the meeting can share a relevant topic with the group.
Encourage informal communication. Don’t underestimate the power of
informal communication. In libraries where team members work in the same physical
location, this could be water cooler talk, but informal communication also happens
12

194
electronically. Many organizations have an internal system for instant messaging, such as
Skype for Business, that library employees can use to informally chat with their
colleagues about projects and ideas. Instant messaging as a means of communication is
particularly useful for library teams that are scattered, either working on multiple
campuses or working remotely.
Meet one-on-one. Managers should meet regularly with their direct reports one
on one. While leaders can and should encourage employees to reach out to them as
questions or concerns arise, it is also helpful to have a dedicated time slot set aside when
employees know they will have uninterrupted time with their supervisor. Both the
manager and the direct report should come to the meeting prepared with an informal list
of points they want to discuss. When managers and their direct reports do not work in the
same physical location, technology tools like phones with video screens or online
meeting software are helpful so that both parties can see and hear each other as if they
were face to face.
Develop Onboarding Processes
New employees must learn a large amount of information about local processes in
a short amount of time. Facilitating that process can increase overall organizational
learning.
Create manuals. Create and regularly update manuals for specific positions and
job aids or standard operating procedures documents for common tasks. If you are
starting from scratch, consider assigning an employee in the position to create the first
13

195
draft of a manual about their responsibilities and the work they do—essentially an upload
of their individual knowledge of the position to share with the rest of the team. Doing this
is particularly important for people who have been in a position for a long time as they
likely have institutional knowledge others on the team may not. Even if it is unlikely the
employee will leave their position anytime soon, having the record is valuable, especially
for purposes of cross-training or helping newer employees in similar roles learn.
Develop an onboarding curriculum. In addition to training materials like
manuals, consider developing a formal onboarding curriculum that new employees must
undertake. One librarian I interviewed described a formal, 6-week onboarding process
that involved set daily tasks and assignments. There were built-in assessment points, and
supervisors could track progress via a learning management system. The training also
incorporated live webinars from vendors or other sources, which are automatically added
to the new employee’s work calendar. In the case of this library, the formal onboarding
process was in reaction to, and a solution for, high turnover of librarians; a strategy to
keep organizational learning high despite external pressures.
Support Learning
Because organizational learning often starts at the individual level, one way to
increase the organizational learning capacity of your library is supporting professional
development for all library employees. However, keep in mind that learning for the sake
of learning is not the goal. Rather, library team members should learn in order to do their
jobs better, innovate, and share what they’ve learned.
14

196
Pay their way. Where possible, financially support library employees attending
trainings, conferences, or other opportunities that may involve a registration cost or travel
expenses. Library employees and leaders can advocate for the inclusion of such funds in
the library’s budget. Daland (2016) recommended as a best practice that at minimum,
0.5-1.0% of the library’s budget should be reserved for employee learning.
Promote opportunities. Even when financial support is not possible,
encouraging library employees to take advantage of free opportunities is helpful. These
resources could include free webinars, collective knowledge on electronic mailing lists,
and library-related publications which can often be obtained freely through interlibrary
loan relationships. When you see an email come through about an upcoming webinar, for
example, you can forward it to colleagues who may be interested.
Allow time for learning. If library employees are willing to pay their own
expenses for a conference, library leaders can make sure that time away is classified as
work time so the employee does not need to take personal or vacation time to attend.
Likewise, managers can ensure employees have down time outside of staffing a reference
desk, monitoring library chat, or other responsibilities, that they can use to pursue
learning. Daland (2016) recommended best practice is 10% of work hours dedicated
toward learning activities. Another aspect of allowing time for learning is advocating for
new positions, or filling vacant positions promptly, if the workload becomes
unmanageable.

15

197
Require and reward learning. Emphasize that learning is a priority by
incorporating continuous learning into annual evaluations or performance reviews. This
should not be so prescriptive as to specify what each individual should be learning about,
but it should be clear that everyone should be learning something they can apply to their
jobs.
Share Learning
Once individual learning takes place, the knowledge needs to be transferred, or
shared, so that it can become organizational learning. Develop formal ways to share
information that a library employee gains from professional development opportunities.
Report back. After an employee attends a conference or other substantial
learning opportunity, make sure the next library team meeting includes time for that
employee to share key points from the experience. Make reporting back after a
conference a standard expectation, in whatever format works best for your library.
Train the trainer. Assign employees who have attended skills-based training to
teach what they have learned to others on the team. This could be one-on-one or in a
group scenario. Alavi and Leidner (2001) recommended skills training as the best way to
share knowledge that is highly context specific, whereas storing knowledge in
repositories makes more sense for more general knowledge.
Store Learning
Going a step beyond simply sharing, institutionalize new knowledge further by
archiving it in an institutional repository, library intranet, or other such tool. Create your
16

198
own databank of library knowledge that employees can return to over time for new ideas
or a reminder of the proper process for a task. Library teams need to explore and
experiment to discover which technologies or systems work best for their own
circumstances. This databank is a great place to store the manuals, job aids, and standard
operating procedures you or others on your team may have created. Also include
handouts, slide decks, or even recordings from webinars or conferences members of your
team have attended. Make sure these materials are only available internally, not publicly,
and that you have permission to archive them.

17

199
Promoting Organizational Learning When You’re Not in Charge
If you are not a director or manager in your library, it may seem that some of
these suggestions are out of your control. However, there are still steps you can take to
contribute to the organizational learning atmosphere at your library.
Seek Out Opportunities to Learn
Opportunities for library employees to learn are everywhere, often for no or little
cost. Be proactive about finding and taking advantage of these opportunities.
Subscribe to electronic mailing lists. Not only will you engage in interesting
discussions on the list, but you will also receive notifications about webinars,
conferences, and other trainings from various organizations, associations, and providers.
Search and browse the literature. Library workers are already skilled in
searching the literature to learn more about topics. Use those skills to find out more about
a topic or project on which you would like to work. Interlibrary loan is often an option
even if your library does not hold the resource you want to read.
Participate in free webinars. Many professional organizations, interest groups,
or other associations hold free webinars on library-related topics. Webinars are
convenient to attend from your desk. Often, the hosts will provide participants with
access to a recording after the webinar, which is useful if you are multitasking during the
webinar time and need to re-watch parts later.

18

200
Share What You Learn
Have conversations with your colleagues and supervisor about what you are
learning, including what you are learning about organizational learning. When you see
free webinars or other opportunities you think would interest colleagues, forward them
the information. Offer to assist or informally mentor a new colleague. Sharing learning is
a two-way process (Collinson & Cook, 2003), so you should also be open to discussing
something a colleague learned and wants to share with you. Ask for help from a
knowledgeable colleague when you need it.
Communicate
Develop positive working relationships with your colleagues. Chat with them
informally, either in person or through email or instant messaging. Share your ideas and
listen to theirs. Collegiality goes a long way toward fostering an environment of
organizational learning.
Suggest Practical Solutions
While it is great to share what you learn, it is better to use what you learn to
develop and suggest practical solutions to problems in your library. The “so what?”
question is important to administrators. How is what you learned going to benefit the
library and what steps does the library team need to undertake to implement it? Be
willing to take the lead in carrying out the solutions you suggest.

19

201
Wrap-Up
Organizational learning is a team effort. Leaders and managers who are
committed to the strategies and processes outlined here can have a significant impact on
the organizational learning capacity of their library environments. On an individual level,
library workers can also do their parts to practice and encourage organizational learning
strategies as a part of their work responsibilities. The result is libraries that are more
prepared to innovate, adapt, and work effectively, better situating them to serve their
students and other users.
As you implement some or all of the suggestions in this manual, I encourage you
to persevere through the challenges you will likely face. Also, remember that
organizational learning is not an all-or-nothing process. If you can make even small
changes to better encourage organizational learning, your library organization, and your
patrons, will benefit. Best wishes in your organizational learning journey!