ABSTRACT
The rise of technology and a new generation of learners have profoundly influenced the
learning and teaching principles in the twenty-first century. Academic libraries, as an intrinsic
part of the students’ educational journey, are increasingly embracing these developments by
morphing into a new model of service termed as the learning commons. This study sought to
investigate strategies that contributed to the success of transforming a traditional library into a
learning commons model, as well as factors that hindered the change process. The goal of this
mixed method of inquiry was to elicit a clear picture of the participant librarians’ viewpoints on
the research topic. The study’s sample consisted of three academic library directors or deans.
The study sites included three independent university libraries located in Orange and Los
Angeles counties in Southern California. The quantitative segment of the research comprised of
an initial survey. The qualitative inquiry utilized three types of instruments for collection of data:
(a) individual semi-structured interviews with librarians, (b) on-site observations, and (c)
information from online and print resources. The resulting data was analyzed using an inductive
approach. The most significant findings that contributed to the success of the transition
comprised of technology, understanding students’ needs through regular surveys, support of
administration, library staff collaboration, cafe, and policy changes regarding food and noise in
the library. The analysis also suggested that funding, resistance to change, building partnerships
with all stakeholders, and forming an effective working team were some of the foremost
challenges to adapting the learning commons model of service. The overall findings of this
study showed that careful planning of the transformation and identifying factors that influenced
the change process were essential for the successful implementation of the learning commons
concept.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
The role and functions of an academic library have evolved drastically as the result of a
new social, economic, and technological reality. Libraries are responding to these developments
by changing focus from collection and storage of information to becoming active partners in
students’ educational journey. The learning commons model of service is a concept that is
founded on the vision of supporting the integrated learning needs of the digital generation. Many
institutions have already adopted the learning commons model that may include space re-design
and re-purposing learning and teaching support resources and services. However, planning and
implementing the transition from a traditional academic library to a learning commons model is a
daunting challenge for most of the smaller institutions (Cunningham, 2007). A key to successful
transformation is identifying strategies that will lead to planning and implementing a productive
and thriving learning commons that will motivate students to develop critical thinking and
engage in creative learning within an information and technology-rich environment.
Chapter One presents the background of the study including a section on the millennial
generation, researcher’s background, statement of the problem, the purpose of the study, the
significance of the study, definition of terms, theoretical framework, research questions,
limitations, delimitations, and the assumption of the study.
Background of the Study
Libraries are gateways to knowledge and the culture of a society. Traditionally, libraries
have been the repositories of print materials with the librarians as the guardians of the resources
(Simmons, 2000). Libraries have supported knowledge and scholarship for generations of
learners by providing refuge and quiet spaces for reading and research (Gayton, 2008; SaponWhite, King & Christie, 2004). According to the type of services delivered to the users, libraries

2
are broadly categorized into the academic library, special library, public library, and national
library (Rubin, 1998). Academic libraries serve the educational objectives of the institution, and
therefore they exist to meet the needs of the academic community. The growth of academic
libraries reflects the development of higher education and their roles have evolved as the
priorities and goals of the educational institutions have progressed (Shiflett, 1981).
Modern academic libraries are at the crossroads of seemingly ubiquitous technology and
online information. The millennial students are increasingly relying on digital and media,
collaboration, and creativity for learning and communication (Hoffman, Franks, & Edson, 2015).
Since late 20th century, there has been a growing dialogue that the traditional brick and mortar
library is no longer an essential part of the institution or student’s educational experience (Ross
& Sennyey, 2008). Numerous academic libraries across North America reported a measurable
decline in the usage of library reference services, door count, and print collections in the early
1990’s (Beagle, 2009). This shift in library usage coincided with the arrival of the internet and
online technology. The topic of relevancy and value of the academic library as place and space
is still debated extensively by academic librarians and educators (Antell & Engel, 2006;
Buschman & Leckie, 2007; Campbell, 2006).
Although the role of an academic library has undergone considerable change in the past
three decades, a library is still an indispensable part of a student’s educational experience.
Twenty-First century libraries are increasingly shifting focus from collecting and preserving
materials to becoming an active partner in students’ success and retention and the overall
educational mission of the institution. A study conducted by the University of Minnesota during
the Fall 2011 semester indicated that first-year undergraduate students who used the library had a
higher-grade point average (GPA) for their first semester and higher retention in the freshman

3
class from the non-library users (Soria, Fransen & Nackerud, 2013). An additional analysis of
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) member libraries concluded that the ratio of
professional library staff to students statistically has proven to have a significant positive
relationship with both retention and graduation rates (Antell & Engel, 2006).
A statistical study of this researcher’s library, Concordia University Irvine Library (CUI
Library) services and resources showed a 250% increase in the door count from 2008-2015. This
substantial shift in library use was a result of transforming the library into a student-centered
environment, including creating additional study stations by removing bookshelves. Although
the CUI library has not transitioned to a learning commons model, the focus has shifted from the
collection of materials to matching learners and educators with the information tools and
resources they need. In 2012, the CUI library reference desk answered only 282 face-to-face and
email reference sessions. This number increased to 980 questions in 2015 after implementation
of a real-time chat reference assistance tool. The most noticeable increase became apparent in
the number of students who attended library instruction workshops. In 2012, only approximately
1,000 graduate and undergraduate students participated in library instruction sessions. This
figure almost doubled in 2015 due to a new library initiative of offering online library classes
using the Adobe Connect platform. A library is a necessary component of student’s educational
journey, but it must renew to accommodate the technological advancements and the changing
expectations of twenty-first century learners.
A new service model adopted by many academic libraries to meet the educational and
research needs of the students is the concept of the learning commons. The learning commons
model integrates the services of the traditional library and the new world of information in a
seamless physical and virtual space in support of education, collaboration, and development of

4
the students of the modern age (Heitsch & Holley, 2011). A "learning commons brings together
the functions of libraries, labs, lounges, and seminar areas in single community gathering place”
(Lippincott & Greenwell, 2011, p. 2). The academic libraries still could uphold their status as
the “heart of the university,” but they must be willing to transform their mission and goals and
adapt to the technological advances expected by the learners of the twenty-first century, who are
also known as the millennial generation.
The Millennial Generation
Before the digital age, college and university students were mostly the same age (18-22
years) and attended the traditional face-to-face classes. This category of students is termed
“traditional,” and they usually enrolled directly from high school and attend full-time (Terenzini
& Pascarella, 1998). Today, students are more diverse, ranging from 17-year-old high school
graduates to 40-year-old working parents. However, the most prominent group of this mix is
students born between 1982 and 2000, dubbed the “millennials” (Pew Research Center, 2015).
According to a United States Census Bureau 2015 report, millennials are more ethnically diverse
than the generations that preceded them, with 44.2% being part of a minority race or ethnic
group. Although they are not intrinsically different from any other students, the millennials are
unique because of their relationship to technology and digital media (McGlynn, 2005). “Kids
these days. Just look at them. They’ve got those headphones in their ears and a gadget in every
hand. They speak in tongues and text in code. They wear flip-flops everywhere. Does anyone
understand them?” (Hoover, 2009, p. 1).
Millennials present a visible gap between their comfort level of technology and the
technological skills of their teachers and professors (Starlink, 2004). The millennial generation
has grown in an era where information is available 24 hours /seven days a week. The seamless

5
access to information has influenced their global outlook and their views on racial and ethnic
diversity and gender roles in society (Redding, 2011). According to a 2014 Nielsen survey,
millennials ranked technology use as most important to them (24%), followed by music/pop
culture (11%), and liberal/tolerant values (7%). Millennials are also affecting higher education
noticeably by their preference for mobile technology and collaborative and interactive learning
(McHaney, 2012). Their preference for a portable learning environment is apparent by their use
of mobile devices such as iPods and laptops rather than desktop computers. Texting and instant
messaging (IM) are the standard methods of communication with peers and family. They
consider email a tool for communicating with professors and other university contacts for
clarifying course information and other academic matters (Jones, 2008). The internet is the first,
and most often, the only source of conducting research and finding information and a tool to
“express ideas that they would not have voiced in class” (Starlink, 2004, p. 10). According to a
2016 Nielsen Social Media Report, a typical millennial on average spends approximately six
hours per week using a variety of communication media, including social media tools and online
chatting. A survey study on millennials use of technology concluded that the majority of college
students used IM during schoolwork (93%), non-computer activities (93%), and computer
activities (97%) (Golder, Wilkinson, & Huberman, 2007). Moreover, millennials have an innate
competence to multitask. Compared with older generations, the millennial generation uses
different media simultaneously, such as listening to music while reading (Carrier, Cheeverb,
Rosena, Beniteza, & Changa, 2009). Millennials also differ from previous generations by their
preference for group activities and collaboration. They respond well to assigned group projects
and team building exercises and are accustomed to sharing their thoughts and opinions (Kendall,
Etheredge, Moody, & Cooper, 2014). This egalitarian ethos and the comfort with teamwork is

6
something that millennials bring to the academic world and the work environment (Phillips &
Trainor, 2014). An additional characteristic of this new generation is the expectation for best
services, facilities, and instant responses to their questions and needs (Seal, 2014).
Howe and Strauss (2007) noted that through the coming years, the millennials would
transform the academic world as the baby boomers did in the 1960’s. Millennials are not passive
learners, and they expect to be active participants in their learning and education. If an
educational institution does not have the technology, resources, and facilities that will support
their learning activities and lifestyle, they will choose a university that does (Turner &
Thompson, 2014).
Student Retention and Academic Libraries
Student retention is an issue of increasing concern for many institutions of higher
education in the U.S. According to a National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) 2017
report, the retention rate among first-time, full-time degree-seeking students who enrolled at
four-year degree-granting institutions in 2014 was 81%. Retention rates were higher at
institutions that were more selective and lowest at the least selective institutions. The retention
rate for private nonprofit four-year institutions was 82% overall, ranging from 63% at institutions
with open admissions to 96% at institutions that accept less than 25% of applicants. The
retention rate for private for-profit four-year institutions was 55% overall, ranging from 51% at
institutions with open admissions to 76% at institutions that accept between 25% and 50% of
applicants. Described as a “leaking pipeline attrition” effect by Seidman (2005), student dropout
has a wide-ranging impact on the institution, the student, and society. The student will have to
repay their debt despite the failure to graduate and struggle with gaining employment and workrelated advancements. NCES has reported that in 2016, the employment rate was higher for

7
those with higher education. For example, the employment rate was highest for young adults
with a bachelor’s or higher degree (88%) than those who had some college (77%) or those who
had completed high school (69%). Also, the institution loses a source of income, and the
surrounding community suffers from adverse economic impacts when students leave or face a
high level of unemployment.
A study by Hanover Research (2014) found that seven constructs influence student
retention: academic advising, social connectedness, student involvement, faculty and staff
approachability, business procedures, learning experiences, and student support services. The
study supports Tinto’s theory of student retention (Draper, 2008) that recommends institutionǦ
wide improvement of classroom practices, academic support, student engagement, and faculty
interaction as essential factors for improving retention among all students. A key component of
Tinto's model of retention is the importance of student integration in the academic and social life
of the institution, whereby library use is a form of student engagement and integration within
such institutions.
Academic libraries demonstrate through a variety of approaches (e.g., instruction,
reference, space and facilities, and collections usage) their roles in contributing to student
engagement, success, and retention. One of the first scholarly studies of academic library use
observed a positive relationship between library use and persistence, as students who borrowed
books from the library dropped out 40% less often than non-borrowers (Kramer & Kramer,
1968). Mezick (2007) explored the impact of library expenditures and staffing levels on
retention and found a moderate relationship between expenditures and retention. An additional
analysis of 3,757 student records from the Spring 2013 semester of a regional public university
in the Midwest focused on “library use, as a whole” (Murray, Ireland, & Hackathorn, 2016).

8
This study found freshman library users were nine times more likely to be retained than nonusers
and sophomore library users were four times more likely to be retained than nonusers. Using the
library for any reason was a significant positive predictor of retention for all the students in the
population (Murray, Ireland, & Hackathorn, 2016).
In 2013, the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) launched a threeyear Assessment in Action program (AiA) that created campus-wide partnerships at institutions
to promote collaborative assessment and library leadership. More than 200 higher education
institutions from across North America completed the team-based assessment projects that
resulted in identifying effective approaches for demonstrating the library’s value to student
learning and success. The assessment findings provided compelling and promising indication
about the multiple ways that academic libraries are contributing to student learning and
achievement.
Compelling Findings of Library Impact:
1. Students benefit from library instruction in their initial coursework.
2. Library use increases student success (e.g., GPA, course grades, retention).
3. Collaborative academic programs and services involving the library enhance student
learning (e.g., higher grades, academic confidence, retention).
4. Information literacy instruction strengthens general education outcomes including use
of information, critical thinking, ethical reasoning, and civic engagement.
5. Library research consultations boost student learning as documented by such factors
as student confidence, GPAs, and improved achievement on course assignments.
Promising Evidence of Library Impact:
1. The library contributes to improved student retention.

9
2. Library instruction adds value to a student’s long-term academic experience.
3. The library promotes academic rapport and student engagement.
4. Use of library space relates positively to student learning and success.
Researcher’s Background
The researcher’s principal interest in researching more concrete methods for
implementing a learning commons model stems from her educational and professional
background as an academic librarian. The researcher’s first experiments with library technology
as a library student assistant at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary (GCTS), involved
participation in converting print book records (retrospective conversion) to Machine Readable
Cataloging (MARC) records and implementing an online catalog of more than 350,000 print
books. After completing a Master of Arts degree at GCTS, the researcher proceeded to work on
a Master of Science Degree at Simmons Graduate School of Library and Information Science in
Boston, Massachusetts. As a library science student, the researcher was drawn to library
technology and, more specifically, how it could be used to meet the learning and teaching needs
of an academic library user more effectively.
After completing the master’s degree in Library and Information Science (MLIS), the
researcher worked for eight years as the information technology librarian and supervisor of
media services and the computer lab at GCTS before she moved to Concordia University in
Irvine, California as director of library services and Assistant Professor of Christ College. As
evident in many other libraries, both GCTS and CUI libraries have gone through numerous
changes in the past two decades. As an example, converting the 350,000 volume card catalog
and manual circulation to an integrated library system (ILS) at GCTS was an exciting step in

10
welcoming the digital age and the new learning and teaching opportunities it offered for libraries,
students, and faculty.
The researcher aims to explore practical strategies and approaches that will guide the
transition of the Concordia University Irvine library to the learning commons model and to
provide other librarians who are perusing similar change with precise planning and
implementation guidelines. The academic library user’s expectations and learning styles have
changed dramatically over the years. Similarly, today’s libraries must cultivate more innovative
approaches to serve the new and future generation of students (Prensky, 2001).
Statement of the Problem
Technology has fundamentally changed the role, responsibilities, and functions of
academic libraries. Today’s academic library must continually evolve to meet the learning needs
of a generation of students that prefer active learning, seamless access to information, and social
interaction, all in a comfortable and flexible environment (Steiner & Holley, 2009). Developing
a learning commons is a proven strategy for libraries to continue as the centers of student
learning and engagement. However, libraries considering adopting a learning commons concept
must be ready to deal with challenges and issues related to space design, technology, staff
training, cost, and collaboration with other departments, and often a general institutional inertia.
A search of available literature shows an abundance of data on history, concept, and theory of the
learning commons. Nevertheless, there is an evident dearth of information on planning steps
required for the successful transition to the new model of service. Unless there is a thorough
understanding of the planning process and implementation strategies, the transition to a learning
commons model may easily fail or collapse.

11
Adopting a learning commons model is a substantial undertaking and dependent on the
support, cooperation, and collaboration of all stakeholders, including administrators, librarians,
faculty, and students. Additional consideration includes a long-term provision strategy for
maintaining the physical structures and various support services, such as technology, media
services, and writing center services (Baily & Tierny, 2002). Determining the elements that
contribute or undermine the change process will assist the libraries to develop into lasting centers
of learning, collaboration, and creativity within the university community. An inductive
approach was utilized to examine the experiences of three academic libraries that have
implemented the learning commons model. The resulting data will help to establish the most
fundamental themes for academic librarians, and other administers to consider when planning a
similar transition.
Purpose of the Study
The aim of this study was to examine strategies, challenges, and obstacles in transitioning
a traditional academic library to a robust and thriving learning commons model. The study also
identified factors in sustaining a successful learning commons. The literature review supports
the view that implementing the learning commons concept is a key step in accommodating the
dynamic learning needs of millennial students and for remaining relevant in the twenty-first
century educational environment. The results of the study provide recommendations for the
planning of the learning commons model at academic libraries. The researcher is also planning
to transition the Concordia University Irvine Library, known as the CUI Library, to the new
design utilizing the results of the study. When fully implemented, this library will serve as a
successful learning commons model for other college and university libraries.

12
Significance of the Study
The students of an intensely digital age (also known as millennials) come with unique
skills and learning expectations that are forcing libraries to consider new services, resources, and
expertise in a new domain termed as the learning commons (Holmgren, 2010). Over the past
two decades, many academic libraries have already reinvented their spaces and services or plan
on converting their libraries to the new model (Hisle, 2005). However, relatively few studies
have researched and documented the contributing factors to success or failure of the new
concept. The goal of this study was to investigate strategies and challenges of transitioning a
traditional academic library into a robust and thriving learning commons model and provide
librarians and university administrators with practical insight for a successful and durable
transition to the new design. The literature review supports the view that implementing the
learning commons concept is a key step in accommodating the dynamic learning needs of
millennial students and for remaining relevant in the twenty-first century educational
environment.
Definition of the Terms
For clarification purposes, this study provides definitions of specific terms commonly
used in the field of library and information science.
Learning Commons: A learning commons is defined as “a dynamic place that encourages
learning through inquiry, collaboration, discussion, and consultation” (McMullen, 2008, p.1). A
learning common is based on creating an environment that supports cooperation, teamwork, and
student use of technology (Miller, 2006).

13
Information Commons: Information commons is a physical space usually in an academic
library with the goal of providing a digital environment and technological support (Beagle,
Bailey, & Tierney, 2006).
Cultural Commons: Cultural commons refers to either physical or virtual cultures shared
and expressed by a socially cohesive community. “A cultural commons is a system of
intellectual resources available on a given geographical or virtual area and could be thought as
the evolution of the more traditional concept of cultural district or cultural cluster” (Santagata,
Bertacchini, Bravo, & Marrelli, 2011, p. 1). A cultural commons is comprised of the workshops,
tutoring programs, research collaborations, etc. that takes place because of the environment
created through the commons.
Physical Commons: The physical commons consists of the computer hardware,
furnishings, designated spaces, and the traditional collections of the library material, such books,
journals, and newspapers.
Virtual Commons: The virtual commons contains the digital library collections, online
tools, electronic learning tools, and Web presence of the library, library catalog, and online
databases (Beagle, 2011).
Village Commons: The village green or commons was traditionally a place to graze
livestock, stage a festival, or meet neighbors. This concept of social utility underlies the
philosophy of the modern learning commons, which is a flexible environment built to
accommodate multiple learning activities (Lippincott & Greenwell, 2011).
Digital Natives: This term refers to the “younger generation, the native speakers of the
digital language of computers, video games, and the internet” (Prensky, 2001, p. 1).

14
Makerspaces: Makerspaces are informal places for creative work in different disciplines
where people of all ages could collaborate to use digital and physical technologies to create new
products, learn technical skills, and explore innovative ideas (Sheridan, Halverson, Litts,
Brahms, Jacobs-Priebe, & Owens, 2014).
Roving Reference: Roving reference is reference and research support conducted by the
librarians or student assistants outside of the reference desk.
Retrospective Conversion: In the field of library and information science, this term means
changing an existing catalog of mostly printed materials from an existing traditional form to a
machine-readable form.
Theoretical Framework
The traditional approach to improving formal education has encouraged the use of
effective pedagogies for centuries. However, educating students raised in an age of technology
require twenty-first century pedagogy in a twenty-first century physical environment. Most of
facilities with the traditional classroom of rows of desks and little space for creativity and
flexibility are not conducive to meeting the needs of the new generation of students and the
training of multiple intelligences. Many educational institutions built in the 19th and even the
20th century offer very rigid and limited amount of learning spaces, and they are not equipped
with technology, multimedia, and creative production equipment. Also, the design of the spaces
is usually not suitable for group work, experiential learning, and flexible movement (Kezar,
2001).
The quality and quantity of campus facilities play a critical role in students’ selection of a
college or university and their overall educational experience. Cain and Reynolds (2006)
investigated factors that influence students’ recruitment, and retention reported that 66.9% of

15
respondents considered the overall quality of campus physical facilities as “very important” in
their decisions. The various physical elements considered essential by respondents included
facilities related to a student’s major (73%), the library (53%), academic technology (5%),
classroom buildings (50%), and residence halls (42%) (Cain & Reynolds, 2006). The study was
conducted with the support of Center for Facilities Research (CFaR), and the survey questions
were sent to students of 1,013 higher education institutions in North America with 16,153
responses from 46 institutions received and analyzed (Cain & Reynolds, 2006). Results such as
these demonstrate that the millennial generation’s demand for an active learning environment is
forcing institutions to take into consideration flexibility, collaboration, and team-based activities
when redesigning and creating their spaces.
Research studies confirm that even though the use of print collections has decreased,
students prefer to use the library for academic work (Bryant, Matthews, & Walton, 2009; Demas,
2005; Foster & Gibbons, 2007; Suarez, 2007). Fred Kent, the architect and founder of Project
for Public Spaces has stated that even though the library is no longer the only place of
information, millennials will go to the library if a library is a "desirable place" (Kent & Myrick,
2003, p. 72). Kent describes four characteristics that create desirability of a learning space:
access and linkages; uses and activities; sociability; and comfort and image (Kent & Myrick,
2003).
Access and linkages. Traditionally, the central location of the library signifies its
importance to an academic institution’s mission of educating students (Cunningham & Tabur,
2012). This geographic placement allows students to move to other facilities, such as those
providing extracurricular and social activities. The easy access to various institutional locations
and learning spaces of the new library or learning commons motivates students to utilize the

16
library as the focal point of their daily activities. Acker and Miller (2005) described the value of
learning spaces for millennial students as “how effectively and efficiently the space provides
access to learning resources. These resources include other students, access to information
technologies and Web content, and flexible student and faculty space configurations that support
efficient learning” (p. 3).
Uses and activities. The millennial generation is known for their capability to
multitask, as they are adept at combining academic work with social activities (Foster &
Gibbons, 2007). Thus, libraries are transforming to provide spaces that can accommodate
students’ academic and social activity requirements. Applegate (2009) stated, "An effective
library is one that addresses the entire spectrum of student needs, [and] does so as part of the
entire student space-use ecology on a campus" (p. 345). A growing trend in library renovations
and design is providing space for group study and activities (Bennett, 2003; Shill & Tonner,
2003). However, quiet study spaces are still in demand and students have often complained
about the noise level in the libraries (Suarez, 2007).
Sociability. The millennial generation requires both the quiet study environment and
spaces for group work and discussion. Gayton (2008) described the two characteristics of a
library for millennials as the "communal library" of quiet, contemplative independent study and
research, and the "social library" of collaborative work and activities. Both aspects require
different spaces and design, and both are equally essential learning spaces in a library (Gayton,
2008).
Comfort and image. Comfort and image are considered the most crucial attributes in
motivating the new generation of students to use the library space and maintain usage into the
future. Demas and Scherer (2002) referred to this as an esprit de place where space, architecture,

17
furnishings, decor, and integration into the community's needs and ethos combine to create a
transcendent space (p. 65). Students and teachers require a place that allows teamwork,
inventiveness, and access to multiple sources of learning. In other words, instead of physical
repositories, libraries are becoming a learning commons to support the various learning styles of
the millennial students by incorporating desirable characteristics (Figure 1.1).

Comfort and image

Space, architecture, furnishing, decor

Sociability

Group study and discussion, quiet
and independent research

Uses and activities

Spaces for academic work social activities

Access and linkage

Central location, access to resources and
services,
networking with other students and faculty

Figure 1.1. Characteristics that determine desirability of a learning space (adapted from Cunningham &
Tabur, 2012)

Research Questions
1. What factors contribute to the successful implementation of a learning commons
concept?
2. What factors undermine the successful implementation of a learning commons
concept?
Limitations of the Study
There is no one formula or guide for creating a learning commons, as every facility is
based on the unique needs of the institution. For instance, financial status and administrative
support have a significant influence on the design and structure of a learning commons. Further,
a learning commons is not a static structure; it evolves with new technology and the change in

18
students’ learning needs. Also, determining the actual success of the learning commons may
require many years. The learning commons concept is relatively new and not yet widespread.
These factors limit the volume of research available for study.
Delimitations of the Study
The study was limited to three academic libraries. The collection of data relied on
surveys, interviews with librarians, site observations, and exploration of online and print
resources.
Assumptions
The librarians and library staff communicated their honest responses to the questions
regarding the transition process. The participants understood the concept and vocabulary related
to the field of library and information science. The researcher recognized and limited biases
concerning the results of the study.
Organization of the Study
This study is organized in five chapters. Chapter 1 represents the background of the
study, statement of the problem, the purpose of the study, the significance of the study, definition
of terms, theoretical framework, research questions, limitations, delimitations, and the
assumption of the study. Chapter 2 encompasses a review of the literature, with focus on the
learning commons as a place, staff and interdepartmental collaboration, the learning commons
resources and services, and the evolving role of an academic librarian. Chapter 3 explains the
methodology of the research in four parts including selection of the participants, instrumentation,
data collection, and data analysis. Chapter 4 describes the findings of the results. Chapter 5
includes a summary of the study, discussion of the findings, recommendations, and conclusion.

19
Summary
Researchers have described the most defining characteristics of the millennial generation
as the use of technology, group work, multitasking, and diversity. To meet the learning
expectations of the latest generation of students and to enhance their engagement in the
educational process, the institutions must take into consideration their various learning styles and
educational needs. Different learning theories and neuroscience have proven that the aesthetics
of learning spaces affect brain function and the process of active learning and effective teaching.
Practical and creative learning spaces aid students to connect to their learning environment,
connect new information to prior knowledge, and engage multiple senses resulting in increased
cognition and recall. Identifying and designing learning spaces that will encourage both formal
and informal learning and meet the social activities needs of the students is an essential step in
engaging the millennial students. Investigation of the library spaces in the learning process
represents a significant opportunity for higher education to contribute positively to the learning
process and progress of students.

20
CHAPTER 2: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
The village commons was traditionally an open green space that belonged to the entire
community. It benefited both the individual and society by providing a central place for grazing
livestock, staging a festival, or meeting neighbors (Association of Commons Registrations
Authorities (ACRA), n.d.). This system of responsible resource management, mutual support,
and collaboration underlies the philosophy of the modern learning commons. A learning
commons is a multiservice and flexible environment built to encourage scholarship and learning
by focusing on community partnership, collaboration, and creative activities (Lippincott &
Greenwell, 2011).
A learning commons approach integrates the services of the traditional library and the
new world of information technology in a seamless physical and virtual space in support of
student education, teamwork, and development (Heitsch & Holley, 2011). A "learning commons
brings together the functions of libraries, labs, lounges, and seminar areas in single community
gathering place” (Lippincott & Greenwell, 2011, p. 2). According to Beagle (2006), an
authority on academic learning commons, the concept of information commons appeared in 1990
with the advent of the internet and under various labels such as “information arcade, media
union, and virtual village” (p. 3).
The terms learning commons and information commons have been used interchangeably,
but they mean different things among different institutions. Beagle (2006) has described an
information commons primarily as the availability of information technology (IT) and related
tools “in the context of physical, digital, human, and social resources organized in support of
learning” (p. xviii). According to this definition, the goal of an information commons service is
to support learning, whereas a learning commons organizes the services of support/service units,

21
such as the library and IT services, with other departments that establish the learning mission and
goals of the institution (Bennett, 2008).
Technological advancements and the shift of traditional libraries to learning commons
have also transformed the role of a librarian from the person who gathers and provides access to
information to an active participant in the educational and learning process. The concept of
blended librarianship arose out of this profound development in the availability of online
information and the gradual irrelevance of traditional librarianship skills, such as collection and
organization of printed information sources (Shank, Bell, & Zabel, 2011). The term “blended
librarian” was proposed by Bell and Shank to describe the librarians of the digital age. A blended
librarian combines the skills of the traditional librarianship with proficiency in information
technology and teaching capability using appropriate technology (Bell & Shank, 2004). The
modern librarians must also be able to coordinate various services not only in face-to-face
situations, but have proficiency in providing assistance via text messaging, email, instant
messaging (IM), Facebook, Twitter, blogs, and other communication media (Wolfe, Naylor, &
Drueke, 2010). Reinventing academic libraries into centers of latest technologies and
collaborative learning and teaching is a natural step forward for most academic intuitions.
However, if the new libraries or learning commons are to remain viable, the librarians must also
be willing to blend their traditional skills with innovative expertise in IT for meeting the needs of
twenty-first century students (Sinclair, 2009)
History of the Libraries
The accumulation of written human experience as an archive of recorded knowledge is
interconnected with human civilization. From the clay tablets and papyrus scrolls to bound
books, libraries have collected, preserved, and transmitted sources of information. The library is

22
one of the pillars of civilization and an indicator of human society and culture. “History
begins with the written record; however, there has to be more than a scattered number of
written records for there to be a library and a civilization” (Tolzmann, Hessel, & Peiss,
2001, p. 1).
The earliest library materials, including clay tablets or papyrus scrolls, were
merely records of legal and trade transactions, but they used some fundamental principles
of librarianship that are standards in today’s libraries (Casson, 2002). The Sumerians,
who lived in the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, current day Iraq, are believed
to have created the world’s first libraries. The first libraries were collections of clays
tablets with cuneiform script, which now date back approximately 5,000 (Lerner, 2009).
It was many centuries before papyrus replaced clay tablets. Papyrus scrolls were lighter,
durable, and much easier to carry (Adams et al., 2007). In fact, this concept has survived
in the form of modern day paper. In Greece, the quest for knowledge and the resulting
small and private libraries flourished around the 5th century B.C. (Kesting, 1978). The
Romans soon expanded the idea by building 26 public libraries, including two founded
by Emperor Augustus. Romans also developed the codex format in the 1st century B.C.
from wooden writing tablets (Boyd, 1915).
Early Islamic and Christian religions significantly contributed to the spread of
libraries through the Middle East. However, the Mongolian Invasion of 1258 destroyed
most Islamic libraries (Learner, 1998). During the 11th and 12th centuries, the Christian
monasteries and their libraries spread rapidly (Casson, 2002). In Europe, the university
libraries emerged in the 12th century, but they were mainly tied to monasteries.
University library collections included inexpensive, mass-produced books made of cheap

23
paper for student use. Printing was revolutionized with Gutenberg’s movable type innovation in
the 1400’s that replaced handwritten manuscripts with printed books (Learner, 1998).
In North America, before the American Revolution, most books were imported from
England, and local presses produced less than 60 books per year (Hanson, 1989). After 1776,
there was an increase in publication. An 1804 catalog listed 1,138 American publications in
print (Weiner, 2005). Both public and academic libraries grew in number and size over the
years. The oldest academic library in the American colonies began with a 400-book donation in
1638 by a Massachusetts clergyman, John Harvard. This bequest was to a new college
established in 1636 and later named Harvard College in Harvard’s honor (Harvard University,
2018). Such colonial college libraries were typically small collections of mainly theological
works with some standard treatises in philosophy, logic, and history. The books were randomly
organized by size, title, subject, or donor until the adoption of the Dewey decimal classification
system in 1876 (Weiner, 2005). Additionally, there were fewer than 100 regularly published
periodicals in the U.S. in 1825, but by 1885, this number increased to more than 9,000 titles
(Weiner, 2005).
Just as with the growth in the economy and the population, universities and their libraries
increased vastly by the end of the 19th century (Thelin, 2011). There was also a gradual shift in
emphasis from conservation and protection of the books to making them more accessible to
students and faculty. Collection development policies increasingly focused on supporting the
curriculum rather than research. Classifying and shelving books according to subject became the
standard and cooperation with other libraries eventually developed into the well-established
system of interlibrary loan (Hamlin, 1981). Hours of operation were extended, facilities were

24
improved, and eventually financing the library became an accepted responsibility of the
parent institution.
According to the American Library Association (ALA), there are an estimated
119,487 academic, public, school, and special libraries in the United States today. The
American Library Directory 2015-2016 has listed the number of academic libraries as
3,793 (ALA, 2015). An academic library is usually linked with a degree-granting
institution of higher education, and its fundamental mission is to support the research and
teaching mission of the institution by providing educational services and resources to
students and faculty regardless of their location. The progress of academic libraries has a
close relationship to the developments in high education. The role and functions of
academic libraries evolved as the institutions expanded and adjusted their priorities.
Shiflett (1981) stated in his classic work “The Origins of American Academic
Librarianship” that libraries have improved or suffered in proportion to its value to the
institution.
Libraries have advanced from clay tablets and papyrus to paper and most recently to
digital format, but the demand for acquiring knowledge has remained unchanged. Printed
information resources are still essential for supporting learning and education. However, the
traditional physical libraries are no longer the only places of research and accessing information.
The twenty-first century students and teachers expect a learning environment that facilitates
collaboration, creativity, social interaction, and access to multiple sources of information. In
other words, instead of being repositories of printed materials, libraries are transforming into a
learning commons model of service.
Traditional academic libraries have become a different kind of learning destination in the

25
age of technology and a student-centered academic culture. Since approximately the year 2000,
many libraries have transitioned to a model that embraces partnership with other student support
departments, such tutorial programs, and writing and computer technology centers. These
facilities of expanded student services are often termed learning commons (Beagle, 2009).
Learning commons refers to “a dynamic place that encourages learning through inquiry,
collaboration, discussion, and consultation” (McMullen, 2008, p.1). A learning commons
approach is grounded on creating a flexible environment that promotes cooperation, teamwork,
and student use of technology (Miller, 2006). This concept is increasingly gaining value as the
new generation of students is characterized by its reliance on technology for learning and
communication (Gardner & Eng, 2005) and a preference for teamwork and experiential activities
in informal spaces (Kvavik, 2005). The literature review is organized in five sections: planning
process of a learning commons model; space design for the learning commons model; staffing
and interdepartmental collaboration; elements of learning support resources; elements of learning
support services.
Despite various definitions of the learning commons, academic learning commons are
fundamentally grounded on a concept that supports participatory learning, creativity, a
productive and flexible physical and virtual environment, and shared student support services,
such as writing centers, IT, tutoring services, and the more traditional library support.
Planning Process of a Learning Commons Model
Traditionally, libraries were built and expanded using carefully defined standards, such as
estimating the number of volumes and journals to be housed, the number of seats and study
carrels, the square feet needed for a particular library function, and the number of librarians per
students. Adding more space was usually the standard solution for any perceived library needs

26
and future growth. However, advances in IT have forced libraries to change their primary focus
from collection development and expansion of physical space to meet the learning needs of
twenty-first century students. Indeed, the academic library of today must function as an integral
part of the student’s total educational experience. The conversion of a traditional academic
library into a learning commons model encompasses a holistic planning process for
conceptualizing a new environment aligned with the university’s core values. The critical
components of the planning process include creating a shared vision, leadership, research,
funding, training, assessment, and safety considerations.
Pearce and Ensley (2004) defined shared vision as “a common mental model of the future
state of the team” (p. 260); it signifies the capacity for envisioning a shared picture of the future,
developing a shared commitment to this future image, and establishing some means for
achieving it. A shared vision facilitates organizational learning and encourages long-term
commitment (Senge, Cambron-McCabe, Lucas, Smith, & Dutton, 2010). Importantly, a clearly
articulated vision is grounded in research and data analysis and supported by a structure that is
comprehensive but clear to everyone (Hooper & Bernhardt, 2016). An effective shared vision
for the learning commons must consider the areas that need to be changed, the essential elements
of a learning commons, and methods for measuring progress and success.
The Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) recommends the review of
the following documents for an initial planning consideration:
x

Institution and library vision and mission statements.

x

Institution and library strategic plans.

x

Campus master plans.

x

Campus history, culture, and demographics.

27
x

Library needs assessment and environmental scan.

x

Documents from other library projects, including building and architectural plans,
national, regional, and state standards and guidelines for library facilities, American
with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, and Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) certification.

Survey and assessment play a significant role in engaging students in the planning
process and identifying needs related to learning commons from the students’ perspectives and
incorporating their viewpoints into the planning of the new facility. Surveys are also valuable in
planning for appropriate services, resources, and additional staffing needs. Tours of other
learning commons and conversation with other librarians and library consultants may provide
practical information (De Rosa, 2006). The University of Massachusetts Dartmouth learning
commons planning process included a review of library literature, site visits to existing learning
commons, consultations with experts in the field, the involvement of the major campus
stakeholders, and survey data (Weiner & Weiner, 2010).
Funding for implementation and maintenance of a learning commons model presents a
challenge for many smaller colleges and universities due to reduced budgets. Libraries have
been forced to reexamine their values and policies due to substantial changes in the economic
structure of the libraries and the expansion of information services over the last few decades.
Creating a shared vision and gaining the support of the university community for the
transformation is the first step in securing funding and other essential resources for the project.
A fact-based and data-driven proposal is critical in demonstrating the benefits of adopting the
new concept to the senior administrators (Blake, 2015).

28
The efficient operation of a learning commons demands a plan for cross-training of staff
and student workers. Depending on the level of integration of the services, this process could
involve providing technology-related training for the library staff and basic research and
information literacy skills for IT staff (Church, 2005). At Loyola University ACE Center, cross
training that focuses on the main points of each service is prerequisite for all tutors (Orgeron,
2001). McKinstry and McCracken (2002) noted that reviewing and updating training programs
should be taken into consideration due to rapid technological changes.
Assessment and evaluation play a crucial role in the development and improvement of a
learning commons by determining if users’ needs are met (Alvayay, Brawley, Kowalski, &
Portier, 2011). The rapidly changing requirements of students necessitate continuous
enhancement of the services, spaces, and resources. “Learning commons are borne from user
need and created from user input.” (Fuller, 2010, p. 2). Beagle (2011) recommend that
evaluation must include the design aspect of the learning spaces, qualitative assessment of
service effectiveness, and quantitative measures of service delivery.
Physical and online safety has become an issue of critical importance in libraries in recent
years. Most libraries have an open-door policy that allows any member of the public to enter the
building and without a security guard or surveillance cameras, leaving users and the facility
vulnerable to those with criminal intent. ALA (2010) security guidelines have suggested
adopting the following measures:
x

Ensure efficient and regular training of librarians and student employees by the
campus safety police to prepare staff to take the appropriate steps when a crime
occurs.

29
x

Take precautions to protect patrons and staff against acts of violence, such as theft,
sexual harassment, and assault, and devise policies and procedures for preventing and
managing crimes.

x

Safeguard collection materials from theft/vandalism through the development of a
library asset protection policy. This policy should address issues such as fire and
emergency regulations, security alarms and gates, guest access, parcel control, and
regular inventory of library collections and other assets.

x

Adopt strategies to focus on disaster preparedness and appropriate measures to
prevent and reduce losses during emergencies and natural disasters, such as
earthquakes, fires, floods, and other weather-related catastrophes. The experiences
and responses of other institutions should be consulted for creating appropriate
strategies and programs. Law enforcement, fire service, risk management, insurance
professionals, and others with expertise in loss prevention should be involved in
planning as required.

Academic libraries are guided by the intellectual freedom principles of ALA (n.d.) and by
the academic freedom standards adopted by the American Association of University Professors
(AAUP). Academic libraries are unique in providing the campus community with information
that supports the research and teaching missions of the institutions. As a result, ALA advocates
that internet access in academic libraries should be free and unrestricted. This practice makes it
possible for students, faculty, and staff to engage in research and scholarly activities with free
and easy access to online information on any topic, including controversial issues. ALA also
recommends that the privacy of library users is and must be inviolable. Policies should be in
place that reinforces the confidentiality of library borrowers and the use of online and

30
information resources and services. Access to the internet is considered the right of all academic
community members. However, illegal internet activity, such as viewing child pornography,
should not be allowed. Many libraries already have established resource guides with in-depth
information related to safety and safeguarding patrons, employees, and property. Examples of
safety policies and procedures can be found on the websites of Wayne State University Library,
Boston University Library, and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Space Design for the Learning Commons Model
The central element of a robust learning commons is the physical space. Similar to
traditional libraries, the commons is visible and centrally-located on the university campus.
Monahan (2002) stated that present technology-based learning environments must be designed
with flexible criteria to be able to accommodate various learning styles and practices. Physical
flexibility is described as the capacity of a space to meet the unique sensory and mobility needs
of individuals, accommodate movable furniture and walls, and designed with reconfigurable
buildings, rooms, and passageways (Monahan, 2002). On a different level, flexibility also
involves the ability to accommodate future modification of space due to changes that include
demographic shifts or policy mandates (Moore & Lackney, 1994). The learning commons is not
a library with more technology but “a concept that emphasizes the way in which architectural
features reflect educational philosophy and structure influences the learning processes that take
place therein” (Reiner & Thomas, n.d., p. 3).
A thriving learning commons is purposefully designed to reinforce learning and deliver a
variety of services that promote scholarship and the academic pursuits of students. The physical
space consists of elements, such as seating, lighting, bathrooms, and wall decor (Stark &
Samson, 2010). The learning spaces inspire students’ use of the learning commons and provide

31
access to both traditional and nontraditional technology (Sullivan, 2010), and a collection that is
built on users need (Harland, 2011). Keating and Gabb (2005) recommended that space should
be designed with the primary goal of promoting student learning beyond simply accommodating
library operations. The learning commons space concept promotes students’ educational and
social activities, group work, and technological skills. Some of the challenges currently faced by
traditional libraries are finding space for nontraditional student activities, such as digital
publishing, makerspaces, group projects, and music production. The educational makerspaces
(EM) movement is based on the philosophy of hands-on learning through creative building and
production (Kurti, Kurti, & Fleming, 2014).
An innovative idea in the design of a learning commons is the availability of cafe or
lounge spaces without the traditional food and beverages restriction policies and rules. In most
traditional libraries, food and drink policies were created to protect the materials, equipment, and
facilities. However, a well-planned learning commons design may want to visualize a model for
an environment where students feel relaxed and receptive, enjoying beverages and snacks,
discussing, learning, and socializing. It is this type of environment that is needed to foster both
formal and informal learning.
The learning commons model is different from a traditional library by recognizing both
individual and social dimensions of education. The social aspect necessitates combining quiet
spaces with areas that permit noise and interaction. In order to accomplish these multiple
purposes, spaces must be designed to accommodate a variety of environments, including quiet,
noisy, individual, group, and long-term and short-term student activities (Keating & Gabb,
2005). This type of space fosters learning by recognizing distinctions between social and
educational dimensions of the learning process and accommodates both academic and social

32
activities of the students. Additionally, providing choices of place that range from individual to
group study reinforce the discipline needed for acquiring knowledge and new skills (Bennett,
2005).
The three significant trends in library space design are identified as strategies that
reinforce social and academic progress, human-centered design, and devices that supplement the
learning process (Brown & Long, 2006). Sinclair (2007) has described this most recent
revolution in the library world as Commons 2.0. The aim of a Commons 2.0 is to promote
creativity, interaction, and collaborative learning through technology, flexible and attractive
spaces, and comfortable furnishing (Sinclair, 2007). Whitchurch, Belliston, & Baer (2006), have
emphasized the significance of integrating traditional library reference service and the physical
location of the computer workstations. However, the quality of services also plays a crucial role
in creating and sustain a productive and functional learning commons.
Staffing and Interdepartmental Collaboration
Migrating a traditional library to a learning commons model has a substantial impact on
staff, training, and interdepartmental relationships. A successful learning commons meets the
user’s needs and expectations for the creation of knowledge, social interaction, technology, and
group work (Seal, 2014). This new trend involves reconsidering interdepartmental partnership
and a new staffing model for providing integrated and services to students. Gaining the support
and participation of faculty and students is a necessary step for implementation. A learning
commons model only becomes a success when faculty and students take ownership of the space
and make it their own (Koechlin, 2015). A learning commons design is founded on the mission
and needs of an institution, but the most common model includes the convergence of library and
IT services (Spencer, 2006). However, differences in departmental culture could create

33
considerable challenges for establishing a central point of service. The librarian’s concept of
service centers on providing information, resources, and an environment that supports study and
research. The focus of IT staff is on the use of technology and solving particular problems
(Heid, 2007). Open and respectful communication is considered the most effective solution for
creating an environment of support and cooperation among departments (Cunningham, 2007).
Both librarians and IT staff must also be prepared for additional training, changes in their job
descriptions, and reassignment of duties.
Undoubtedly, student assistants play a valuable role in assisting other students in creating
a welcoming and non-threatening environment (Kent & McLennan, 2007). Many learning
commons offer innovative services and work-based learning programs that are entirely staffed by
“student rovers.” Student rovers are experienced students who are trained and paid to assist their
peers by providing directions and basic information regarding research resources and technology
or referral to other relevant services and expert staff members (McCormack, Pancini, & Tout,
2010).
Elements of Learning Support Resources
The resources of a learning commons vary with the requirements and policies of the
institutions. According to Cunningham (2007), a learning commons may or may not hold a print
collection, including reference volumes and other academic books. However, many institutions
from across the country have reported a shift of focus from print to digital resources. A 2016
Ithaka S+R Library Survey of library deans and directors of non-for-profit four-year academic
institutions across the U.S. clearly demonstrated this transition from print to electronic (WolffEisenberg, 2017). The survey questions were sent to 1,488 individuals representing 1,501
institutions. Digital content, including eBooks, full-text databases, electronic reserves, and

34
courses materials through the library website, was shown to offer a broad range of options to
users, and wireless access throughout the building and even the campus was an expected feature.
Although every learning commons facility is unique, all learning commons are based on the
theory of supporting the learning needs of a generation of students that value technology and
social and collaborative learning (McMullen, 2008).
The learning commons is a technology-rich environment. IT resources and services
should meet the needs of learning, teaching, communication, and research in one location. Most
of information accessed by users for research are repositories and databases that are available
online to users 24/7 in different places. Some typical components include computer workstations
with appropriate and updated software for writing and research, wireless network, multimedia
production software and hardware, and storage space for student work (Elsayed et al., 2013).
Many learning commons facilities also provide laptop computers, projectors, and other
multimedia equipment, such as video cameras, tripods, and microphones for student loan
(Keating & Gabb, 2005). Additional equipment may include wireless printers, copiers, and
scanners and the availability of software ranges from word processing to more sophisticated full
suite and licensed packages, such as statistical or web authoring software. The computer
workstations are usually arranged in pods, clusters, cloverleaf, or circular patterns with ample
space for student study materials (McMullen, 2007). The message of a learning commons to
students is, “Here you have tools, room to collaborate, equipment, advice, research options, and
access to expert information. Now it is up to you to build something worthwhile: a paper, a
presentation, an education” (Lippincott & Greenwell, 2011, p. 2).
Planning for acquiring appropriate technologies is an integral part of a learning commons
model. However, the rapid changes in information technology and communication media also

35
demand a robust budgetary plan. Keeping the learning commons and its resources and services
current with emerging technologies and users’ needs is essential to its long-term sustainability
and progress (Kumar & Cheddie, 2014). Strategies for ensuring up-to-date software, hardware
replacement cycles, and professional development of support staff must be explored and
eventually implemented. Gibbons (2007) recommended embracing a research and development
(R&D) mindset to keep pace with the continual technological changes. The R&D mindset
mandate requires developing staff technology skills as the core responsibility of job
performance.
Elements of Learning Support Services
An emerging trend in response to students’ dissatisfaction with constant referral among
the library, student services, and IT department is the formation of a collaborative service
module (Beagle, 2011). Adjusting to an innovative service model means cooperation and
communication among all staff members from participating departments, such as IT, writing
centers, and media services (Wolfe, Naylor, & Drueke, 2010). The learning and teaching
support services of a learning commons are considerably broader than the services of a
traditional library. However, reference and research assistance and information literacy are still
essential elements of both models. The goal of the traditional library reference desk is to provide
research and information support, but the service desk of a learning commons offers both
research and IT assistance (Wolfe et al., 2010). Some learning commons models have service
desks with integrated functions, and others have adopted multiple desks with separate functions
(Dawes, 2015). Selected learning commons libraries also have chosen a model of reference
service that is no longer limited to a particular physical location in the library. Roving or

36
roaming reference is a service type in which a librarian or student assistant walks throughout the
library and assist students with locating or using resources and services (Bremer, 2017).
The expansion of online courses and heightened user expectations also indicate the
importance of supporting virtual communities with access to an exploding body of online
information tools and collections. Virtual reference help via chat, text, and email connects users
in real time to a professional college or university librarian (Heitsch & Holley, 2011).
Additional services offered often include computer and learning labs and testing centers. These
facilities are equipped with networked computers, professional software suites, scanners,
printers, and related equipment. Depending on the need of students, these services may offer
English-as-a-second-language tutoring and computer-assisted instruction for students with
disabilities. The support staff and trained tutors of these facilities typically deliver instructions in
the use of educational and communication technologies. University faculty and staff also reserve
available spaces for class and university-sponsored events. These spaces are often equipped with
video and conferencing capabilities and managing online media assets.
The University of Minnesota learning commons offers free-of-charge tutoring to enrolled
students via their Peer Research Consultation program. The peer research consultants are
available for one-on-one assistance to develop research strategies for writing research papers and
other assignments. The consultants are students, who are specially trained to help fellow
students find scholarly or academic articles, navigate the library website, locate appropriate
databases for a research topic, and evaluate articles and websites.
Other examples of learning support programs include the Peer-Assisted Learning (PAL)
program, which is an academic support program for historically difficult introductory college
courses, with weekly study sessions throughout the academic semester (Arendale, 2014). The IT

37
staff supports the educational community through technology-rich course production, integrating
technology into teaching, and investigation of developing technologies. Multimedia projects
design and creation are facilitated by media services assistants (Stuart & Iandoli, 2009). Another
common facility is the language center, which strives to advance second languages, literature,
and cultural education through technology inspired instruction and training. Increasingly,
libraries are adopting models that extend learning services and student support beyond the library
and IT. Including writing centers in academic libraries is an effective way to maximize the
relationship between departments, foster collaboration, and expedite referrals. For instance, the
learning commons at the University of Southern California in partnership with the university’s
writing center provides writing assistance during scheduled hours. The writing center offers
student writing support, consultation, and tutoring. Scholarly writing and citation workshops are
designed and conducted in collaboration with the library reference staff.
The abundance and the relatively easy availability of online information also present
extra challenges for creators and users of copyrighted material. The copyright support services
responsibility is educating faculty and students regarding copyright laws and protecting the
institution from potential copyright infringement and liability. The primary functions of
copyright support services are training, consultation, course-integrated instruction, and
workshops on copyright and scholarly communications issues and requirements (McMullen,
2008).
Importantly, librarians continue to offer general and subject-specific on-site and online
instruction sessions at both the undergraduate and graduate levels that include information
retrieval techniques and evaluating sources of information. Students also can receive hands-on

38
instruction concerning the use of academic research databases on a variety of information
sources, including scholarly journal articles in the sciences, humanities, and social sciences.
Summary
The learning commons model for libraries presents an innovative design for twenty-first
century learning in an age of technological advances. Traditional academic libraries, in their
present structure, symbolize an early 20th century model of information storage and retrieval that
no longer meets the learning needs of a generation of students raised in a technology-rich
learning culture with immediate access to information and social interaction. A learning
commons model is not just about more computers, but the model also confirms student lifestyles
by bringing student support services, resources, and technologies into a library as the heart of the
campus. As stated in the University of Massachusetts, Amherst learning commons mission
statement, it is a place for “transformative learning experiences that inspire students to embrace
challenge, engage in critical inquiry and creative thought, and grow in their chosen academic
pursuits” (University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2015, p.1). An additional feature of a
successful learning commons model is to combine social and educational activities by providing
students with varied and collaborative spaces that accommodate their changing patterns of
learning and interaction.
The most significant challenge facing libraries in the twenty-first century is staying
relevant to users. Academic libraries must take risks and reevaluate library services and systems
in response to the needs of today’s learners by adopting a service model that supports academic
pursuits and high-level thinking skills and processes, such as critical thinking, problem-solving,
collaborating, and innovating.

39
CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
The learning commons philosophy was developed in response to distinctive personal and
academic characteristics of millennial students. To meet the learning requirements of this
diverse and largest living generation in the nation (Fry, 2016), academic libraries gradually have
evolved by integrating their services with academic support services to deliver everything a
student may require in a single physical facility. “The learning commons model functionally and
spatially integrates library, IT, and other academic support services to provide a continuum of
services to the user, a blending of staff knowledge and skills, and referral to appropriate areas of
expertise” (McMullen, 2008, p.1).
Research was conducted with the purpose of investigating the experiences and challenges
encountered by librarians who have engaged in transitioning their traditional university or
college libraries to the learning commons service model. Research has indicated that the
successful implementation of a learning commons is contingent on a thorough assessment of
distinctive qualities, resources, and requirements of an institution. Furthermore, building
collaboration between the library and various stakeholders such as senior administration, faculty,
students, and librarians is a key element of the strategy for long-term survival of the new
concept. Additional consideration includes establishing an optimal learning environment
through shared workspaces, technological solutions, and centralized services for participatory
learning (Koechlin, Rosenfeld, & Loertscher, 2010). The emergence of the learning commons
concept as a significant force in meeting the learning needs of the new generation of students
brings into focus the significance of a shared vision of all stakeholders and careful organizational
planning and design.

40
Inadequate initial planning of the multiple stages of the transition or poor provision can
easily lead to collapse, underperformance, or overuse of a learning commons. The methodology
for investigating the research topics is organized into five sections: (a) selection of the
participants, (b) sampling procedures, (c) data collection and instrumentation, (d) validation
strategies, and (e) data analysis.
Selection of the Participants
To establish a purposive sample, the participants were recruited from Statewide
California Electronic Library Consortium (SCELC) and Southern California Theological
Library Consortium (SCATLA). An initial email to 160 SCELC and 28 SCATLA
members was sent to identify independent university or college libraries that already have
implemented a learning commons concept. After receiving and evaluating the responses,
those libraries that met the research criteria were invited for participation in the study.
Recruitment was done mainly via email and in-person during SCELC and SCATLA
meetings. Recruitment outreach highlighted the goals of the research and the
requirement for the prior experience of transitioning an academic library to a learning
commons.
A mixed method approach is based on collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data
from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives (Zohrabi, 2013). The quantitative
step of the study utilized survey questions for gathering data. The qualitative phase of the
research was conducted from an interpretivist/constructivist perspective using interviews
and observations. The interpretive constructivist paradigm is a theoretical framework
that sees the world as understood and experienced by people in relation to one another
(Eriksen, 1980). The design allowed the research to be adapted based on distinctive

41
characteristics of each institution and personal experiences and observations of the respondents.
The findings were shared with SCELC and SCATLA member libraries via SCELC and
SCATLA members Email List Serves. As a courtesy, a final report of the research was provided
to SCELC and SCATLA Board of Directors. This research was limited to exploring the
transition experiences of three academic libraries, and as a result, it did not reflect a truly broad
cross-section of the transition experiences. Each university was unique in terms of budget,
mission, and enrollment and these factors influenced the conversion process of the libraries.
This study was not designed for in-depth analysis of the individual themes and categories.
Sampling Procedure
The purposive sample included three academic libraries. Purposive sampling, also
described as judgment, selective, or subjective sampling is a sampling procedure in which
researchers choose members of a population due to their specific knowledge or experience
(Molina, 2015). This method is nonrandom and does not rely on underlying theories or set
number of participants (Tongco, 2007). Five libraries were identified among SCELC and
SCATLA member libraries based on the following criteria: (a) the institution is an independent
small to midsize university or college library located in California. (b) the library has
transitioned to a learning commons service model. (c) the selected librarians have actively
participated in the transition process. The final selection of the participants was limited to three
academic libraries.
Data Collection and Instrumentation
A mixed methodology for data collection and analysis was determined as the most
appropriate approach for this study. The data collection procedures involved four categories:
surveys, individual semi-structured interviews, nonparticipant observations, and online and print

42
documents. The first instrument in this study consisted of a survey instrument. The interviews
included semi-structured, open-ended questions. Although an interview guide with preplanned
questions (Appendix A) was used, the interviewer did not adhere to that specific order of
questions (Magnusson & Marecek, 2015). The main advantage of this type of interview was the
flexibility in asking questions and allowing the participant to communicate their views in their
own words (Opdenakker, 2006). The interview questions were directly correlated to research
questions and developed in advance. Interviews and discussion regarding transition strategies
and processes were conducted in-person using open-ended questions. Interview questionnaires
were developed with a goal of answering the research objectives and goals. The questions were
designed specifically to document the experiences of the librarians who planned and participated
in the change process.
Additional data regarding space, services, and resource utilization was gathered from site
visits with the researcher as a nonparticipant observer. The site visit included a tour of the
facility and taking notes regarding spaces, services, and resources. An observation form
(Appendix B) was developed for identifying what will be observed and documenting reflections
during these visits. Information from websites, social media outlets and print materials
supplemented the study.
Recording and storage of data was accomplished through digital equipment such as iPad
or iPod as well as written observations and informal discussion notes. The data was transferred
to the researcher’s desktop computer with appropriate password protection and backup files in
Dropbox.

\

43
Validation Strategies
A key factor influencing validity, reliability, and accuracy of the results is the level of
error. Four major sources of error include (1) the researcher (2) the participants (3) the setting or
social context and (4) the data collection and analysis methods (Brink, 1993). Triangulation,
thick description, and peer review measures ensured the validity and reliability of the data.
Triangulation is the process of examining multiple perspectives, identifying common themes,
and excluding overlapping categories by comparing and cross-validating data from various
sources (Creswell, & Miller, 2000). Multiple methods of data collection including survey
questions, interview, observation, and document analysis contributed to the credibility of the
findings. Various qualitative inquiry theories stress the issue of enhancing quality and credibility
of qualitative analysis. Guba (1981) has proposed four criteria for trustworthiness of a
qualitative study. These four constructs correspond to the standards traditionally employed by
researchers. These criteria include: (a) credibility or internal validity; (b) transferability or
external validity; (c) dependability or reliability; (d) conformability or objectivity. Creswell and
Miller (2000) have suggested using the “lens” perspective and the researcher's’ paradigm
assumptions. The lens perspective is based on the researchers, participants, and reviewers’
assessments. Researcher paradigm assumptions include postpositivist, constructivist, and critical
influence validation procedures (Guba & Lincoln, 1994).
Rich and thick description complemented the validity of the research through a detailed
description of the site, the contributors, and the themes of the research (Creswell & Miller,
2000). As suggested by Lincoln and Guba (1985), the goal of peer review is to assess the
accuracy and validity of the findings by inviting feedback, suggestions, and questions from
reviewers specialized in the same scholarly area as the researcher. Transparency is a

44
fundamental factor enhancing the integrity and interpretability of the research. Academic
discourse protocol requires scholars to disclose the evidence, theory, processes, and methodology
that led to the conclusion of the study (Moravcsik, 2014). High quality and secure recording
devices diminished possible threats to internal validity. The study was restricted to specific
libraries and periods, so maturation did not pose a threat
Data Analysis
This research utilized an inductive approach for analyzing the collected data from
surveys, interviews, observations, and archived information. The primary aim of an inductive
approach is to convert the raw data into a summary format, create a link between the research
objectives and findings, and to develop conclusions from the experiences of participants from the
raw data (Thomas, 2006). Furthermore, an inductive approach offered the benefits of a less
complicated option for analyzing data by not depending on restricted protocols as other
structured methodologies. Thomas (2006) asserts that an inductive analysis leads to developing
categories into a framework or a model. The resulting categories have five main features:
1. Category label: a word or a short phrase that defines the category.
2. Category description: a description of the key characteristics, scope, and limitations.
3. Text and data associated with the category.
4. Links: relationship or links between categories.
5. The type of models in which categories are embedded. These models signify the
conclusion of the analysis.

45
The Process of Inductive Coding
Precoding of the data was done by reading the raw data to identify and mark important
comments or themes. The following procedure as suggested by Thomas (2003) was applied for
coding the data:
1. Preparing and cleaning of raw data files to ensure consistency in the format including
font size, margins, and highlighting interviewer’s comments.
2. A careful reading of the text to gain an understanding of the themes in the text.
Identifying and creating categories or themes.
3. Identifying overlapping codes and un-coded text or the text that is not relevant to the
evaluation of objectives.
4. Revising and refining the category system by searching for subtopics such as
contradictory point of view and new insights.
5. Creating a model that incorporates 3-8 most important categories.
Table 1.1
The Coding Process in Inductive Analysis
Preparing
Initial careful Identifying
and cleaning read through and creating
the data
text
Themes

Entire data

Many pages
of text

30-40
categories

Reducing
overlap and
redundancy
among the
categories
15-20
categories

Refining text
by
identifying
subtopics
15-20
categories

Creating a
model of
most
important
categories
3-8
categories

Table 1.1 is adapted from Thomas (2003, p.6).
Anticipated Ethical Issues
Participants shared information about the challenges of the transition process including
some details about their perspective institutions and libraries. To protect participants from

46
potential supervisory consequences, confidentiality and anonymity of the institutions and the
respondents was ensured through pseudonyms and general indicators such as the exact location
of the college or university was kept confidential. Participants were informed that they were free
to withdraw from the research at any time. Additional information including the purpose and the
procedure of the study, the expectation from the participants, the amount of time required,
contact information of the researcher or IRB were made available to all participants.
Summary
This chapter sets forth the research questions to be analyzed for the study. The
participants were three academic libraries in Southern California that have successfully
transitioned to a learning commons model. The components of a qualitative general inductive
methodology utilized in this study were explained. The data collection and data analysis
procedures were described. Finally, validity, trustworthiness, and reliability strategies used by
the researcher were set forth and discussed.

47
CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
The intent of this mixed method study was to examine the experiences of the librarians
who led or participated in transitioning a traditional academic library to a learning commons
model. The qualitative aspect of the research that formed the core of the study was based on the
general inductive theory as described by Thomas (2003). The quantitative segment of the
research utilized a survey instrument to obtain a thorough preliminary understanding of the
institution and its library. The data was analyzed with a focus on answering the two research
questions as described in Chapter 1:
1. What factors contribute to the successful implementation of a learning commons
concept?
2. What factors undermine the successful implementation of a learning commons
concept?
The participants in this study were deans or directors of three academic libraries in
California. Pseudonyms LC1, LC2, and LC3 were used to protect the identities of the librarians
and the institutions. The research tools for investigating the two research questions comprised of
a survey, in-person interview, observation, and online research.
Participants
Participant LC1 is a professional librarian with a BA in social work, California teaching
credential, an MA in instructional technology, a MLIS, and more than 23 years of academic
library experience. Participant LC2 holds a BA in music, an MA in library science, and a PhD.
Participant LC2 also has worked more than 30 years as an academic librarian. Participant LC3
has a MLIS and more than 34 years of work experience as a librarian. Participant LC3 also has
completed the coursework towards a PhD program.

48
Institution and Library Descriptions
The three contributing academic libraries are located in Southern California. Institution
LC1 is a small private university with full-time enrollment (FTE) of approximately 1,100
students. The library houses an estimated 65,000 books, audiovisuals, and print periodicals.
Access to nearly 90,000 eBooks and thousands of journal articles is available online. The library
operates on an annual budget of less than $500,000 and has six librarians and support staff
members. The library is open 73 hours per week during regular semesters. As indicated in
Table 4.1, the facility consists of two floors with spacious and bright areas and a variety of
comfortable and flexible furniture. The first floor is dedicated to print stacks, a service desk, and
study tables. In addition to staff offices, the second floor includes an information commons and
the collaborative student innovation (CSI) lab. The information commons covers nearly 50% of
the library’s total floor space. The services and resources offered in the information commons
includes computers, printing, scanners, wireless access, and assistance with research and
computer-related issues. The CSI lab was designed to accommodate students’ group projects,
discussions, and presentations. LC1 Library facilities are summarized in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1
LC1 Library Facilities on Levels One and Two
Level 1
x Print books
x Service desk
x Study tables

Level 2
x Information commons
x CSI lab
x Helpdesk
x Offices

Institution LC2 is an independent university with FTE of approximately 5,000 students.
The library’s annual budget is more than $1,000,000. The library is open approximately 100
hours per week when classes are in session and supported by 20 librarians and staff members,

49
but many basic functions are performed by student employees. The library consists of three
floors and an architecture that is centered on providing bright, spacious, and welcoming spaces
with movable and comfortable furniture. In addition to a collection of more than 800,000 print
and eBooks, the library also offers an extensive array of services to students, faculty, and staff as
summarized in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2
LC2 Library Facilities on Levels One, Two, and Three
Level 1
Level 2
x Distance education
x Copy room
production center
x Cafe
x Group study rooms
x Instruction lab
x Mac and PC labs
x Learning resource room
x Microform reader
x Public computers
x Public computers
x Service desks
x Technical services
x Writing center
x Tech commons helpdesk

Level 3
x Administration offices
x Center for faculty
development
x Food court
x Group study rooms
x Conference rooms
x Learning center
x Mezzanine
x Outdoor terrace
x Public computers
x Test proctoring center

Institution LC3 is also a private comprehensive university with an estimated FTE of
8,300 students. The library has a book collection of more than 600,000. The library is open 140
hours per week and the library operations and services are supported by 46 librarians and library
staff as well as 150 student employees. The library building consists of three levels with many
large windows and an open space design offering an extensive category of student and faculty
resources and services. LC3 Library facilities are summarized in Table 4.3.

50

Table 4.3
LC3 Library Facilities on Levels One, Two, and Three
Level 1
Level 2
x Cafe
x Book stacks
x Circulation desk
x Technology support and
x Library instruction
equipment checkout station
room
x Current periodicals
x Group study rooms
x Group study rooms
x Information
x Popular reading collection
x Reading room
commons
x New books
x Video viewing workstations

Level 3
x Archives & special
collections
x Lecture room
x Book stacks
x Faculty commons and
innovation center (FIC)
x Group study rooms
x University events venue

Quantitative Results
An initial assessment survey (Appendix A) was sent to the participants as an introduction
to the research environment and the participants’ academic and professional backgrounds. The
survey was comprised of seven questions. Question one regarding the change in the gate count
offered the participants with five response options: Decrease, No Increase (Same), Moderate
Increase (Less than 20%), Medium Increase (21% - 30%), Significant Increase (more than 30%).
Questions two to four explored the three key areas of research interest (library resources,
services, and spaces) with seven items, each organized on a 5-point scale: Very Important (5),
Important (4), Somewhat Important (3), Not very Important (2), and Not Applicable (1).
Question five, with 10 items, was aimed at exploring the two top students’ activities in the
library. Question six was an open-ended question to offer participants an opportunity to provide
any additional comments or suggestions not included in the survey. The final question consisted
of general informational queries, such as the institution’s FTE, the library’s annul budget, staff
size, and hours of operation.

51
For question one, “How would you describe the change in the gate count after
implementation of the learning commons model in your library?”, the participants were given an
opportunity to reflect on and examine the library gate count data before and after the renovations.
As shown in Figure 4.1, library LC1 reported a significant increase (more than 30%) in the door
count after creating an information commons and redesigning the spaces. LC2 indicated that
there has only been a moderate increase in library usage according to the door count, as the
library was already a popular destination for students. Library LC3 experienced a substantial
increase in the door count after moving to the new building with extensive renovations of spaces
and services. The results are shown in Figure 4.1.

35%

Change in the Gate Count After Adopting the Lerning Commons
Concept

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

LC1

LC2

LC3

Figure 4.1. Survey response showing increase in the library gate count after transition.

The second survey question asked the participants to rate the importance of library
research assistance, IT support, writing center services, tutoring, multimedia production support,
24/7 access to the library, and the significance of additional services, such as the computer lab,

52
printing, and copying. All three libraries reported reference and research assistance as a “very
important” function of the library. LC1 also rated the use of the computer lab and printing as
“very important” and IT support and tutoring services as “somewhat important.” LC1 did not
have a writing center, multimedia production support center, or 24/7 access to the library. LC2
categorized IT support as “very important,” writing center and tutoring “important,” and
multimedia production support as “somewhat important.” Although offering extended hours of
operation, LC2 is not open 24/7. In addition to research and reference assistance, LC3
considered 24/7 hours of operation as a “very important” service of the library. IT support was
rated as “important,” and multimedia support and group study rooms were evaluated as
“somewhat important.”
The most important theme from the responses of the librarians was the availability of
research and reference assistance and IT support was ranked the second most important service
as indicated in Figure 4.2.
Please rate Please Rate the Importance of the Following
Services in Your Library/Learning Commons
5
4
3
2
1
0
Referene
Assistance

IT Support

Writing Center

Tutoring

Multimedia
Support

24/7 Access

5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2= Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable
LC1

LC2

LC3

Figure 4.2. Survey response showing research assistance and IT support as important library services.

53
For question, “Please rate the importance of the following resources your library/learning
commons”, the results suggested that the resources provided by a library or learning commons
play a crucial role in effectiveness and usage of the facility. All three libraries considered online
databases and computer workstations as “very important.” LC1 and LC3 also categorized copy
and printing services as “very important.” Additionally, LC1 rated print books as “very
important” and phone chargers and headphones as “somewhat important.” LC1 did not offer
laptops and other equipment for checkout. LC2 categorized the availability of print books, copy
and printing services, and electrical outlets as “important” and borrowing of laptops, tablets, and
other equipment as “somewhat important.” Library LC3 emphasized the availability of
electrical outlets as “very important” and the print book collections as “important.” The
responses are summarized in Figure 4.3.

Please Rate the Importance of the Following Resources in
Your Library/Learning Commons

Print Books

Online
Databases

Copy, Print, Scan

Computer
Workstations

Borrow
Equipment

Electrical
Outlets

5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2=Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable
LC1

LC2

LC3

.
Figure 4.3. Survey response showing online databases and computer workstations as the most important
resources in libraries.

54
As understood by librarians and educators, the primary aim of an academic library is to
advance the students’ educational goals and the mission of the university. A recent and
fascinating phenomenon in the evolvement of libraries is the impact of redesigned library spaces
on psychosocial aspects of an institution (Freeman et al., 2005). A library was traditionally
valued as a quiet space for research and study. However, to accommodate the learning styles of
the digital generation, the libraries are redesigning their spaces to accommodate a broad
spectrum of learning styles in a flexible and comfortable environment.
For the third question, “Please rate the importance of the following spaces in your
library/learning commons,” group study rooms, comfortable furnishing, computer and learning
labs were labeled as “most important” by all three participants. The two libraries that had a cafe
considered it a “very important” student gathering and social interaction venue. LC2 and LC3
also ranked the quiet study spaces as “very important.” LC1 assessed quiet study spaces as
“important” (Figure 4.4).

55

Please Rate the Importance of the Following Spaces in Your
Library/Learning Commons
5
4
3
2
1
0
Quite Study
Areas

Group Study
Rooms

Comfortable
Furnishings

Media
Lab/Studio

Café

Computer &
Learning Labs

5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2= Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable

LC1

LC2

LC3

Figure 4.4. Survey responses showing important library/learning commons spaces such as group study
rooms, cafe, and comfortable furniture.

For the question “What are the top two activities of the students when they visit the
Library?”, all three librarians reported that although the libraries have evolved significantly, they
are still the main centers for individual and group study, research, and writing. Notably, even
though most students have access to a personal computer, the library research computers show
heavy usage. The purpose of this question was to get an understanding of most popular usage of
the library. Possible choices included the following: individual study and research; writing a
paper; group study; the use group study rooms, computers, printers and copiers, library Wi-Fi,
and research assistance at the help desk; checking out or returning library materials; and relaxing
and socializing (Table 4.4).

56
Table 4.4
“What are the top two activities of the students when they visit the library?”
Librarian Code
Information Shared
LC1
Individual study
Group study
LC2

Studying
Use of computer workstations

LC3

Group study
Use of technology (computers, printers, and Wi fi)

The final open-ended question was aimed at collecting additional information that the
participant wished to share with the researcher. Only two responses out of three were received.
LC1 elaborated on the increase in library usage after adopting many aspects of a learning
commons model of service:
We have not implemented a “Learning Commons” model per se. However, we saw a
significant increase in traffic after our 1999 renovations. We have two floors with one
service point on each. The Circulation Desk provides access services (circulation,
reserves, ILL, photocopying) and the Information Commons Desk serves the only
computer lab on campus (supported by campus IT) and provides scanning & printing. In
2014, we built a group study room with a smart TV, Apple TV, TV cam, adapters, and
cables.
LC3 commented that since the library did not keep data for the previous years, it was
difficult to quantify the usage of the library services, resources, and spaces before and after
renovations.

57
Qualitative Results
Interviews
This study was intended to explore the diverse elements in shaping a traditional academic
library to a learning commons model. In addition to a preliminary survey, this mixed method
study included a series of interviews designed to gain an understanding of the process through
experiences of the participant librarians. The interview consisted of 20 questions divided into six
precise categories. These six categories consisted of (1) educational and professional
background of the participant, (2) institution description, (3) learning commons, (4) transition
challenges, (5) changes made for the transition, and (6) reflection.
The responses of the participant librarians to question, “What made you decide to change
from a traditional library model to a learning commons model?”, indicated that educational
institutions are responding to the learning needs of the digital students and the advances in
information and communication technologies. Reponses included themes such as bright, open,
and welcoming environment, technology, cafe, changing role of academic libraries, studentcentered approach, and collaboration spaces. Sample responses by all three librarians are shown
in Table 4.5.

58
Table 4.5.
“What made you decide to change from a traditional library model to a learning commons
model?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Electronic resources; Students needs for success.”
LC2

“Some of that has to do with architecture than with services and so forth,
but they [administration] wanted a bright, open, and welcoming
environment. So, you noticed our theme of the building was embraced
around the building at this ‘Christ is the light of the world’ light.
Apparently, the previous library facility had very few windows and was
rather dark. We have almost too many windows. It’s very bright and airy.
However, we do try to have a lot of welcoming services like our cafe and
things like that. They all kind of incorporate into hopefully a positive and
welcoming environment.”

LC3

“Well, when I came here in 2006, we were planning a new library. I knew
that this building was going to be built in the next couple of years. And so,
when we were planning the building, a lot of the groundwork that was laid
was looking at the changing role of academic libraries on campus. And,
the building that we were in—which you can actually see from here—was
in transition. And, they wanted to use the planning and development of
this building as an opportunity to bring the library more firmly into the
twenty-first century. We wanted to be influenced and wanted to be kind of
on the cutting-edge of what academic libraries were doing…But, also
investigating in the library literature about new formats for delivering
library services and we realized that we wanted engaged learning
throughout the building. We wanted to have a more student-centered
approach that offered collaboration space and lots of programming and
other kinds of things. In other words, we wanted the library to move
beyond a traditional academic library to really become the intellectual and
cultural hub of the campus. And for that we felt that many of the Learning
Commons models were more appropriate.”

Librarians play a crucial role in informing, educating, and motivating the university
community regarding library services, resources, and spaces. However, in response to the
question “Describe how you introduced the concept of the change to your university
leadership?”, two main themes emerged. These themes implied the necessity of building
partnerships and a good working relationship with the university administration and leadership

59
team and the issue of funding. LC1 indicated that although the administration supported the
renovations, the main reason for achieving the renovation projects of the library was receiving a
technology and renovation grant. LC2 and LC3 highlighted the importance of administrative
support and cooperation with other departments. Summary responses by all three librarians are
in shown in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6
“Describe how you introduced the concept of the change to your university leadership?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Opportunity to remodel through a grant; technology and online services,
‘Bigger bang for our buck.’ ”
LC2

“Introducing concept of change into leadership – you’re asking actually
about change management. I can discuss that. Some of it will hinge upon
services we provide. Some of it will maybe relate to just the way we deal
with one another in personnel management. So, what I do is I try to raise
the idea of a concept, introduce an idea.” “These are all parts of change
management, to be out front, clear about what you want to do to make sure
the change is not a done deal, so that people involved in the change feel
they have true and authentic and genuine input, that they are creating their
own future. It is not a dictate handed from the administration to them
without their input. They get to see how we may actually flex and change
the design of the policies as we move forward in light of what they’ve
brought up. In the case of the tech commons, we said they will manage all
of the printing operations.”

LC3

“I will say that it was not difficult at all because there was new leadership at
the university when I arrived in 2006. There was a new chief academic
officer who was heavily involved in championing the new library. And, I
think when you build a new library people are expecting new things.” “They
wanted this kind of 21st-century modern library building and they wanted it
to be a modern library in terms of its services and collections and its
approach to student support.”

The references to “information commons,” “tech commons,” and a “user-centered
library” were the phrases that librarians used to describe the most significant changes in their
libraries since transitioning to a learning commons service model (Table 4.7). Technology

60
included digital resources, such as online databases, computers, software applications, wireless
access, and copy and printing services. A user-centered library was described as considering
students’ preferences in upgrading the library. In addition to technology, students’
recommendations for renovation included a cafe, individual and group study rooms, and
comfortable seating.
Table 4.7
“Describe the most significant changes, if any, you have experienced since transitioning to a
learning commons service model?”
Librarian Code
LC1

Response Shared
“Two service points; 50% of floor space dedicated to technology; focus of
librarian skills on digital resources.”

LC2

“The creation of library tech commons, staffed by IT
student employees. The tech commons assists students with personal
computers and software applications and supports the entire university
community with printing, copying, and use of public computers in the
library and processing media equipment loans for faculty, staff, and
students. The library is also in the process on phasing in a test proctoring
service.”

LC3

“I think the idea is that we saw changes coming before we moved into this
building and people said to me when the building was being constructed
between 2007 and 2009, ‘What are you going to do to get students in the
building?’ And I said, ‘Basically, we’re going to open the door.’ So, we
knew that the building would be very heavily used by students because it
was designed to be a user-centered library. It has gorgeous views, it has
technology, it has wireless, it has data, it has a cafe, it has group study
rooms. It has all of the things that students—it has a fireplace. It has all of
the things that students told us that they wanted. They wanted individual
study space, comfortable seating, group study space, we had 33 group
study rooms with whiteboard walls. We were very responsive to what they
wanted. And so, we knew that we were going to be heavily used.”

Changes in libraries and student learning styles influence the role and work
responsibilities of the librarians. The responses suggested that library innovations led to an

61
adjustment or increase in the work responsibilities of the library director or dean. This
transformation in the role of a modern library leader was described due to progress in
educational technology, the significance of supportive leadership, and building a relationship of
cooperation, coordination, and support with administration and various university departments
(Table 4.8).
Table 4.8
“Describe the changes, if any, you have experienced in your position and work responsibilities.”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“I started out as cataloger, then evolved into systems, and now director.
As director (11 years), I have been Chair of the technology strategy
committee on campus and become more involved with IT and DLT.”
LC2

“More time is being dedicated to building relationship with other
departments, leveraging opportunities such as funding, working with
administration, and building strategic goals.”

LC3

“I think that what I’ve been trying to do is provide more leadership within
the library. So, I’ve been very much encouraging the librarians to become
more assessment-focused, more evidence-based in their decision-making,
more research oriented in the way they approach their jobs. I did create,
for example, a research incentive grant where I support librarians in
conducting research and then presenting the results of their research. And,
the effects of that have been very dramatic.”

Twenty-first century libraries must take into consideration the learning needs of the
online students. In reference to working with students in a renovated library or learning
commons, LC1specified the growth in the number of online programs as the main reason for
developing online resources, such as LibGuids, tutorials, LibAnswers reference with a FAQs
system, and embedded librarians in both online and on-ground classes. LC2 described mainly
communicating with student senators regarding student concerns and did not observed any
substantial changes in working with students. Developing a mandatory library information

62
literacy program for freshman-year classes was a valuable accomplishment for LC3. Sample
responses by all three librarians are shown in Table 4.9.
Table 4.9
“Describe the changes, if any, you have experienced in working with students.”
Librarian Code
LC1

Response Shared

“Online students have changed the most—from strictly adult degree
completion to a wider demographic, including traditional undergrads and
graduate programs. We have developed LibGuides and online tutorials,
instituted an online LibAnswers reference with FAQs system, embedded a
librarian in introductory classes both online and on-ground, train our SLAs
to handle first level reference questions & record reference transactions,
we have instituted a reference librarian sign instead of having a reference
desk. All librarians take LibAnswers and walk-in reference duty hours,
handling both online and on-ground students.”

LC2

“No significant changes were observed in working with students.”

LC3

“So, first of all five years ago we implemented a new core curriculum. And
for the first time, information literacy instruction is integrated into the core
curriculum. So, we have mandatory information literacy in two classes in
freshman year – a first-year seminar and a rhetorical arts class. And the
library is responsible for that instruction.” “And for the past couple of
years we’ve had 100 percent success in reaching every single student
enrolled in rhetorical arts and close to 100 percent for every student who’s
enrolled in a first-year seminar has completed and passed those tutorials.
And then we also have advanced information literacy in a course that’s
called a flagged course where it’s an upper level course where students
have to write a documented paper that requires information literacy skills.”

Responses from all three librarians regarding the most common library activities
suggested that study and research and the use of technology and study spaces were the prominent
student activities in the library. Technology consisted of printing, Wi-Fi access, and the use of
library computer workstations. All three libraries indicated that group study rooms were
particularly popular with students. Sample responses by all three librarians are shown in Table
4.10.

63
Table 4.10
“Describe the most common student activities within the learning commons.”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Printing; using the network; using the computers; writing papers, using
Canvas Learning System; Small group study (CSI Lab); study.”
LC2

“So, the most common is group study, we’re very fortunate to have very
nice group study rooms. We’re actually looking at building two more.”
“The computers are used heavily. We do statistics and we check every
hour on the half-hour. We do a head count. E check to see if they’re using
a computer. We log if it’s our computer or their computer.”

LC3

“Group or individual study including reading, working on assignments,
writing papers, the use of group study rooms and library computers.”

The next question focused on evaluating faculty activities in library. The reference to
faculty activity denotes the various ways faculty members use the resources and services of the
library either for personal research or for classroom activities. The responses included reference
to the use of faculty-only spaces, such as a conference rooms or commons and the use of
research databases or a specific program for teaching. Faculty commons are dedicated areas for
faculty to engage in individual or collaborative work and connect with colleagues. Sample
responses by all three librarians are in found in Table 4.11.

64
Table 4.11
“Describe the most common faculty activities within the learning commons.”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Bringing or sending classes to use a resource together—SPSS and/or a
specialized database or other program.”
LC2

“I’ll tell you, the most common activity within the faculty use are our
conference rooms. They want our space for meetings. There’s a high
premium on meeting space. So, we had our library conference room, which
we call LCR. That’s always been available to anyone on campus.”

LC3

“So, we have something called the faculty commons and it’s also up here
on the third floor and it has two parts. One is kind of like a reading room
and it has lockers and it’s just a space where – quiet space where faculty
can go when they have a break. Or a lot of times people use it when they
are on sabbatical because they don’t want to be in their offices. And our
adjuncts use it.” “But then the other part of it is what we call the faculty
innovation center, the FIC. And that’s run by information technology
services. And that’s kind of like a technology sandbox where information
technology services will have things for faculty.”

In reference to the factors that contributed to the success of the transition, LC1 described
the automation of the library system, more public computers, and a general renovation of the
library as key components in making the transition successful. However, LC1 also stated that
without procuring a grant, the transition would have been impossible or difficult because of
funding. LC2 emphasized the importance of users’ satisfaction through surveys, the building of
a cafe, and permitting food in the library. LC3 stated the desire and support of the university
leaders to provide a “more active learning place” for students was the key contributing element
of success. Based on responses, funding, administrative support, understanding users’ needs,
and some changes in traditional policies are crucial for successful transformation of the libraries.
Sample responses by all three librarians are shown in Table 4.12.

65
Table 4.12
“Describe the factors that contributed to the success of the transition.”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Renovation, automation, additional public computers.”
LC2

“So, I think that’s the biggest thing. Word of mouth is – you can put out all
the advertising you want, but nothing gets the students in as other students
saying, ‘I’ll meet you in the library. There’s the café. We’ll get a cup of
coffee. Then we’ll study together.’ “They [students] love having the café.
It’s very popular.”

LC3

“I would say a desire on the part of the university administration to sort of
change the whole perception of the library as a more active learning place.
And also, they wanted—honestly, they’ve known for years they were
going to build a new library. And so again, that colors the situation. But I
do think there was a strong desire that the library be a more innovative,
creative, and cutting-edge kind of service provider.”

There were three main themes based on responses of the participants regarding
challenges and obstacles of the transition process. These impediments were expressed as
resistance to change, the intricate issue of collaboration and partnership with team members and
stakeholders, and funding. Responses consisted of phrases, such as “you are always going to
have somebody who’s not happy with transition,” “funding is always a major challenge,” and “I
just don’t like the direction you are taking the library.” Sample responses by all three librarians
are shared in Table 4.13.

66
Table 4.13
“Describe the challenges and obstacles of the transition.”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“Some long-time faculty resisted automation and use of electronic
databases and learning new technologies to encourage student use of the
resources. Some administration saw the wide-open space as a waste of
space where books could be shelved.”
LC2

“Not too many. You’re always going to have somebody who’s not happy
with a decision.” “The funding is going to be a challenge. Funding is
always a major challenge.”

LC3

“So, all of these kinds of things have contributed to the university
embracing change for the library. I think the challenges come when, first
of all, we have had somewhat of a financial – you know during the
recession. We did pretty well because we were on our way up. And
frankly, this building was in the middle of being built when the recession
hit. So, it didn’t stop the construction. In a lot of places, it did stop
construction.” “There are some faculty here – again, the faculty – it’s very
difficult to reach every faculty member with your message.”

The importance of redesigned spaces was also explored. LC1 explained the opening of
the library spaces through relocation of non-library offices and extensive weeding of the print
collections for creating areas for the building of an information commons and accommodating
comfortable and movable furniture. LC2 created a tech commons equipped with updated
technology in the library building. LC2 also installed compact shelving for maximizing the
space. LC3 commented on adding 33 group study rooms, the expansion of archives and special
collections, and creating event and exhibition areas. The responses suggested that technology
and student demand for more collaborative study spaces, such as group study rooms were the
leading considerations in redesigning the library to a learning commons model. Sample
responses by all three librarians are shown in Table 4.14.

67

Table 4.14
“As part of the transition, what changes did you make to the physical space?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“We expanded the library by almost 100%—taking over spaces within our
walls that had been used for classrooms, bookstore, and other non-library
functions. We moved the entrance to the first floor and all of the
circulating materials are on the first floor. We did extensive weeding of
old obsolete books. We had computer pods custom designed and built
with student collaboration and sharing in mind (they are wide enough for
two or three people to gather around one computer). We responded to
natural tendencies of patrons to move furniture.”
LC2

“We’ve done quite a bit of compact shelving at the lower level.”
‘The creation of tech commons, faculty conference room, cafe, and
relocation of writing center to library building were additional changes we
implemented.”

LC3

“The group study rooms, the addition of the group study rooms was big.
The addition of classrooms was big. The expansion of archives and special
collections with an exhibition area. And then the big event space.”

All participants referred to a technology-based approach for renovation in response to
being asked about the changes made to library services (Table 4.15). LC1 created online
communities utilizing social media sites and tools. LC2 expanded the information literacy and
peer mentoring programs and relocated the writing center and IT help desk into the library
building. In addition to the expansion of information literacy instructions, LC3 converted the
basement of the library to a book storage area with retrieval services. All three librarians
mentioned forming partnerships with IT for assisting students with the technical- and mediarelated questions in the library.

68
Table 4.15
“As part of the transition, what changes did you make to the library services?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“We included more technical assistance by partnering with IT. We
inserted ourselves into the online courseware, opened social media
accounts to engage online and traditional students who reside in those
communities. We worked at building community online as well as with
on-ground.”
LC2

“We’re doing a lot more with regard to library instruction. I don't know if
that’s what you’re looking for unless you consider that a traditional
service. We’re doing more peer mentoring. Our librarians are sitting in on
critiques.”

LC3

“We changed our service points. We consolidated eventually – when we
first opened. We had a separate media and reserve desk on two, but we
changed that to Tech on Two because we wanted to collaborate with
information technology. So, we moved media and reserve services down to
the first floor and we actually circulate video and audio and all of those
things off of the first floor in the circulation department.” “As I said, we’ve
changed – we had instruction, but we changed our instruction services a lot
and we’ve added things like one-on-one consultations with students.
We’re doing a lot more. We added actually information literacy related to
archives and special collections.”

When asked about the changes to the library collections (Table 4.16), LC1 and LC3
indicated that their print collections were weeded out extensively. Although, still maintaining
specific print collections, all three libraries indicated a considerable growth in their eBook
collections. The responses highlighted the shift in academic library practices from collecting
print books to providing access to eBooks and online sources of information and academic work.

69
Table 4.16
“As part of the transition, what changes did you make to the library collections?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“We weeded heavily in the print area and have focused on purchasing
eBooks and eJournals.”
LC2

“None, really. We were already heavily digital anyway. If you were a
faculty member and you wanted a book and you asked, “I’d like this
book,” we would order a digital copy.” “We were doing ongoing
[weeding] – we’re still doing weeding. Weeding is a little more involved.”

LC3

“Well, so we did two things. We weeded the collection to some extent, but
we also brought materials that were off-site into the building.” “The
collection is really changing, not so much from the Learning Commons
perspective, but we have vastly increased the number of electronic books
that we have in the last few years. I mean, we’ve gone from about 200,000
to about .5 million in two years and that’s partially due to the influence of
(name).”

Concerning changes to purchasing and budgeting, the responses highlighted the
reallocation of funds based on the unique needs of the renovated libraries. LC1’s budgeting and
purchasing priorities consisted of obtaining peripherals, such scanners and cameras, and
replacement of old technologies. LC2 reallocated some funds from the print book budget to
purchasing furniture. Although LC3 did not experience any major changes in purchasing budget,
some funds from print books were transferred to purchasing eBooks. The responses suggested
that purchasing and collecting print books was no longer a priority of the academic libraries.
Indeed, the libraries are increasingly focusing on providing online resources, productivity
equipment, and comfortable and flexible furniture. Sample responses by all three librarians are
shown in Table 4.17.

70
Table 4.17
“As part of the transition, what changes did you make to purchasing and budgeting?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“We prioritized printing supplies, peripherals, such as scanners and
cameras, and replacement of obsolete technologies.”
LC2

“I don't know that many libraries would because technically, we have a
purchasing department which is external to the library and we don’t get to
make choices on how things are purchased. Budgeting, we have some.
So, we have made some adjustments to collections. We move some money
out of collections and put it into furnishings. Furnishings is usually what
you’re dealing with when you’re dealing with a learning center.”

LC3

“Well, I would say that we didn’t make major different changes to
purchasing and budgeting. I mean, the university gave us some new
positions when we moved into the new building and that was because we
needed to operate that space in the basement.” “Our traditional book
budget is still there. We are doing more reallocation from our book budget
to electronic resources. To all kinds of electronic resources. So, the
problem we’ve seen is the shift from purchasing to subscription.”

The responses to the question regarding the changes in librarians’ positions during the
transition process indicated that implementing a learning commons concept does not always
entail hiring additional librarians (Table 4.18). As shared by LC1, the library staff were trained
with additional skills through a professional development program. LC2 redesigned the staff
positions based on the new needs of the library. LC3 added extra student employees in addition
to some staff positions.

71
Table 4.18
“As part of the transition, what changes did you make to staff?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
“We prioritized online services and equipped existing staff to provide
needed help by encouraging professional development. We were able to
focus on more user-centered services by getting rid of the Unix-based
server maintenance.”
LC2

“Several. The staffing for the media services is now completely in another
operation in IT. We got rid of that. We kept the position in technical
services because that was an early retirement, but we completely redescribed it.”

LC3

“Because of the changes in configuring the space, we had to add some
staff. And we primarily added some support staff. And then over time,
we’ve added some librarians.” “we’ve added a lot of student staff. We
went from about 80 students to about 150 moving at – now again,
obviously, it’s five, 10, 15 hours a week, but we really double the number
of students who worked in the building because we need them to do things
like basement retrieval.”

The final interview question was aimed at providing the participant librarians with an
opportunity to reflect on the transformation process and share any additional information not
previous discussed during the interview. LC2 stated that the ability to manage change was
considered an indispensable skill for administers in creating partnership and good working
relationship with university administrators and departments for achieving renovation and change
goals. Forming a shared vision, an effective strategic plan, and consistently endeavoring to
improve were described as “keys for success” by LC3. LC1 did not have any additional
comments regarding the interview questions or the transition process. Sample responses by all
three librarians are provided in Table 4.19.

72
Table 4.19
“Please reflect on the process of the transition. What aspects worked well, and what aspects did
not work well?”
Librarian Code
Response Shared
LC1
No additional information was provided.
LC2

“Well, I mentioned the way we manage change. I think that works pretty
well. It’s an iterative process. I’ve done it enough. I’m trying to think of
something that didn’t work well…The only thing that hasn’t really taken
off was I started a committee that didn’t go anywhere and that was a
technology committee. It was just because I had no bandwidth to really
support it and the people on it weren’t keyed into moving it forward. I
think it’s okay because we now have a tech commons.”

LC3

“I would say that we laid the groundwork for the transition by being very
intentional about what our goals and objectives were for the new building.
We revised our strategic plan. We wrote a new vision statement.” “I
would say that there really were not problems because we had a critical
mass of people who wanted it to be a better library and wanted to do things
differently. I mean, apparently there were librarians who left this library at
one point because they didn’t feel empowered. So, when you empower the
librarians you get good response because everybody wants to be respected
and wants to be supported. So that’s my job. My job is to help all these
people do their jobs better and really, I guess because we were building a
new building and there was a vision behind it. It really wasn’t difficult.”

Observations
The observation step of the research was based on unobtrusive collection of primary data
about the library’s environment and student activities without interacting directly with the
participants and users of the library. The main purpose for supplementing the research with the
observation was to study the social behaviors of the students in the library as well as how they
use the library services, resources, and spaces. Depending on the size of the library, observation
lasted between one and two hours.
LC1. The library building is relatively small, but it was designed on a concept of open
spaces and a comfortable and welcoming environment for study and reflection. The main

73
service desk located on the first floor was facing the main entry doors to the library. The service
desk attendants provided assistance with students’ questions and checking out library materials.
The use of print book stacks was minimum. However, mostly individual students busy with
activities, such as texting or eating light food items occupied study tables on the first floor. The
library has reversed the traditional “no food” policy to allow basic food items in the library.
Extensive use of computer workstations in information commons was noted on the second floor
of the library. The student employee at the information commons service desk helped students
both with research and technology-related questions. Multiple groups of students were using
collaborative study stations for quiet study or group projects. Although there were no formal
rules regarding noise, no disruptive conversations or discussions were noticed. In addition to
computer stations and study tables, the library also provided informal learning and social
interaction areas with comfortable and movable furniture, such as “bean bag” seating.
LC2. All three floors were used by students involved in various activities. Most
computers were occupied by students. The library did not have any specific restrictions
regarding noise level, but unreasonably loud activities were discouraged. Basic food items and
drinks were also allowed in the library. The library’s group study rooms were 90% occupied and
from the observer’s perspective, they were well equipped with technology and comfortable
furniture. The library cafe provided lively environment for both academic discussion,
collaborative work, and informal conversations.
LC3. The library provided an inviting, spacious, and welcoming environment for group
and individual study and social learning activities. The group study rooms were bright and
spacious with modern technology tools for presentations and meetings. The study rooms were
80% occupied. The cafe had students in both indoor and outdoor seating, either involved in

74
social or study-related discussions and conversations. The cafe had Wi-Fi access both inside and
outside of the facility. As observed in LC1 and LC3, the library computer workstations were the
busiest sections of the library.
The above observations revealed three dominant parts of the library spaces: group study
rooms, cafe, and the information or tech commons. All three libraries had open and bright
spaces with a variety of furniture for diverse student needs. The most common student activities
included the use of library computers, individual and group study, and social interaction mainly
in the cafe. The changes in the traditional food and noise policies were also noted in all three
libraries. All three libraries operated service desks supported by both the library and IT
departments.
Summary
This chapter provided qualitative and quantitative results of the research, including
library assessment surveys, semi-structured in-person interviews, and nonparticipant
observations. The survey and interview questions were designed to identify the dominant factors
in the transition process. Online research was conducted for obtaining general information
regarding the participants’ institutions and the libraries. The next chapter will consist of a
summary of findings, suggested research implications for application, and conclusions of this
research study.

75
CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to investigate the transformation process of a traditional
library to a learning commons model and the elements that influence the success or failure of the
change process. The research was focused on examining the transition experiences of three
renovated libraries of independent private institutions in Southern California. Although all three
libraries have adapted the learning commons model of services, the extent of renovations and
upgrades varied based on financial status, size, and needs of the library and the institution.
The collection of data consisted of surveys, interviews, observations, and online research.
The participants completed an initial questionnaire, which focused on librarians’ views regarding
the importance of specific services, resources, and spaces in the renovated libraries. After the
collection of surveys, the librarians were asked to participate in in-person interviews. The
interview questions were semi-structured and provided the interviewees with opportunities to
describe their experiences of the renovation projects. Direct observations provided the
researcher with a detached perspective of the research environment. The researcher as a direct
observer strived to be unobtrusive so as not to bias the observation. General information about
the participants’ libraries and their parent institutions was obtained through online research. A
sequential transformative design strategy was followed for analyzing data and making
recommendations (see Figure 5.1).

Figure 5.1. Sequential transformative design.

76
This chapter consists of discussion of findings, suggested research implications for
application, and conclusions of this research study.
Discussion of Findings
The surveys, interviews, and observations results are presented in this section. The
outcomes imply that the renovated libraries or learning commons are the preferred learning and
social destinations on campus.
Surveys
Library door counts. The three participant librarians reported moderate (less than 20%)
and significant increase (more than 30%) increase in door counts. The annual door count of the
researcher’s library has shown a substantial increase after creating additional study spaces, more
computer stations, and extending library hours of operation. Other libraries, such as University
of Massachusetts Amherst and University of Iowa, have indicated similar spikes in library use
after renovations using the learning commons concept.
The most important library services. Based on the participants’ observations, library
reference and research assistance services were still in high demand (Figure 5.2). The use of the
traditional library reference desk has declined sharply in the digital age (Boehme, 2016).
However, the participants’ perspectives and literature indicated that a mediated reference service
model that supports the new paradigms of teaching and research in academic libraries is an
indispensable component of the library function (Bandyopadhyay & Boyd-Byrnes, 2016;
Delaney & Bates, 2015; Yeh & Walter, 2017). The integration of IT support into the traditional
reference desk as a single service point was also categorized as “important” due to reliance of the
millennials students on technology and media for academic and social interaction (Samson &
Oelz, 2005).

77

Most Used Services
5
4
3
2
1
0
LC1

LC2

LC3

5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2= Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable
Referene Assistance

IT Support

Figure 5.2. Most used library services
The library hours of operations play an important role in student satisfaction, but the
implementation of 24/7 access is a complex process. Many academic library facilities are open
extended hours, but relatively few offer full services to library users during the overnight hours
(Bowman, 2013). Kimble Library at the Coastal Carolina University is an example of a library
with 24/7 access and a high level of customer services and staff productivity. In particular, a
student satisfaction survey conducted by the researcher’s library, which elicited approximately
460 responses, supported the trend that the majority of students preferred studying after 8:00pm
and that within late night hours, most students preferred performing study-related activities
between 10:00pm and 12:00am (Figure 5.3).

78

Figure 5.3. Students’ preferred hours for study-related activities (Barton & Guzman, 2017).
The most important library resources. The traditional academic library functioned
as a repository and guardian of knowledge through collecting and preserving print materials.
However, in an era of technology-based production and consumption of information, libraries
have made remarkable strides in providing users with organizational paradigms and strategies for
accessing information through and beyond their physical libraries. The responses of all three
librarians reflected the shift from the use of print to online resources for information retrieval
(Figure 5.4). Additionally, the survey results and the researchers’ observations indicated public
computer workstation were in high demand, especially for individual quiet work.
The student satisfaction survey performed by the researcher’s library in 2017 also
supported students’ preferences for online databases and the use of technology in the library). A
small number of students reported the use of print books, especially fiction titles. Electronic
media, such as CDs and DVDs were rated as obsolete sources of information.

79

Most Used Resources
5
4
3
2
1
0
LC1
LC2
LC3
5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2=Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable
Print books

Online databases

Figure 5.4. Most used library resources.
The most important library spaces. An important consideration in adapting the
learning commons model of service is the design and functionality of the library spaces that
accommodate the diverse formal and informal learning activities of the students. According to
participants’ observations, group study rooms, areas with comfortable furnishing, and computer
and learning labs were considered the most utilized sections of the library (Figure 5.5). The
availability of a cafe as a service of the library was also regarded as a popular area for student
gathering.
The researcher’s 2017 library survey indicated the more than half of responders
recommended the addition of study spaces, including better furniture, and a general update of the
library building for improving the library facility.

80

Most Used Spaces
5
4
3
2
1
0
Group study rooms

Comfortable
furnishings

Café

Computer and
learning Labs

5=Very Important 4=Important 3=Somewhat Important
2=Not Very Important 1=Not Applicable
LC1

LC2

LC3

Figure 5.5. Most used library spaces.
The two top student activities. The participants’ responses confirmed group and
collaborative study as the primary activity of the students in the library. The researcher’s library
survey confirmed that most students value the library as an ideal place for school-related
activities such as study and research and printing and copying. (Figure 5.6).
Two Top Student Activities
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Individual and Group Study

Printing and Copying

Figure 5.6. The two top student activities based on survey at the researcher’s library (Barton &
Guzman, 2017).

81
Interviews
The interview and discussions centered on sharing the transition experiences of
participants. The main purpose of interview questions was to discover the factors that promoted
or undermined the transformation of libraries to a learning commons model of service.
Reasons for Change
Technology has profoundly affected education, and libraries are no exceptions. The
participants’ responses also expressed the need for a new vision and a desire to take an active
part in the education of millennial and future generation of students. Literature also strongly
supports the impact of technology as the primary motivating factor for adopting the new design
of service (Blackburn, 2011; Hunt, 2017; Lippincott, 2012). Libraries are changing because
online source of information and communication tools are rapidly expanding. There is an
increased awareness that the new generation requires a positive and welcoming learning
environment with access to flexible, open, and bright spaces. However, funding and maintaining
the new facility has prevented libraries and their intuitions from moving forward. During the
research interviews, at least one participant librarian mentioned that renovations would have
been impossible without the availability of an outside grant.
Introducing the Concept of Change to the Leadership
Introducing a new concept of service and obtaining the support of leadership, in addition
to funds are often significant challenges for many library directors of smaller universities.
Although LC1 had the opportunity to acquire a renovation and technology grant, qualifying for a
grant is a time-consuming and a relatively complicated process for private universities. LC3 had
the full support of management, as the decision to build a new library based on a learning
commons concept was a prior decision of the senior leadership. However, LC3 shared that the

82
process of change would have more complicated if the old library building and service had to be
renovated. LC2 attributed the understanding and application success of this unique approach in
many library innovation projects to working with other departments and administrators.
Indeed, the definition of “change management” varies. According to Prosci (n.d), a
change management firm, “change management is the discipline that guides how we prepare,
equip, and support individuals to successfully adopt change to drive organizational success and
outcomes”. LC2 described the concept as:
Some of it [change management] will hinge upon services we provide. Some of it will
maybe relate to just the way we deal with one another in personnel management. So,
what I do is I try to raise the idea of a concept, introduce an idea. My style is not to say
here’s what we’re going to do. I’ve decided we’re going to do x. I do it in more of a
hypothetical. So, I will discuss this, usually in smaller groups, with direct stakeholders to
say just an idea. This is in the literature. What would the world look like if we phased
out reserves totally? What would that look like? That would mean a change in workload,
a change in services. So, we discuss that.
The Most Significant Changes Due to Renovations
The responses reflected a switch from a print-based library to a center of technology,
information, scholarship, and both formal and informal student learning activities. LC1 library
dedicated 50% of their floor space to creating an information commons with updated computers
and an increased emphasis on online and digital resources. Librarians and other staff members
are provided with regular professional development opportunities. LC2 designed a tech
commons in collaboration with the IT department. The tech commons is in the library building
but it is staffed by IT student employees to support the entire university community with

83
technology-related issues, such as hardware and software troubleshooting, printing, copying,
scanning, and equipment checkout. LC3 added 33 group study rooms, a cafe, 24/7 access, and
updated technology as some of the significant features of the library.
Service Changes
All three librarians stated that collaborating with the IT department in creating an IT
helpdesk at the library was an advantageous strategy for assisting students. Academic
institutions continue to remodel traditional libraries to include technology, renovated spaces, and
collocated services. A frequent feature of the new library is a single point of service. A single
service point usually includes information technology staff and librarians or appropriate student
workers for referring patrons to librarians or IT staff (LaMagna, Hartman-Caverly & Marchetti,
2016). Outreach via online tools, such as social media, was also considered an effective strategy
for informing and engaging students. Expansion of library information and instruction literacy
services to both on-campus and online students were reported by all participant librarians.
Collection Changes
LC1 and LC3 described extensive weeding out of the print items. LC2 continues with the
regular reduction of the library print collections. However, all three libraries have been
transitioning to acquiring online sources of information, including eBooks and full-text online
journals. The librarians’ reports are supported by acquisition statistics provided by an ACRL
report as shown in Figure 5.7.

84

Figure 5.7. Items added to academic libraries’ collections (ALA, 2014).
Budget Changes
To accommodate the more critical needs of the library, LC1 prioritized replacing obsolete
technology and acquiring printing supplies and other peripherals, such as scanners and cameras.
LC2 reallocated some funds from print collections to purchasing furniture. LC3 transferred
some funds from print books budgets to purchasing eBooks. LC3 also added new staff and
student employee positions to support the operations of the expanded spaces and services. None
of librarians mentioned receiving additional funds for acquiring eBooks. However, reallocating
funds from print book to eBooks or technology-related items appears to be the common theme.
Physical Space Changes
LC1’s library was expanded by almost 100% through the relocation of non-library offices
to other campus buildings. Extensive weeding of the print book collections provided additional
space for the study stations. The library furniture was custom designed with student

85
collaboration and sharing in mind. LC2’s space was increased through the installation of
compact shelving. In addition, the library created a shared space with the writing center, and the
IT helpdesk was moved to the library. The library cafe became a popular destination for
students’ group work and informal activities. LC3 added 33 group study rooms and a cafe, and
the space for archives and special collections was enlarged to include an exhibition area. All
participants noted that adding cafes or coffee shops in or adjacent to the library building has been
a very successful strategy for drawing more students to the library.
Staff Changes
LC1 noted an increased focus on staff professional development for providing online
services and involvement in campus-wide events. LC2’s library redesigned some positions due
to shifting needs of the library and the university. LC3 mainly hired additional student
employees for assistance with the basic library functions and perform work as desk assistants,
student mentors, and student rovers. Hiring student employees was also a practical cost saving
strategy.
The responses of the participants demonstrated that the role and responsibilities of the
library administrators change or increase after the transformation process. LC1 commented on
more involvement with technology-related projects at the university level, including being the
chair of the technology strategy committee. LC2 described the shift in work responsibilities as
dedicating more time to building relationships with other departments and leveraging
opportunities for funding and strategic goals. LC3 focused on ongoing progress in IT and the
necessity of related professional and educational staff development. Participation in campus
events and collaborating with students in sponsoring activities were considered further shifts in a
library administrator’s responsibilities.

86
Changes in Working with Students
LC1 highlighted a demographic shift in both undergraduate and graduate online students
and noted its effect on instruction and information literacy. The development of LibGuides,
online tutorials, online LibAnswers reference service, and embedded librarians in both online
and on-ground classes are examples of tools and methods to accommodate the changing student
population. LC2 has not experienced any noteworthy changes in working with students. LC3
described that librarians are required to provide information literacy instructions to freshmanyear students; the information literacy classes are mandatory and account for 10% of the class
grade. According to LC3, the information literacy classes have been a major factor in reducing
routine reference questions.
Students and Faculty Activities Within the Library
From the participants’ perspectives, a library or learning commons is still the preferred
location for research, writing, and group work. Group study rooms have shown consistent rise in
usage in all three libraries. The use of computer workstations, printers, and internet access were
also categorized as being frequently used by students in the building.
LC1 described the most common faculty activity as bringing students into the library to
work with a specific software or database. LC2 indicated the use of dedicated faculty conference
rooms for activities, such as research, meetings with colleagues, consultation, or simply for a
lunch break, were most common. The faculty commons in LC3’s library offers a quiet space
specifically designated for the use of faculty members. It had comfortable seating, workspaces,
lockers, and is conveniently located next to the faculty innovation center. LC3 also commented
on the participation of faculty in various presentations and workshops, and the use of archives
and other special library collections.

87
Factors That Contributed to a Successful Transition
LC1 described the main contributing factors in the success of their transition as an
apparent need for automation, updated technology, and a general demand for renovation of the
library spaces. LC2 emphasized conducting regular user satisfaction surveys as the key for
success of the initiative. The creation of a cafe and allowing the consumption of food in the
library significantly contributed to making the new library the center of student activities. LC3
considered the support of administration as the primary factor in achieving the changes. The
willingness of the librarians to contribute and cooperate was also rated as crucial in the
transformation process.
Challenges and Obstacles of the Transition
Securing funding for the transition was challenging for all the libraries. All three
participants also mentioned resistance to change or the new vision by some faculty and staff
members as a frequent obstacle. One participant librarian shared the objections of some faculty
members for creating open study spaces by removing bookshelves. Additional challenges
included forming a good working team and building partnerships with all stakeholders.
Table 5.1
Important Factors in Transition Process
Factors that Contributed to a Successful
Transition
Technology

Challenges and Obstacles of the Transition
Process
Funding

User satisfaction surveys

Resistance to change

Café
Change in food policy
Support of administration

Building partnerships with stakeholders
Forming a good working team

Staff cooperation and collaboration
Change management skills

88
Recommended Learning Commons Implementation Phases
Education has become a complex process as learning is supplemented by advancing
information technologies both on- and off-campus and libraries are evolving because of this shift
in teaching and learning methods globally. A learning commons implementation process
consists of three cyclical stages: creating the essential conditions, the implementation phase of
physical and virtual spaces, and strategies for the future to prevent the collapse of a learning
commons, the “tragedy of commons” (Figure 5.8).
Phase 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

Essential Conditions

Physical and Virtual
Planning

Avoiding “Tragedy
of the commons”

Figure 5.8. Recommended implementation phases of learning commons model.
Phase 1: Essential conditions
The key components of phase 1 are building a shared vision and strategic plan, obtaining
the support of leadership, research and information gathering, securing resources, and staff
professional development (Faber, 2012).
A shared vision is necessary first step for transforming the library into a learning
commons. An administrator or a single member of a team does not impose a shared vision;
rather, it is built through working with the team members including staff, faculty, and students to
create the new vision for the library. As was confirmed by the research participants’ input, the
support and engagement of the leadership is crucial for the shift to materialize. In addition to
budgetary planning, the leaders also have the authority to facilitate access to individuals with
pedagogical and technological skills. Research that utilizes tools such as webinars, site visits,
and training will inform the next steps of the project. Surveys and interviews are valuable tools

89
for the collection of data on transition experiences of other librarians and educators for involving
students. Planning should also include resource allocation regarding the selection of
technological equipment and online sources of information. Staff professional development and
student training must also be considered for efficient operation of the facility.
Table 5.2
Phase 1. Essential Conditions
Element

Action

Shared vision, strategic plan

Working with stakeholders

Leadership

Support and engagement

Research

Webinars, site visits, surveys, interviews

Resources

Technology, online, and print resources

Training

Professional development, student training

Phase 2: Physical and virtual commons
The learning commons seeks to integrate the physical and virtual learning worlds through
offering welcoming, technology-rich, and flexible environments (Figure 5.9). Some additional
considerations include the availability of movable furniture for a variety of learning
configurations, sufficient access to power and data for supporting diverse devices, group study
rooms for collaboration and presentations, and appropriate service desks. The virtual learning
commons space is normally equipped with a technical infrastructure that supports 24/7 access to
learning resources and tools. The libraries of the past functioned as a warehouse of print
knowledge, whereas the libraries of the twenty-first century have progressed to dynamic centers
of creation of knowledge.

90

Physical Space

Virtual Space

Welcoming, Technology Rich, flexible
spaces for individual and group work

Technical Infrastructure, 24/7 Access
Learning Resources and Tools

Learning Commons
Framework
Figure 5.9. Learning commons framework.
Phase 3: Avoiding the “Tragedy of the Commons”
The learning commons is an ongoing and evolving concept and it demands
comprehensive and long-term planning strategies. The learning commons and information
commons have been growing in popularity, but they also have the potential to fail as a service
model because of either certain unplanned conditions or poor planning. Hardin (1968)
introduced the phrase “tragedy of the commons”, which occurs when there is an overuse of a
common asset without replenishment. In a learning commons setting, the tragedy would become
apparent in a facility that is not designed to provide the spaces, resources, and services to stay
relevant to future changes.
The most common tragedy is the depletion or degradation of the resources (Beagle, et al.,
2006). The problems are more apparent with technology, such as the upgrade of or replacement
of outdated computers, printers, and additional equipment for checkout. A well-articulated
technology plan that is consistent with the service mission of the learning commons is essential
for keeping the resources updated and functional. A failed learning commons will also fail in its
mission of providing its users with optimum and efficient resources and spaces.

91
Expecting resistance to change and planning for it will enable libraries to address the
objections raised by team members or other departments. A learning commons normally
functions through collaboration and partnership of multiple departments. A clear policy of
integrated services and authority is needed to strengthen the commons concept. Restructuring
formal job responsibilities, training, and open communication can also diffuse resistance and
create an efficient and supportive work environment. Transforming a traditional academic
library to a learning commons model is a substantial undertaking for many institutions. Careful
planning of every stage of the process is crucial for the long-term survival of the initiative.
The systematic assessment and evaluation of the learning commons should be undertaken
regularly for ongoing improvement of programs, resources, and spaces. However, the
assessment will not provide an accurate measure of commons success if it only focuses on the
design aspect or the spaces. The processes must be supplemented by a qualitative study of
“service effectiveness and quantitative measures of service delivery” (Beagle, 2011, p.1).
Implications for Future Research
Based on this study’s results, it is recommended that future research focuses on three
areas related to implementing a learning commons concept: strategies for reducing bifurcation
and creating alignment among various university departments, training staff and team leaders for
the change, and strategies for sustaining a learning commons. The result of this study indicated
that collaboration and cooperation among departments and various constituents of the institution
is crucial for creating the new model of services. The leaders of transformation must ensure that
the mission of a learning commons is aligned with the mission of the university and it’s founded
on the shared vision of all stakeholders. “The number one factor in converting a library into

92
learning commons is the strength and vision of the professional doing the transition” (Loertscher
& Koechlin, 2014, p. E5).
The second research recommendation is regarding preparing leaders and staff for the
changes. The transition to a learning commons model may be intimidating to some staff and
faculty members because of its extensive focus on technology, student collaboration, and a
flexible learning environment. The researcher recommends planning regular information
sessions about the projects for the entire university community. In addition, providing
appropriate training for all staff members that will support the learning commons functions. IT
staff may need training about the library functions and the librarian may require additional
technology skills. Developing the various leadership skills of the supervisors and managers is an
often-overlooked if often overlooked in many institutions. Successful and long-term
transformation requires leaders that are skilled in managing changes.
A learning commons is not static and must be regarded as a model of service that is
continually evolving and adjusting to progress. Careful planning for the long-term maintenance
is essential for its survival. Hardin (1968) proposed two ways to avoid the tragedy of commons.
The first strategy involves assigning ownership of the resource system to single authority. The
second strategy suggests that the resource system is divided into section and assigned to
individuals. In a library learning commons context, this translate to maintenance of the learning
commons by one department such as the library or different departments become responsible for
different functions of the learning commons. Further research is recommended for long-term
success and progress of the library learning commons model services.

93
Conclusions
This research investigated elements that promoted or undermined the renovation of a
traditional library to a learning commons model. The transition experiences of three librarians
were analyzed for suggestions and recommendations. The study identified access to funding,
resistance to changes, poor organization, a lack of cohesion and centralized leadership, and
building partnerships with all stakeholders as the main challenges and obstacles in the transition
process.
In addition, based on the results of this research, a successful transition primarily depends
on detailed planning of every phase of the process. These phases must consider the core
components of a learning commons model, which include services, resources, and spaces. The
results of this study also indicate that having a shared vision facilitates partnership among the
team members and other departments. A strategic plan that supports the goals and mission of the
parent institution is an effective strategy for building a supportive relationship with the
administrators. The ability to manage change is a valuable contributing factor in initiating and
completing new projects, creating partnerships with other departments, and gaining the trust of
the senior administrators. Being intentional about the goals and objectives of both the library
and institution are additional elements of successful implementation.