ABSTRACT
ASSESSING INFORMATION LITERACY OF UNDERGRADUATES
AT A POINT NEAR GRADUATION: A PILOT STUDY
Accreditation is an important process for institutes of higher education, related to
eligibility for federal financial aid, grants, and other federal dollars. The Western
Association of Schools and Colleges Senior Colleges and University Commission
(WSCUC) is the regional accrediting body for California State University, Fresno.
WSCUC requires the assessment of five core competencies at the undergraduate level,
including information literacy (IL). This study outlines a pilot process for assessing IL at
a point near graduation using student artifacts gathered from capstone courses.
Conducted over the course of a year, the WSCUC Information Literacy Assessment
Committee (WSCUC IL Committee) assessed 82 student artifacts from three courses
using the American Association of Colleges and Universities’ Information Literacy
VALUE Rubric. The process and rubric was determined to be an effective method for
evaluating IL proficiency at a point near graduation. The WSCUC IL Committee also
found 84% students demonstrate IL proficiency, and the majority of students demonstrate
IL proficiency across all five subcriteria of the IL VALUE Rubric. The relationship
between IL proficiency scores and other factors related to IL proficiency assessment are
also explored, including IL proficiency and final paper score and IL proficiency and
relationship to participation in an IL instruction session. Final recommendations for the
process of assessing IL at a point near graduation using capstone artifacts are made, as
well as recommendations for connecting this assessment process to IL teaching and
learning.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
In the United States, there are several regional accrediting bodies that credential
universities and colleges. This process is known as accreditation and is the method by
which educational institutions are reviewed for the quality of the education they provide;
accreditation by recognized accrediting bodies provides eligibility for United States
federal benefits, including financial aid and federal loans (Council for Higher Education
Accreditation, n.d.). The Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC) is the
regional accrediting agency for California, Hawaii, and the Pacific; the Senior College
and University Commission (SCUC) is responsible for accreditation standards and
practices for senior colleges and universities, including Fresno State (Western
Association of Schools and Colleges Senior College and University Commission, 2016).
WASC SCUC is known as WSCUC.
In its 2013 Handbook of Accreditation, the WSCUC identified five core
competencies where all participating institutions must demonstrate effective assessment
and achievement of outcomes for their undergraduate students:


Written communication



Quantitative reasoning



Oral communication



Information literacy



Critical thinking
According to WSCUC, these core competencies are relevant across all disciplines,

and are essential for both academic and post-graduation success (WSCUC, 2013a).
California State University, Fresno (Fresno State) is accredited by WSCUC, and
participates in assessment of these core competencies in both ongoing and cyclic
schedules.

2
As one of the five core competencies, information literacy (IL) is an important
aspect of both academic literacy and life-long learning. There are many definitions of IL,
to be explored further in this study: as a working definition, IL is considered the ability to
find, evaluate, use, and create information in an ethical and effective way (ACRL, 2000).
To complete many academic requirements, undergraduate students must possess
or learn to find information using effective retrieval techniques, such as search terms and
keyword searching; to consider their search returns and their relevancy or value to their
original search and information need; to evaluate the information found, and consider
bias, purpose, and accuracy; to synthesize this information and identify commonalities,
contradictions, and gaps in the themes presented; and then to create a new information
product, such as a paper or presentation, acknowledging the key information sources in
an appropriate way. Additional considerations may be understanding how to best
communicate information, including medium, and to understanding the economic
systems and power structures that mediate access and use of information (ACRL, 2016).
In addition to academic work, these skills are also acknowledged to enhance
individuals’ ability to participate in civic life and to be successful in the workplace
(International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005; Partnership for
21st Century Learning, 2007). In October of 2009, President Barack Obama declared the
month “Information Literacy Awareness Month,” citing the importance of information
literacy to several life skills, including education, but also, medical, financial, technical,
political, and civic realms (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, 2009). A key
consideration of the presidential proclamation is that, in contrast to previous eras, the 21st
Century is flooded with information, in multiple formats and in vast amounts. In
addition, individuals are no longer solely passive consumers of information, but also,
active creators of information, aided by technology platforms such as video and media

3
sharing sites (e.g., YouTube, Instagram), as well as social media sites (e.g., Twitter,
Facebook) (ACRL, 2016).
With the importance of IL to student learning and to life post-graduation, it is the
responsibility of institutions to establish effective methods for measuring student learning
and achievement of IL, as evidenced by the inclusion of IL in the core competencies of
WSCUC, as well as in the accreditation materials of other regional bodies (Oakleaf,
2010b; Saunders, 2007). Of concern to universities, however, is that university students
often lack the IL skills expected of their academic level.
In 2016, the Stanford History Education Group (SHEG) released a report on the
results of a study examining the information evaluation abilities of middle school, high
school, and college students (Wineburg, McGrew, Breakstone, & Ortega, 2016).
Focusing on college student performance, the researchers found that only a few students
were able to provide a critical analysis of the content of a political tweet; at all three
levels, students struggled to perform information evaluation exercises for web pages,
images posted on a multi-media hosting site, and social media posts (Wineburg et al.,
2016). Released in November of 2016, the culminating month of a United States
presidential election cycle that frequently invoked “fake news,” this study raised concerns
that students aren’t being prepared to critically engage with information at the necessary
levels (Alexander, 2016; Domonoske, 2016).
At the local level, students at Fresno State enter their university careers with
below-average IL skills, as measured by the Standardized Assessment of Information
Literacy Skills (SAILS) (Henry Madden Library, personal communication, 2018).
SAILS has been administered to incoming freshmen at Fresno State every fall semester
from 2013-2018, and students consistently score lower than the national average. There
may be several reasons for these low performance levels, including staffing levels of PreK- 12 school librarians in California (or, teacher librarians, as the positions are referred to

4
within the state). California ranks the lowest in the nation for teacher librarian-to-student
ratios, with only one librarian for every 7,187 students (California Department of
Education, n.d.). Teacher librarians are the specific professionals educated in the
standards of IL, as well as the pedagogy of IL: the lack of teacher librarians in California
may put California students at an IL disadvantage.
In addition, within the California State University (CSU) system, campuses are
assigned certain service areas for outreach and recruitment. Fresno State draws from
Fresno, Kings, Madera, and Tulare counties (California State University, 2016). These
counties are largely rural, low-income, and schools lack school libraries and librarians
(Doyle, 2018).
With the low levels of IL measured in incoming university students at Fresno
State, the importance of IL proficiency at graduation is heightened. Currently, IL levels
of exiting students are assessed using SAILS, the same test students are administered
when entering Fresno State. SAILS scores for graduating students indicate significant
growth in IL while at Fresno State, though scores from 2018 indicate students remained
below average in several key areas (Henry Madden Library, personal communication,
2016, 2018). In addition, as a standardized test, SAILS can provide some insight into
student IL achievement, but it lacks the authentic use of information to achieve a
particular goal or to create a particular document; SAILS also lacks the disciplinary
application and creation of information that is important to IL. Capstone courses, in
which students engage in in-depth learning and synthesize/apply high-level, disciplinary
concepts acquired through scaffolding and prior learning experiences (Wagenaar, 1993),
may be a place where this disciplinary application can be examined. In order to better
understand methods of assessing IL that capture student application of information in an
authentic, disciplinary context, artifacts created in capstone/culminating experience

5
courses offer potential value for librarians, instructors, and university accreditation
coordinators.
Purpose of the Research Project
There are three goals for this research study:
1. To establish a process for collecting and assessing student artifacts from
capstone/culminating experience courses
2. To evaluate the efficacy of this process for evaluating IL at a point near graduation,
for the purposes of campus-wide assessment efforts related to accreditation
3. To assess student IL levels at a point near graduation
The results of this study will serve to inform the Fresno State WSCUC
Information Literacy Subcommittee (IL Subcommittee) in the process of how to evaluate
student IL in Academic Year (AY) 2018/2019. The preliminary results of student IL
levels will also inform librarians in creating IL services and resources, to support the
development of IL in students towards IL proficiency as they near graduation. At Fresno
State, this is defined as an undergraduate student who has completed more than 90 units
(M. Jordine, personal communication, October 17, 2018).
Need for the Project
In AY18/19, the IL Subcommittee will complete a cross-campus assessment of
IL. In order to establish a working method for this assessment, the IL Subcommittee
piloted a process for assessing evidence of IL in major academic artifacts from students at
a point near graduation. Students were enrolled in capstone courses, as defined by their
degree-granting department, and artifacts were assessed using the American Association
of Colleges and Universities’ (AAC&U) Valid Assessment of Learning in Undergraduate
Education (VALUE) IL rubric.

6
While there is a substantial body of literature related to assessment of IL, there
has been less written about university/college accreditation and the role libraries and
librarians can play, particularly in the assessment of IL. The necessity to assess
undergraduate student IL for all WSCUC members, as well as the value of IL assessment
for many college and university librarians and academic faculty, make this study relevant
to the teaching and research work of libraries, librarians, and instructional faculty in
higher education.
Summary
IL has been established as a necessary skill for civic, personal, professional, and
educational success, as evidenced by its identification as a 21st Century Skill, and its
inclusion in the accrediting materials of many regional accrediting bodies, including
WASC. In order to assess the proficiency of IL by the undergraduate students of Fresno
State, the IL Subcommittee piloted a process to collect and assess student artifacts in
capstone/culminating experience courses. In addition, student IL proficiency was
reviewed. For the purposes of this study, information literacy proficiency shall be
defined as a score of 3 or 4 on the AAC&U IL VALUE Rubric, which constitutes a
milestone or capstone demonstration of IL skill and understanding (AAC&U, 2009a).
The results of this study will inform the development of the campus-wide IL assessment
process in AY2018/2019, as well as the development of IL services and resources to
support IL proficiency by Fresno State undergraduate students.

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
Information Literacy, Higher Education, and Accreditation
Librarians and other information professionals have sought to incorporate IL into
the higher education curriculum for several decades (Weiner, 2012). As the speed of
communication and information availability progressed through the 1990s and early
2000s, library associations and librarians responded with task forces and standards that
aimed to codify information literacy and establish a definition and competencies by
which IL could be measured (including the American Library Association’s Presidential
Committee on Library Instruction: Final Report, 1989; the Society of College and
University Libraries’ Seven Pillars of Information Literacy, 1999; and Christine Bruce’s
The Seven Faces of Information Literacy, 1999).
ACRL is a division of the American Library Association (ALA), the largest and
oldest member organization of librarians in the world. ACRL is the largest division of
ALA and specifically serves librarians and libraries working in higher education (ALA,
n.d.; ACRL, n.d.). In 2000, ACRL’s Information Literacy Competency Standards for
Higher Education (“the Standards”) connected the need for information fluency to the K12 learning environment, rapidly changing higher education (acknowledging the
increasing amount of distance learners and electronic learning materials), and the
professional lives of students after graduation. Referring to the first major forum in the
United States around information literacy, the Standards defines IL as the ability to
“recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use
effectively the needed information” (ACRL, 2001, para. 1). In this document, ACRL
also connected IL competencies to the interests of several major regional accrediting
agencies, including WASC.

8
The identification of IL as an essential academic skill first appeared in WASC
standards in the early 2000s (Thompson, 2002; WSCUC, 2001). Previous iterations of
the WASC Handbook focus more on the adequacy of and access to information resources
(library collections) in support of student learning; in the 2001 update, IL is named as a
core competency and acknowledged as a necessary aspect of student learning (WSCUC,
2001). The handbook also asks institutions to consider how librarians and other
information professionals are involved in the process of teaching students to find and use
information well (WSCUC, 2001).
IL has remained a core competency of the WSCUC through the 2000s. In the
2013 edition of the Handbook, the Standards and ACRL’s definition of IL are referenced
as important supplemental documents for teaching and assessing IL (WSCUC, 2013b).
Further affirming the importance of IL in higher education, a major higher
education organization, the Association of American Colleges and Universities
(AAC&U; 2009b), included IL as one of its 16 Liberal Education and America’s Promise
(LEAP) Essential Learning Outcomes. Founded in 1915 and comprised of over 1,400
member institutions, AAC&U is a national association dedicated to promoting quality
liberal education in higher education (AAC&U, n.d.). IL is identified by AAC&U
(2009b) as an “Intellectual and Practical Skill,” along with inquiry and analysis; critical
thinking; creative thinking; written communication; oral communication; reading;
quantitative literacy; teamwork; and problem solving. AAC&U (2009b) developed
rubrics to support the assessment of these Essential Learning Outcomes, the Valid
Assessment of Learning in Undergraduate Education (VALUE) rubrics.
The IL VALUE Rubric (see Appendix A) adopted its definition of IL from the
1989 National Forum on Information Literacy, stating IL as “The ability to know when
there is a need for information, to be able to identify, locate, evaluate and effectively and
responsibly use and share that information for the problem at hand” (AAC&U, 2009a,

9
para. 1). Heavily grounded in the Standards, the rubric is meant to be applied to multiple
artifacts and products generated by students to assess the use of information in a variety
of formats (AAC&U, 2009a).
In 2010, ACRL launched a major initiative, the Value of Academic Libraries.
The initiative was designed to address the need for libraries to connect their work to
institutional priorities, and to provide evidence of impact on student learning, faculty
teaching and research, and campus engagement (Oakleaf, 2010b). Introducing the
initiative, Megan Oakleaf and ACRL released The Value of Academic Libraries: A
Comprehensive Research Review and Report (2010b). The report, commonly referred to
as VAL, directly addressed libraries and the accreditation process. Referencing several
accreditation organizations, as well as Saunder’s (2007, 2008, 2009) work related to
libraries and accreditation, Oakleaf and ACRL (2010b) acknowledged that the value of
libraries can be communicated and increased through involvement in the accreditation
process.
Within the VAL report, Oakleaf and ACRL (2010b) also addressed key tensions
that have come to be central in library/accreditation discussions. The first is the shift
from reporting traditional library analytics (number of volumes, number of subscriptions,
items circulated, patrons served, etc…) to doing the work of assessment of learning
(Oakleaf and ACRL, 2010b). This new identity as an active instructor, rather than a
support service for instruction, has been uncomfortable for some libraries, with only onefifth of Association of Research Libraries (ARL) including language directly related to
teaching in their mission statements (Oakleaf, 2011a). In addition, library schools (the
colloquial term for Master of Library Science/Master of Library and Information Science
programs) often do not require and perhaps may not even offer a course in library
instruction, though a knowledge of teaching practice is often a job requirement for
academic librarians (Crane, 2017).

10
For librarians who embrace critical information literacy, an approach to teaching
IL grounded in critical pedagogy, the push to demonstrate impact of learning through
measures that are defined by the institution, perhaps because of accreditation mandates,
rather than by the student, is a second area of tension (Oakleaf, 2010b; Tewell, 2016). In
VAL, Oakleaf (2010b) emphasized the importance of maintaining local outcomes and
student-informed IL instruction, to address student learning needs. With the release of
the Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education (“the Framework”)
(ACRL, 2016), a reframing of the complexities of IL expert behavior, there has been an
increasing connection of critical IL to the official standards used to define IL competency
(Battista et al., 2015; Bauder & Rod, 2016), as well as the acknowledgement of the
necessity of outcomes and curriculums grounded in the local context (ACRL, 2016).
However, librarians have also recently questioned the ways that learning analytics, driven
by institutional reporting requirements often tied to accreditation, might contradict the
core values of librarianship, including privacy and artificial definitions of learning
defined top-down (Drabinski, 2017; Fisher, 2018; Hathcock, 2018). This critical
perspective on libraries’ role in the accreditation process and how it might impact student
learning and librarians’ relationships with their students should be seriously considered in
the conversation around library assessment and accreditation.
With the Standards being released in 2000, several WASC handbooks addressing
IL through the 2000s, and the VALUE Rubrics being released in 2009, the first decade of
the 21st Century standardized IL for higher education. These documents created a
reference for IL competency as well as the requirement to assess that competency in
students for accreditation. The literature in library and information science reflects an
awareness of the importance of accreditation during this period, with multiple articles
providing case studies and research as arguments for the involvement of libraries in
institutional and professional accreditation processes (see Owusu-Ansah, 2003, 2004;

11
Saunders, 2007, 2008, 2009; Thompson, 2002). In addition, studies that do not explicitly
address accreditation often reference accreditation as a factor for consideration in
developing and providing IL services. As information professionals with both a
theoretical background in information science and practical experience in working with
students to find and use information resources, librarians are well positioned to lead this
work.
Information Literacy Assessment and Rubrics
The use of rubrics for IL assessment is acknowledged in the library literature as a
valuable approach, as rubrics allow for assessment of IL skills, concepts, and
understandings in an applied, authentic way (Gola, Ke, Creelman, & Vaillancourt, 2014).
Rubrics for IL also allow for the assessment of deeper learning/higher-order learning, as
well as communicate to students and other colleagues (e.g., instructional faculty,
university administrators) the criteria by which IL proficiency is defined (Oakleaf, 2008).
The IL rubric can be used to assess student work in many ways. Common
applications include rubrics for evaluating bibliographies/works cited (Carbery & Leahy,
2015; Gola et al., 2014; Goodman, Watts, Arenas, Weigel, & Terrell, 2018; Kim &
Dolan, 2015; Knight, 2006; Rinto, 2013; Rinto & Cogbill-Seiders, 2015; Rivera, 2017;
Rosenblatt, 2010; Schweikhard, Hoberecht, Peterson, & Randall, 2018; White-Farnham
& Gardner, 2014) and student artifacts such as projects, posters, and papers (Booth,
Lowe, Tagge, & Stone, 2015; Douglas & Rabinowitz, 2016; Fagerheim & Shrode, 2009;
Gola et al., 2014; Holliday et al., 2015; Horowitz, 2014; Junisbai, Lowe, & Tagge, 2016;
Lowe, Booth, Stone, & Tagge, 2015, 2016; Lundstrom, Diekema, Leary, Haderlie, &
Holliday, 2015; Miller, 2018; Rinto & Cogbill-Seiders, 2015; Rosenblatt, 2010;
Schweikhard et al., 2018; Turbow & Evener, 2016; Williamson, 2016; Willson & Angell,
2017).

12
When evaluating bibliographies/works cited, assessors are looking for a number
of factors, including appropriate use of citation style; appropriate source type for the
research topic (which may vary by discipline); the relevance of the source to the topic;
the timeliness of resources cited; and the thoroughness of resources used to address the
topic (which may include number of works cited) (Blank et al., 2016; Knight, 2006;
Rinto, 2013). While evaluating the sources in context within the student project can
reveal important information about how students synthesize existing literature into a new
information product, focusing on bibliographies is less time-consuming and potentially
more sustainable for IL assessment efforts (Knight, 2006).
Applying a rubric to a complete final project takes time and resources but can be
deeply revealing of students’ IL skills and understanding. In a major assessment exercise
that evaluated over 800 undergraduate student papers, Holliday et al. (2015) found the
benefits of this immersive exercise outweighed the cost of resources to conduct the study.
By reading hundreds of papers, librarians gained extensive knowledge of the ways
students synthesize sources and address evidence within their papers (Holliday et al.,
2015). These findings regarding areas of strength and weakness across the student body
can now be used to develop library resources that address student needs as demonstrated
by the artifacts evaluated (Holliday et al., 2015). This can be particularly beneficial to
librarians, who often deliver instruction in a single session (the “one-shot”) early in the
course and may not have access to students’ final products.
It is important to acknowledge the weaknesses of rubrics as well, as poor design
may limit their accuracy (Oakleaf, 2008). In 2015, Angell’s study revealed almost no
discussion of validity and reliability of rubric instruments in the library literature.
Oakleaf (2007) named technical skills of rubric creation and application such as rubric
design and evaluation of validity and reliability as necessary training for librarians. A
study of librarians and use of assessment results to improve student learning also

13
identified lack of knowledge about assessment, including technical expertise, as a barrier
to performing assessment (Oakleaf & Hinchliffe, 2008). In order to successfully
implement rubric-based IL assessment, librarians must be comfortable with the tool.
In efforts to more effectively implement rubrics into IL work, the Institute of
Museum and Library Services (IMLS) awarded a grant to establish Rubric Assessment of
Information Literacy Skills (RAILS) (Oakleaf, 2011b). Beginning in 2010, several
institutions and cohorts of individual librarians were trained in best practices for
developing and using rubrics for IL assessment (Oakleaf, 2008, 2010a). The RAILS
website lists nearly 20 publications and presentations from librarians participating in this
project, many at major library conferences where these best practices were widely viewed
by practicing librarians (Oakleaf, 2010a). While it is difficult to quantify an increase in
the effectiveness of rubrics for IL assessment as a result of RAILS, an increase in the
awareness of the potential value for rubrics was achieved.
IL VALUE Rubric, Authentic Assessment, and Capstone
IL Proficiency
Released by AAC&U in 2009, the IL VALUE rubric has since been applied by
librarians in information literacy assessment. The IL VALUE rubric is also used as a
template that librarians modify in order to address their situational learning assessment
needs (Turbow & Evener, 2016).
There are several benefits to the IL VALUE rubric for librarians. Addressing
Oakleaf’s (2007) and Angell’s (2015) concern about validity and reliability of rubrics in
the library science literature, the IL VALUE rubric has already undergone both validity
and reliability study. Validity has been established for both face validity (having been
created by faculty experts, who were familiar with student learning needs, and used
widely by higher education professionals) and content validity (again, expertise being one

14
way to establish content validity) (Finley, 2011). The rubrics have also been tested for
reliability at the national level, as well as across disciplines (Finley, 2011).
The IL VALUE rubric also offers librarians and instructional faculty the
opportunity to assess IL as it is demonstrated through a paper, project, or other artifact.
While standardized tests such as SAILS can provide very relevant information about IL
proficiency, IL is complicated and contextual and often best assessed in authentic
exercises (Holliday et al., 2015; Oakleaf, 2011b). This is also an important consideration
for the development of IL proficiency. While it may be sufficient to teach incoming firstyear undergraduates to evaluate information using simple rules such as only citing
websites that end in .edu or .org (rules which are easily assessable on a multiple-choice
test), this is a limiting view of information evaluation and relies on externally established
rules rather than intrinsic knowledge, which is indicative of a developed information user
(Farrell, 2012). This higher-order use of information should be assessed to determine IL
proficiency for students further along in their college career, or for advanced degrees
(Rapchak, Brungard, & Bergfelt, 2016).
Degree-culminating capstone courses and experiences have several aspects that
make them ideal for IL assessment. As discussed above, the opportunity to assess IL
proficiency at a later point in the college career can reveal intrinsically rather than
extrinsically motivated application of IL knowledge. This is particularly important as
students near graduation and prepare to fully participate in their chosen professions or
communities of practice (Farrell, 2013). The ability to embody and enact the information
practices of a profession is an important sociocultural aspect of IL (Lloyd, 2007). The
capstone course can give librarians the opportunity to assess how well students are
prepared to assume this active role in the information culture of their communities.
The capstone course has also been identified as a “high-impact practice,” (HIP) or
a learning method which results in increased student learning and engagement (Riehle &

15
Weiner, 2013). In their study of HIPs and information literacy, Riehle and Weiner
(2013) found many disciplines include IL competency in their capstone projects or
experiences, though these competencies (e.g., choosing a research topic, use of previous
research, communicating findings effectively) may not be identified as IL skills
explicitly. Using artifacts generated during the capstone experience, librarians have the
opportunity to assess IL skills in two ways: 1) as they have been developed over the
course of a student’s college career (Boyer Commission, 1998); and, 2) if HIPs have an
impact on further development or concretization of IL proficiency as students near
graduation (Riehle & Weiner, 2013). HIPs have been found to have broad value for
higher-education institutions, particularly for assessment for accreditation (Finley, 2011);
the HIP of capstone experiences also has specific value for librarians attempting to
develop IL proficiency in an authentic context that will benefit students after graduation.
Research Questions
The literature of information literacy has demonstrated the need for libraries to
engage in the institutional assessment process, particularly when IL is a criterion.
Previous research has also demonstrated the value of both rubrics and the use of capstone
artifacts for assessment of IL. This study outlined the process for the pilot study, which
will bring the use of rubrics and capstone artifacts together, and evaluate the pilot process
for improvement for full-campus implementation for accreditation purposes in AY18/19.
Research Questions, Part I
1. Is this method an effective process for assessing IL for undergraduate students at a
point near graduation?
2. How can this process be improved for the campus-wide assessment of IL in
AY18/19?

16
Though this pilot study had a limited sample size, this study also discussed the
findings of the IL assessment process and its indications for undergraduate student IL at
Fresno State.
Research Questions, Part II
1. Are Fresno State undergraduate students achieving IL proficiency at or near
graduation?
2. Is there a relationship between demonstration of IL proficiency and assignment
grade?
3. Is there a significant difference in IL proficiency between students who have
participated in IL instruction and those who have not?
Research Hypotheses
Research Hypotheses, Part I
The evaluation of the effectiveness of this project is an explorative study with no
hypotheses posited.
Research Hypotheses, Part II
1. Fresno State undergraduate students are achieving IL proficiency at or near
graduation.
2. There is a statistically significant positive relationship between demonstration of IL
proficiency and assignment grade.
3. There is a statistically significant difference in IL proficiency between students who
have participated in IL instruction and those who have not.

17
Summary
As access, speed of dissemination, and volume of information has increased,
universities and accrediting bodies have acknowledged the need for information
competency in their graduates. As a result, the last 30 years has seen an increase in the
engagement and participation of librarians with the accreditation process, as they can
provide IL assessment expertise. Librarians have explored several ways to effectively
assess IL: rubrics are one method with many benefits for both librarians and instructors,
as they can be used to assess IL in authentic contexts and in many different formats.
Accrediting agencies often require assessment of competencies at a point near
graduation: capstone course and culminating experiences are one potential source for
artifacts to assess that meets this criterion. For IL assessment, the resulting projects of
the capstone course hold additional value, as they can provide information about IL skills
that improve IL services and resources to further develop IL proficiency by the time
students reach this point in their college careers and prepare to graduate.

CHAPTER 3: METHODS
The purpose of this study was to evaluate a method for assessing IL across the
Fresno State campus, as required for reaccreditation. WSCUC (2013a) requires that the
core competencies are assessed at a point near graduation. While not required, WSCUC
(2013b) also suggests that assessment occur in the major or discipline of the student, and
artifacts that may yield ample evidence of outcome achievement be considered. In
addition, levels of proficiency were analyzed to develop a preliminary understanding of
graduating student IL. To assess the IL proficiency of students at a point near graduation,
using student work grounded in the practices of their discipline, these procedures were
followed.
Ethical Considerations
As part of the procedure for conducting research, an application form for
unfunded research was submitted at the department level to the Henry Madden Library
Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects. Instructional faculty volunteers for the
study were provided an informed consent form, outlining the study procedure. All
student work and student artifacts, as well as faculty names, were confidential (only
available to the author of the study) and all artifacts were anonymized before being
provided to the IL subcommittee members. As the work of this research was being
conducted solely by faculty of California State University, Fresno, as part of their normal
work in teaching and evaluating institutional effectiveness, and using student artifacts
submitted as part of the normal progression of their course, it was proposed that this work
constitutes minimal risk to both student and faculty participants.
The Henry Madden Library Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects
agreed with the level of risk assigned to this study. A memo stating the minimal risk
nature of the study was signed by the chair of the IL subcommittee, and submitted to the

19
Department of Curriculum and Instruction and the chair of the thesis committee. In
addition, a copy of the approved minimal risk proposal and memo were filed with the
Fresno State Center for Faculty Excellence and Faculty Affairs, in order to secure access
to Blackboard, the learning management system (LMS) for Fresno State at the time of
this study. All approvals were secured prior to the gathering of participant data.
Procedures
Participants
In spring 2017, the Fresno State Dean of Undergraduate Studies and Fresno State
Director of Assessment contacted department chairs, asking that they identify courses
considered capstone experiences for the undergraduate degrees granted by that
department. Of the 60 degrees identified, 35 departments responded “yes,” they have a
capstone course; 15 responded, “no,” they do not have a capstone course; and 10 did not
respond. Of the 35 that responded “yes,” one identified the capstone course as a pilot.
“Yes” respondents also identified the name and catalog number of the course. From
these responses, a list of 50 capstone courses was generated.
Using the Fresno State course management system, PeopleSoft, a list of all
courses in Spring and Fall 2017 was generated. Courses were sorted alphabetically, and
cross-referenced against the capstone course list to identify all capstone courses taught
during the AY17/18 year. Course information included number of students enrolled in
the course, as well as the instructor name, and if the course was a lecture, lab, or seminar.
Using this method, a list of 43 courses consisting of 175 sections was identified. From
this list, the following criteria were used to remove courses from eligibility for the study:
1. Sections with no identified instructor
2. Sections with five or less students enrolled

20
3. Lab sections with an accompanying lecture section (lecture sessions were retained if
they met the criteria)
The resulting eligible courses consisted of 33 courses and 83 sections, taught by
55 individual instructors. These instructors were contacted via email, and provided a
form created in Google Forms, including the informed consent form, outlining the project
method and goals, and asking if they would consider volunteering their course artifacts
for participation in the study (See Appendix B: Faculty Volunteer Consent Form). If so,
they were asked to identify their name, department, and provide consent. From the list of
55 instructors, there were three participants who volunteered their course artifacts and
provided consent. All faculty volunteers in the pilot study were provided a letter for their
Research, Tenure, and Promotion (RTP) file, and an individual report of IL performance
for the artifacts collected from their course.
Collecting and Preparing Artifacts
To collect the artifacts from these three courses, the instructional faculty were
asked to provide their consent for the study author to access their course artifacts using
their course LMS. For the author to access the papers, the instructors were asked to add
the study author as a teaching assistant in the course. This was offered as an option to
faculty in order to minimize paper copies and provide convenience for the participants.
Once the study author was granted access to the course, the artifacts could be
downloaded in a single file, along with the final grade for the paper.
One faculty participant did not collect papers using the LMS. These artifacts
were collected by the study author (along with final paper scores), scanned, and returned
to the faculty participant.

21
Following the collection of student artifacts, the author then used Adobe Acrobat
Pro DC to collate the artifacts into a single file, anonymize the artifacts, and label the
artifacts using an alphabetic code. The final number of artifacts to be assessed was 82.
Instrument
The instrument used to evaluate student artifacts is the AAC&U Valid
Assessment of Learning in Undergraduate Education (VALUE) IL rubric (2009a). The
rubric consists of five dimensions of IL: 1) Determine the extent of information needed;
2) Access the needed information; 3) Evaluate information and its sources critically; 4)
Use information effectively to achieve a specific purpose; and 5) Access and use
information ethically.
Each dimension is scored from 0 (given when there is no evidence of the
dimension) to 4. A score in any of the dimensions of 1 is considered “benchmark,” a
score of 2 or 3 is considered “milestone,” and a score of 4 is considered “capstone.” For
the purposes of assessment at Fresno State a score of 0,1, or 2 is considered nonproficient; a score of 3 or 4 is considered proficient. A score of 2.5- 2.9 was rounded to
3.0, and was counted as a score of 3 (proficient).
Methods
The scoring of items was performed by the IL subcommittee. The subcommittee
consisted of six members, including three librarian faculty (including the subcommittee
chair) and three instructional faculty (including the campus Director of Assessment).
Prior to assessing the artifacts, the subcommittee participated in an hour-long
norming session, to encourage higher interrater reliability. Each subcommittee member
was provided a copy of the AAC&U IL VALUE rubric, and copies of the same two
artifacts. Each subcommittee member then evaluated the two artifacts independently,
noting their scores for each of the dimensions of the IL VALUE rubric. The members

22
shared their scores, discussing any major discrepancies, considerations, benchmarks,
difficulties in assessing criteria, and other considerations when scoring using the rubric.
Each committee member was assigned a total of 28 artifacts to assess. Every
artifact was scored by two readers. If the below conditions occurred, a third reader was
assigned to the artifact:
1. A difference of more than two points
2. A mean score split between ‘2’ and ‘3’ on the IL VALUE rubric, indicating a nonproficient and proficient score split
Summary
In the preceding section, the method for the study was outlined. This pilot study
used artifacts collected from capstone and culminating experience courses to assess IL
proficiency. Instructors who taught capstone/culminating experience courses were
contacted via a volunteer interest form; interested volunteers had their papers collected
though the university LMS or in print. The artifacts were then anonymized, and
distributed to the WSCUC IL Committee. Following an hour-long norming session, the
artifacts were assessed using the AAC&U IL VALUE rubric.

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
Introduction
This section outlines the process of evaluating capstone artifacts for evidence of
information literacy proficiency. This section also outlines the findings of the WSCUC
IL Committee in examining undergraduate IL proficiency at a point near graduation, and
the relationships between final assignment grade and history of student participation in IL
instruction during or prior to the semester of the capstone course.
Findings, Interpretation, and Analysis: Part I, Efficacy of
Capstone Projects for Assessing IL
When evaluating this pilot process for efficacy of IL assessment, there are several
factors to consider: the efficiency and scalability of the process; the appropriateness of
the process and tool for assessing the determined criteria; and finally, the value and
usability of the assessment data. This latter considerations includes how found data can
be reported back to librarians, instructional faculty, administrators, and other stakeholders
for both accreditation requirements and for improvement of learning.
Efficiency and Scalability
The process of completing this pilot study took a full calendar year. However, a
significant amount of this time was spent in assessment design, and securing permissions
and Human Subjects approval for the study. Once permissions were secured, identifying
and recruiting volunteers, collecting and anonymizing artifacts, norming, and scoring the
artifacts took 7 months. It is expected that this process would take less time for future
assessments, as the process for anonymizing the artifacts and WSCUC IL Committee
familiarity with the components of the IL VALUE Rubric has been established.
Scalability of this process was an important consideration. Previous rubric
assessments of IL have found the time to assess capstone projects—which are often

24
lengthy, complex research papers—is significant (Holliday et al., 2015). However,
several factors in the pilot helped alleviate the time spent per student artifact. First, six
readers participated in the scoring process. By having multiple readers available, even
with two readers per artifact, each committee member scored around 28 artifacts. While
there is a considerable amount of reading, this is not too onerous given enough time
before scores must be reported. As the WSCUC IL Committee will likely increase the
number of student artifacts scored for the full assessment in AY2018/2019, one potential
method to ensure a reasonable number of artifacts per scorer is to use representative
sampling.
In an unpublished rubric assessment of CSU student artifacts focused on first year
students, the selected rubric included 18 criteria. Not only did the size of this rubric
increase exponentially the amount of time needed per artifact, readers reported difficulty
in achieving interrater reliability across this large number of criteria. With only five
criteria, the IL VALUE Rubric is significantly less time-consuming to apply to student
artifacts.
Appropriateness of the Tool, Including
Limitations
In addition to a usable length, the IL VALUE Rubric also captured necessary
information regarding student IL proficiency. The five criteria are well-aligned with the
Standards in terms of performance indicators for IL, and the
Benchmark/Milestones/Capstone levels of rubric scores apply well to
capstone/graduating student IL proficiency.
During the scoring process, two potential limitations regarding the IL VALUE
Rubric were raised. The first is in regards to two criteria, “Access the Needed
Information,” and “Access and Use Information Ethically and Legally.” While
conclusions may be drawn regarding student access to information based on evidence in

25
the student artifact, such as type of information referenced, there are unknowns, as
scorers are not present when students are accessing this information. Students may not
be using the best sources, and relying on information sources like Google Scholar to find
“good enough” information. With the rise of pirated sources of scholarly content,
students may also be accessing “illegal” versions of scholarly articles. It is entirely
possible that students may not even knowingly access these unlicensed versions, as
researchers themselves often violate license terms in sharing and posting copies of their
own work (Howard, 2013).
The second limitation of the IL VALUE Rubric rests in its alignment with the
Standards. While this performance-based assessment of information literacy is valuable,
there are important aspects of IL proficiency introduced in the Framework (ACRL, 2016)
that are not addressed in the IL VALUE Rubric. A considerable difference is the
affective aspect of IL, referred to as “Dispositions” in the Framework (ACRL, 2016).
Feelings, values, and attitudes about information are not listed within the IL VALUE
Rubric criteria, and are useful for assessing IL proficiency in graduating students.
Value and Usability of the Assessment
Data
The resulting information about student IL proficiency is valuable and useful for
accreditation and IL teaching and learning. Using capstone artifacts and the criteria in
the IL VALUE Rubric gives a comprehensive picture of student performance on five key
IL proficiency performance indicators. In addition, because these criteria are assessed in
a disciplinary and applied context, the resulting scores speak to student disciplinary
performance. WSCUC defines this as an appropriate assessment for ensuring quality and
integrity of the educational experience afforded to students; WSCUC also notes that
disciplinary assessment of core competencies “engages faculty and produces the most
useful findings” (WSCUCb, 2013, p. 30).

26
It is through engagement with faculty that valuable IL teaching and learning work
can be performed. Using the data and scoring details from this assessment, subject
librarians and instructional faculty can work together to strengthen areas of lower scores
on IL performance earlier in students’ academic path. Given the
Benchmark/Milestones/Capstone levels of the IL VALUE Rubric scores, librarians and
instructional faculty can also design scaffolded instructional interventions to support the
development of more advanced IL understanding.
Findings, Interpretation, and Analysis: Part II, IL
Proficiency and Relationship With Other Factors
IL Proficiency
For the purposes of this study, IL proficiency was defined by an overall score of 3
or higher on the IL VALUE Rubric, which is the average of the scores for each of the
five rubric criteria. Frequency scores were rounded to the nearest whole number if the
mean score was a decimal. The overall mean score for IL proficiency was 3, or a score of
Milestone on the IL VALUE Rubric. Individually, 84% of students demonstrated IL
proficiency, while 16% did not demonstrate IL proficiency (n=82).
The majority of students also scored proficient on individual IL VALUE Rubric
criteria. The frequency of scores by individual criteria are shown on Table 1.
Proficiency percentage by individual IL VALUE Rubric criteria are shown on Table 2.
IL Proficiency and Final Grade
Assignment
A Spearman’s rank-order correlation was run to determine the relationship
between IL proficiency (raw scores, left unrounded) and final grade assignment.
Spearman’s rank-order correlation was chosen because student grades are ordinal data.

27
Table 1
IL VALUE Rubric: Score Frequency by Individual Criteria
IL VALUE Rubric
1
2
3
Criteria

4

Determine the Extent of
Information Needed

0

15

46

21

Access the Information
Needed

0

11

49

22

0

18

43

21

0

9

55

18

2

14

56

10

Evaluate Information
and its Sources
Critically
Use Information
Effectively to
Accomplish a Specific
Purpose
Access and Use
Information Ethically
and Legally
Table 2

IL VALUE Rubric: Proficiency Percentage by Individual Criteria
IL VALUE Rubric
Not Proficient
Proficient
Criteria
Determine the Extent of
Information Needed

18%

82%

Access the Information
Needed

13%

87%

Evaluate Information
and its Sources
Critically

22%

78%

Use Information
Effectively to
Accomplish a Specific
Purpose

11%

89%

Access and Use
Information Ethically
and Legally

20%

80%

28
There is a medium/moderate positive correlation between the two variables
(rs(82)= .364, p<.001). This relationship is summarized in a scatterplot (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Correlation between IL proficiency and final assignment grade.
IL Proficiency and IL Instruction
Participation
A one-way between subjects ANOVA was conducted to compare the effect of
participation in information literacy instruction on IL proficiency scores (raw scores, left
unrounded). There was not a significant effect for participation in information literacy
instruction on IL proficiency scores at the p<.05 level [F(7.174, 9.375) = .239, p = .201]
(see Table 3).

29
Table 3
Analysis of Variance for Participation in IL Instruction on IL Proficiency.
Sum of
Mean
Source
Df
F
Sig
Squares
Square
Between
7.174
30
.239
1.301
.201
Groups
Within
9.375
51
.184
Groups
Total

16.549

81

Limitations
The nature of a pilot study has inherent limitations. The number of faculty
participants is small, and limited by discipline (social studies), which restricts the
conclusions that can be drawn about IL in other disciplines. While a pilot study, the
process would have benefited from additional disciplinary representation, to understand
the complexities of assessing IL across different disciplinary approaches to information.
With n = 82, the number of students’ artifacts is sufficient to assess the Research
Hypotheses, but the nature of the sampling suggests that the results may be somewhat
biased and therefore may not be representative of the entire campus population or other
disciplines.
Participant recruitment was voluntary, and participants volunteered after
assignments were submitted and graded. IL proficiency scores may be biased as a result,
i.e., faculty may be more likely to volunteer to participate if student scores are likely to
be strong.

CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION
As Fresno State prepares for campus-wide assessment of IL in AY18/19, this
study sought to pilot a process by which IL proficiency could be assessed at a point near
graduation. Using artifacts collected from capstone/culminating experience courses and
the AAC&U IL VALUE Rubric, overall proficiency as well as performance on individual
IL VALUE Rubric criteria were assessed.
Answers to Research Questions
Answers to Research Questions, Part I
1. Is this method an effective process for assessing IL proficiency for undergraduate
students at a point near graduation?
This process was determined to be an effective process for assessing IL
proficiency for undergraduate students at a point near graduation, based on the efficiency
and scalability of the process; the appropriateness of the process and tool for assessing
the determined criteria; and the value and usability of the assessment data.
2. How can this process be improved for the campus-wide assessment of IL in
AY18/19?
This assessment process, while an effective method for assessing IL proficiency,
can be improved for future assessment activities. Recruitment efforts should include a
larger number of faculty volunteers, and from different colleges at Fresno State. Efforts
to secure a diverse and representative sample in terms of majors and disciplines are
critical, particularly for the campus-wide assessment process. The assessment analysis of
IL proficiency might also be expanded by looking at differences among
majors/disciplines. Early recruitment is also important to this process as it allows for
“gaps” in representation to be addressed through direct outreach.

31
Answers to Research Questions, Part II
1. Are Fresno State undergraduate students achieving IL proficiency at or near
graduation?
Fresno State undergraduate students are achieving IL proficiency at/near
graduation, as demonstrated by the mean overall IL proficiency score of 2.88 and with
86% of the sample scoring Proficient.
2. Is there a relationship between demonstration of IL proficiency and assignment
grade?
A moderate, positive correlation between IL proficiency and assignment grade
exists. Students who demonstrated a higher IL proficiency grade also demonstrated a
higher assignment grade.
3. Is there a significant difference in IL proficiency between students who have
participated in IL instruction and those who have not?
There is not a significant difference in IL proficiency between students who have
participated in IL instruction and those who have not. Students who have participated in
IL instruction before or during the semester in which the capstone artifact was completed
did not demonstrate higher rates of IL proficiency.
Summary of Findings, Part I
The process for evaluating graduating student IL proficiency using artifacts
collected from capstone/culminating experience courses has been established as an
effective process. While rubric grading of complex research papers is potentially time
consuming, limiting the number of assessment criteria and having multiple scorers can
help address the time commitment required. The evidence of student IL performance,
particularly in a disciplinary, authentic context, is particularly valuable for librarians,
instructional faculty, and other information literacy assessment coordinators. As with

32
any assessment process, there are some limitations: the IL VALUE Rubric does not
assess some important affective aspects of IL proficiency.
Summary of Findings, Part II
The results of the IL proficiency assessment demonstrated that Fresno State
students are IL proficient, with proficiency also demonstrated in each of the five
individual criteria on the IL VALUE Rubric. Looking at the relationships between IL
proficiency scores and other measures of IL performance and proficiency often
considered in IL assessment, a positive relationship was shown between IL proficiency
and final grade assignment. There was no significant difference in IL proficiency scores
between students who participated in IL instruction prior to or during the semester in
which the capstone artifact was completed.
Future Recommendations
As evidenced by the literature in library instruction and higher education, the
expectation of meaningful assessment of information literacy has only grown over the
last three decades. As students and as professionals, graduates can expect to participate
in a robust, complex information environment, and multiple higher education
stakeholders view preparation for this environment as one of the responsibilities of an
educational institution. Regional accrediting agencies, such as WSCUC, hold higher
education institutions accountable for developing this skill within students, and formalize
the teaching and learning of IL by including it in the accreditation process. To ensure the
quality of IL instruction, and the achievement of IL proficiency by graduating students,
assessment of these activities is necessary. Following are some recommendations for
assessment of IL directly arising from the results of this study, presented as findings from
the study, connections to IL literature and practice, and specific recommendations for IL

33
assessment, teaching, and learning at Fresno State. In some instances, areas for future
research are also identified.
IL Assessment and Disciplinary
Considerations
One of the limitations of this study was the lack of participants beyond the social
sciences. However, different disciplines within the social sciences were represented, and
interestingly, differences within the artifacts were evident across the participating
departments, including the treatment of primary research, primary sources, qualitative
information, and the synthesis of sources into a final product. While IL, as with the other
four WSCUC core competencies, is to be found and fostered in all disciplines,
assessment of the particular ways in which IL proficiency might manifest across the
disciplines is necessary to accurately reflect IL proficiency. The assessment of this
proficiency needs to be done in the Fresno State undergraduate student population across
the disciplines.
As explored in Chapter 2 of this study, the sociocultural aspects of information
use in a particular profession or discipline are a key component of information expertise
(Lloyd, 2007); while it is reasonable to not expect professional information expertise
from graduating undergraduates, the foundation upon which that expertise will be built
should be established before graduation. When teaching, learning, and assessing IL, the
threshold concepts approach that underpins the Framework (ACRL, 2016) is useful for
considering disciplinary differences as necessary for IL proficiency.
ACRL has acknowledged the importance of disciplinary competencies for
information use as well: when the Standards (ACRL, 2000) were introduced, disciplinebased standards were later developed to provide guidance for these differences. That
work is currently taking place for the Framework (ACRL, 2016), and over the next
several years, these documents that are intended to describe the spectrum of information

34
skill development within the disciplines will be integrated into IL instruction work by
librarians, instructional faculty, and conceivably, accrediting bodies. These may be
particularly useful for IL outreach to instructional faculty, who are expert information
users in their own fields. Threshold concept research, both in the disciplines and in IL,
has found that the practices that define “expertise” in a particular community are often
tacit, and difficult for expert practitioners to communicate explicitly to novices (Hofer,
Townsend, & Brunetti, 2012). Access to these discipline-specific tools will hopefully
foster conversation about assessment of IL not just in writing or communication courses,
but across campus.
As recommended in the summary of findings, future IL practices intending to
capture campus-wide IL proficiency should be initiated early in order to ensure
representation of multiple disciplines. Where gaps in programmatic participation are
found, targeted outreach can be performed, perhaps in collaboration with college
assessment coordinators and subject liaison librarians. Additionally, as the new,
discipline-specific, Framework documents are released, it is recommended that these
documents be used for discipline-specific IL teaching and assessment. When using a
general IL rubric, such as the IL VALUE Rubric, these documents may aid in the scoring
of student artifacts by providing insight as to how IL manifests in context in different
fields of study. Finally, instructional faculty and subject liaison librarians might work
together to design components of assignments/assessments to explicitly communicate to
students’ expectations of information use and synthesis for the discipline.
Potential directions for future research might focus on disciplinary differences in
the criteria for IL proficiency. It would be particularly interesting to investigate the
development of information expertise in undergraduate students as they advance through
their degree. This development might also be considered in context of post-graduate
information use, by investigating practitioner/professional IL and information culture.

35
For those interested in the teaching and learning components of IL, these findings might
inform best practices for IL instruction and assessment.
IL Assessment Through Multiple
Approaches
As discussed earlier in this study, there are some weaknesses and challenges in
using the IL VALUE Rubric and capstone artifacts for IL proficiency: 1) while wellsuited to the capstone research paper or project, the AAC&U VALUE Rubric is difficult
to apply to projects in other formats; 2) the IL VALUE Rubric is designed around the
Standards (ACRL, 2000), and does not consider aspects of IL competency introduced in
the Framework (ACRL, 2016), particularly affective aspects; and 3) using capstone
research papers and projects may not allow accurate insight into how students are
accessing information resources, including the sources from which they obtain resources
(and, the legality of that access and use). These findings suggest that there would be
value in performing IL assessment through a variety of methods. This would include
disciplines with diverse culminating experiences to be represented in campus IL
assessment activities; this would also allow certain aspects of IL, such as affective
components, to be measured.
The AAC&U VALUE Rubric explicitly recognizes the importance of IL
assessment through multiple formats, stating in its framing language,
This rubric is recommended for use evaluating a collection of work, rather than a
single work sample in order to full gauge students’ information skills. Ideally, a
collection of work would contain a wide variety of different types of work and
might include: research papers, editorials, speeches, grant proposals, marketing or
business plans, PowerPoint presentations, posters, literature reviews, position
papers, and argument critiques, to name a few. In addition, a description of the
assignments with the instructions that initiated the student work would be vital in

36
providing the complete context for the work. Although a student’s final work
must stand on its own, evidence of a student’s research and information gathering
process, such as a research journal/diary, could provide further demonstration of a
student’s information proficiency and for some criteria on this rubric would be
required. (AAC&U, 2009a, para. 2)
Considering this directive from the AAC&U IL VALUE Rubric, it is recommended that
assessment of undergraduate IL be multi-faceted (assessed in multiple formats) and
multi-tiered (takes place across the information searching, evaluating, and synthesizing
process).
In designing this assessment process, several courses were excluded from the
study due to the format of the final capstone artifact: a recital for music majors, for
example. The nature of the pilot project did not align with assessing these artifacts. As
emphasis on authentic, disciplinary IL assessment increases, however, the potential for
subject librarians, instructional faculty, and assessment coordinators to collaborate on the
design of assignments/assessments that can capture the information practices of students
whose final culmination of learning does not result in a research paper or project presents
interesting opportunities. This is particularly intriguing in light of the emphasis in the
Framework on the role of information creator as an important part of IL proficiency
(ACRL, 2016).
In addition to multiple formats of artifacts used for IL assessment, it is also
recommended that these assessments take place throughout the process of artifact
creation, including topic development, research, creation, and dissemination to capture all
aspects of IL competency, including performance indicators, affective elements, and
reflective practice. Woven throughout the Framework are references to metacognition,
or “critical self-reflection” about the ways in which one finds, uses, and creates
information (ACRL, 2016). Designing assessments that consider both the final product

37
and the process will support students’ ability to transfer learning achieved through
reflection into future projects.
Research into undergraduate beliefs and values (the “dispositions” of the
Framework) around information may be a rich area for future investigation. In particular,
understanding how the thoughts and feelings of proficient information users differ from
those that are non-proficient can inform the design of learning situations that support the
development of the dispositional aspects of IL proficiency. Research into effective
methods for assessing affective elements of IL, such as reflection, would also benefit the
study of IL assessment.
Frequent and Formative IL Assessment
While this pilot study found that students are IL proficient, the overall IL rubric
score was determined to be 3, or Milestone, rather than 4, or Capstone. Ideally, the
majority of graduating undergraduates would perform at a capstone level. The nature of
this assessment project focuses on IL assessment at a point near graduation. The
assessment of IL at frequent points throughout a students’ academic career, however, can
serve to improve IL proficiency as students near graduation.
One particular strategy that might support this frequent and formative approach to
IL assessment is to consider disciplinary or departmental benchmarks and milestones.
The AAC&U IL VALUE Rubric is divided into levels of Benchmark/Milestone/
Capstone. Similarly, programmatic assessment at Fresno State is organized into courses
where disciplinary concepts are introduced, reinforced, and mastered. By identifying
courses where these concepts are taught, librarians can work with their instructional
faculty to incorporate IL experiences that are both disciplinarily and developmentally
appropriate. This will also allow for the advancement of IL instruction beyond database
demonstration in a way that is scalable, as the instruction can be pre-planned and

38
coordinated with program faculty. This might also present the opportunity to examine
areas for direct IL interventions at the point-of-need, such as LMS-embedded IL tutorials,
flipped classroom experiences, librarians embedded into LMS course instances to directly
interact with students as they encounter research and information challenges, and/or codesigned and co-assessed assignments.
IL Instruction
The goal of assessment is not solely to measure and report student performance,
but to integrate findings back into instructional design to better develop student learning
(Oakleaf, 2009). This final section of recommendations connects study findings to IL
instruction.
This study found there was no significant difference between students who
participated in IL instruction prior to or during the semester of their capstone course and
IL proficiency scores. While it would be hoped that IL instruction would raise IL
proficiency scores, every student who participated in IL instruction had only participated
in a single formal IL instruction session in their college career. Fresno State librarians,
like many libraries, provide direct IL instruction mainly through one-shots in which
librarians visit the classroom for a single session, often focused on teaching database
demonstrations. While IL is also developed through many other practices (as evidenced
by student IL proficiency rates), participating in only a single session directly dedicated
to IL is likely insufficient to address the full spectrum of information skills and concepts
encountered throughout an undergraduate program of study, particularly higher-order IL
skills. In addition, while proficiency with information finding tools is an important part
of IL, it is only a part, and often does not represent the higher-order learning that is
necessary for development of IL at the more advanced levels. While these skills are also
developed within other courses, this development is often tacit, rather than explicit, and a

39
study of Fresno State faculty information literacy instruction practices demonstrates that
instructional faculty often do not include IL learning outcomes in their syllabi (Foster,
2018).
There has been little published research on declined or unchanged IL proficiency
related to IL instruction: similar to many disciplines, published IL research focuses on
successful interventions with a positive impact on student performance. It is not
unreasonable to suppose that students might experience a decline in IL proficiency
following instruction, however. An unpublished study with a similar design to this
assessment project conducted with first-year undergraduate students at Fresno State and
at California State University, Northridge, also found that students’ IL self-efficacy and
research confidence declined post-IL instruction (Council of Library Deans Assessment
Team, personal communication, 2018). Foster and Doyle (2018) also found that graduate
students at Fresno State exhibit a decline in self-perceived research expertise after
participating in IL instruction, or completing a graduate-level research methodology
course. It is hypothesized that this may be caused by increased knowledge of the
complexity of the research process, that students “don’t know what they don’t know,”
until participating in IL instruction.
This is somewhat similar to Kuhlthau’s seminal work on the Information Search
Process (ISP), where students are optimistic and excited after they have selected a
research topic, but experience increasing levels of frustration and disappointment once
they begin searching for existing information that supports or develops their chosen topic,
and find conflicting information, overwhelming amounts of information, or no
information at all (Kuhlthau, Heinström, & Todd, 2008). Through guided inquiry,
Kuhlthau (1994) suggests “zones of intervention,” based on Vygotsky’s zones of
proximal development, or specific librarian interventions for each stage of the ISP,
aligned to the type of support offered to the particular cognitive, affective, and active

40
needs of the student as they engage with information resources to create a new
information product. The guided inquiry design is a scaffolded approach, with each
research stage building upon the other, and presents students opportunities to make
meaning by constructing connections between found sources and their own ideas,
culminating with a reflective and evaluative process. Throughout this process, the
librarian interacts with the student in a variety of roles that aims to foster self-directed
learning. Beyond the “one-shot” model of IL instruction, or a single, often lecture-based
session, there are multiple interactions with the librarian at the point of information need.
When considering direct IL instruction and its relationship to the development of
information literacy, it is recommended that a scaffolded approach such as Kuhlthau’s, or
the novice-to-expert threshold model found in the Framework (ACRL, 2016), be adopted
for teaching IL at Fresno State. It is also recommended that direct and explicit IL
teaching become the work of both library and instructional faculty. Librarians at Fresno
State are currently developing an IL curriculum based on this model, along with a series
of web-based tutorials with built-in assessments aligned to this curriculum. It is hoped
that these tools can be used by instructional faculty in addition to librarians. Through
collaborative practice, librarians and instructional faculty can design learning and
assessment exercises that address the scaffolded nature of IL development, and support
the achievement of higher-order IL skills and more students achieving IL proficiency.
With increased instructional collaboration and integration of IL into the
undergraduate classroom, research directions might include the investigation of
information literacy as a metaliteracy, a term that connects information literacy,
reflection and metacognition, and the additional literacies of digital literacy, media
literacy, and critical thinking (Jacobson & Mackey, 2013). In the 21st century higher
education classroom, disciplinary learning and multiple modalities for information
access, use, evaluation, and creation (including delivery of instruction, curriculum

41
materials, and learning activities and assignments) intersect in complex ways. Research
at these intersections, including how to assess IL where these literacies overlap and
influence each other, may lead to knowledge that improves student IL proficiency, and
teaching, learning, and assessment scholarship for increased student success.
Conclusion
This study established the viability of the use of capstone artifacts for assessing IL
proficiency at a point near graduation, as required by WSCUC for accreditation purposes.
There are many benefits to assessing IL proficiency using capstone artifacts, including
the ability to assess IL practices within a disciplinary context, and with the expectation
that the project demonstrates the culmination of student learning.
This study also evaluated student IL proficiency and its relationship to several
other assessment measures, including final paper grade and participation in IL
instruction. While Fresno State students demonstrate IL proficiency, there are several
ways in which increased numbers and scores for IL proficiency might be achieved,
including disciplinary considerations for IL assessment, multiple approaches to IL
assessment, frequent and formative IL assessment, and a scaffolded approach to IL
instruction that may result in increased IL proficiency levels for graduating
undergraduate students. Collaborative teaching, assignment design, and assessment, as
well as communication between librarians, instructional faculty, and assessment
coordinators is particularly recommended. Within the classroom, students will benefit
from these collaborations that have the potential to strengthen their information skills;
post-graduation, students will also benefit from strong information skills that will carry
into their professional work and personal lives.