EXAMINING PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE DATA RESOURCES
AND APPLICATIONS IN HEALTHCARE

by

Sarah Siddiqui

Abstract
This thesis is a study of popular data resources in healthcare and their applications toward health
information system design and development. The first section reviews the way data is collected
with a list of websites where health datasets can be obtained; along with a summary of the
recognized vocabulary standards that make it easier to understand and share this data. The next
section discusses ways of data categorization for better analysis, recognizing that a significant
proportion of health data is unstructured. The Recent Findings section highlights the changes in
the data over the years and the ways in which their application can be expected to expand in the
future. The final section looks at different health information systems- Electronic Health Records
in particular, focusing on how their design and functionality can be enhanced for better usability.

iii

Introduction
With innovations in technology and vendors offering increasing IT solutions for
integrating business processes, the field of health informatics has been gaining importance. One
of the earliest papers by Greenes and Shortliffe (1990) defined Medical informatics as “the field
that concerns itself with the cognitive, information processing, and communication tasks of
medical practice, education, and research, including the information science and the technology
to support these tasks.” As healthcare is an information-intensive process (Austin & Boxerman,
1998), it becomes essential that the information used is easily accessible as well as accurate. In
this thesis, we will first examine the data resources that can be used by researchers and technical
specialists in healthcare. This will be followed by a discussion of the categorization of this data,
and the emerging themes and future expectations for health informatics development and design.

Data Resources
Data Collection
The data utilized in health informatics can come from various sources such as Electronic
Health Records (EHRs), Clinical Decision Support Systems, insurance claims, etc. According to
Wu, Zhao, and Wu (2005), the majority of public health data is collected from “emergency
medical service (EMS), emergency department (ED), and hospitals.” They further go on to
mention that among these, ED data is the most popular source. Aggarwal (2016) has listed some
other means of collecting data:
a.

Clickstream behavior on social media websites, blogs or Apps that discusses healthcare.

This is similar to the patient behavior and sentiment data mentioned in Groves, Kayyali, Knott
and Kuiken (2013).
1

b.

Data from devices containing health sensors and information systems, such as fitness

trackers (Beam and Kohane, 2018).
c.

Billing data from health insurance companies.

d.

Genomic and biometric data

e.

Notes provided by physicians in digital formats

f.

Imaging data of patients such as scans or ultrasounds.

Nguyen et al. (2014) have evaluated the methods of data collection. They found that
while a combination of approaches is generally used for collecting the data, the dominant source
is questionnaires, followed by interviews including focus group interviews. The data is generally
analyzed used qualitative methods.
The data collected in health care and medicine has been growing at large rates,
particularly due to the utilization of computer-based information systems (Groves et al., 2013):
“from only 30% office-based physicians and hospitals using such systems (EMRs) in 2005; the
figure has increased to more than 50% for physicians and nearly 75% for hospitals by 2011.”
One of the reasons for adopting EHR systems is that analyzing patient data can improve the
overall quality of health care by identifying patients at risk and assisting them though
“interventions” such as alert systems (Kumar & Bauer, 2008). This is in addition to other
benefits of adopting EHRs, such as reduction in costs of transcriptions and filing, and perhaps
the most important: decrease in medical errors (Kumar & Bauer).
The extensive amount of data has led to the development of Big Data in healthcare,
which can be defined as “large and complex electronic health data sets which are very difficult to
manage with traditional hardware, software and data management tools and methods” (Sun &
Reddy in Aggarwal, 2016). Machine learning algorithms can be utilized for analyzing big data
2

(Beam & Kohane, 2018). The paper relating to “The big data revolution in healthcare” by
Groves et al. (2013) mentions several sources of data that in addition to clinical data is helping to
fuel the growth of big data in healthcare. Some of these are:
a. Claims data, which can be collected from insurance companies and their clients.
b. Pharmaceutical research and development (R&D) data which through data related to
clinical trials can provide information about the effects of drugs in the body.
c. Patient behavior and sentiment data is gathered from sources outside of healthcare
such as retailers. It also includes “companies that aggregate and sell consumer
information, such as Acxiom and Accurint” (Groves et al., p.3).
Integrating the data obtained from these resources can broaden the scope and application of
research in healthcare.

Websites
The previous section looked at the ways in data is commonly collected. When it comes to
applying this data for research or similar purposes, we turn to datasets, some of which may be
restricted due to privacy reasons. Some popular websites where the datasets can be accessed are:
1. UC Berekely Dataset Resources:
http://guides.lib.berkeley.edu/publichealth/healthstatistics/rawdata
The website contains a variety of datasets related to mortality, substance abuse, health
interviews, medical care etc. The datasets are also categorized by region as national and
international, with some pertaining specifically to California.
2.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
https://www.cdc.gov/BRFSS/ The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)

3

conducts over 400,000 telephone interviews across the U.S., regarding the people’s
“health-related risk behaviors, chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services.”
3.

Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS)
https://hints.cancer.gov/ The HINTS data is a publicly available collection of Americans’
utilization of cancer-related information. The aim of this dataset is to increase the usage
of health information with proper communication to users. It also contains updates about
the latest trends and opportunities in health information.

4.

Data Science Central
https://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/10-great-healthcare-data-sets)
Contains datasets related to childcare, mortality, cost of healthcare, etc.

5.

Data.gov
https://www.data.gov/health/ Contains over 1000 public health datasets, with the feature to

filter data by topic, source, state, etc.
6.

Data Planet
https://statisticaldatasets.data-planet.com/ This website contains a wide variety of datasets
categorized into diseases (asthma, blood pressure, diabetes), health insurance, deaths, etc.

7.

Statistical Dataset
https://statisticaldatasets.data-planet.com/ They offer several statistical tables
organized by medical issue or disease. Examples are data on AIDS, mortality,
diabetes, and vaccinations, among others.

8.

World Health Organization Global Health Observatory data repository
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/?theme=main The WHO website has datasets on a
variety of topics. These can be viewed by category, theme, indicator, country, etc. to find

4

suitable resources.
When it comes to sharing the data, different standards for transmission have been
developed. These can include “Text, eXtensible Markup Language (XML), Simple Mail Transfer
Protocol (SMTP), Open Database Connectivity Standard (ODBC), and Health Level 7 (HL7)
standard” (Wu et al., 2005). The HL7 (Health Level 7 International) also provides “a framework
(and related standards) for the exchange, integration, sharing, and retrieval of electronic health
information.” This ensures that the information can be transferred and integrated seamlessly
across different channels.

Vocabulary Standards and Resources
With various sub disciplines in health and medicine across the globe, practitioners have
attempted to develop glossaries/thesauri to unify public health and health-related vocabulary
(Niedźwiedzka, Czabanowska & Śmietana, 2009). As mentioned in Gross, Taylor and Joudrey
(2015), adding controlled vocabulary gives more successful results in full text searching. They
have found that “for about 1 out of every 5 successful keyword searches, half or more of the hits
now retrieved would not be retrieved if there were no subject headings.” Getting access to
relevant resources without wasting time is quintessential for doctors and clinicians. Some of the
vocabulary sources used in health care (from Niedźwiedzka et al., 2009) are:
•

PHIN (Public Health Information Network) vocabulary, created by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention in the United States

•

UMLS (Unified Medical Language System)- created by the National Library of
Medicine. The UMLS has several knowledge sources, including a Metathesaurus, which
contains terms from vocabularies such as Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), RxNorm,
and SNOMED CT (NIH, 2016). SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
5

Clinical Terms) is a popular multilingual terminology that is mapped to other
international terminologies (SNOMED, 2018).
•

European Multilingual Thesaurus on Health Promotion- developed as a result of the
efforts of the International Union for Health Promotion and Health Education, Regional
Office for Europe (IUHPE/EURO); contains 1300 terms available in 12 languages.

•

NHPL (National Health Public Language)- Developed by the integration of the Health
Development Agency’s Public Health Information Thesaurus with England’s Public
Health Observatories Public Health Information Tagging System (PHITS); the NHPL is
comprised of 1571 terms in 10 thematic areas. It is also in the process of being integrated
with MeSH, SNOMED, and other taxonomies.

•

The General Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus is another resource available in 17
languages and contains over 6000 entries.

•

Terminology/Glossary of technical terms- offered by the National Information Center on
Health Services Research and Health Care Technology (NICHSR)

In addition to the above, the World Health Organization has developed some glossaries that can
be used by public health professionals. As Niedźwiedzka et al. have highlighted, while unifying
all the terminology is essential; it is also a challenge because of the lack of international
consensus “as to the actual organization of public health systems.”

6

Categorization of data
In order to be analyzed and applied, the big data mentioned in the previous sections need
to be categorized for a better understanding. Weber, Mandl and Kohane (2014) recognized this
challenge and divided the data on the basis of its bigness as shown in the figure below:

The Tapestry of Potentially High-Value Information Sources That May be Linked to an Individual for Use in Health Care:
CPT indicates current procedural terminology; ECG, electrocardiography; EPA, US Environmental Protection Agency; GIS,
geographic information systems; GPS, global positioning system; HL7, Health Level 7 coding standard; ICD-9, Institutional
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision; LOINC, Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes; NDC, National Drug
Code; OTC, over-the-counter; SNOMED, Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine; SNP, single-nucleotide polymorphism.
Source: https://jamanetwork-com.libproxy.albany.edu/data/Journals/JAMA/930408/jvp140057f1.png; Refer Appendix A for
permission license details.

The Health care center Electronic Health Records (EHR- highlighted in blue boxes)
contain various types of data that can be linked to patients relatively easily. A significant amount
7

of such data is also unstructured. Conversely, data such as claims records are fairly structured
and provide long-term records that can be linked to patients. The figure also mentions some nontraditional health data such as social media posts, census records and credit card history. This
data is not very large in quantity and may be harder to link to the patients; yet it is useful for a
“holistic view of a patient, and, in particular, shed light on social and environmental factors that
may be influencing health” (Weber et al.).
EHRs have been defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) as
“repository of patient data in digital form, stored and exchanged securely, and accessible by
multiple authorized users. It contains retrospective, concurrent, and prospective information and
its primary purpose is to support continuing, efficient and quality integrated health care” (as
mentioned in Häyrinen et al., 2008). These systems help create timely medical records, which
improves access, reduces costs, and benefit patient care (Austin & Boxerman, 1998). The paper
by Häyrinen et al. lists several categories of data that can be obtained from EHRs. These include
referrals, symptoms, medical history, diagnoses, test reports, and medications prescribed. Data
charting comprising of patients’ daily activities can be included under nursing data components.
It must be mentioned that in most cases the term EHR is treated interchangeably with
Electronic Medical Record (EMR). However, Ludwick and Doucette (2009) have differentiated
between the two. According to them, an EMR is a “computerized health information system
where providers record detailed encounter information such as patient demographics, encounter
summaries, medical history, allergies, intolerances, and lab test histories.” On the other hand,
EHRs draw from EMRs to provide longitudinal data to patients about their lifetime health
history.

8

From the earlier figure we observed that a substantial amount of data has been classified
into the “unstructured” category. Unlike the structured data, this refers to the information that
cannot be stored in databases or EHRs (Wang & Hajli, 2017).

Recent Findings
Over the years, not only has the quantity of data increased, but the datatypes used in
databases have also expanded from alphanumeric data used in the 1990s. We can now include
“radiology images and molecular data such as DNA data” (Haux, 2006) to the datasets. This has
in turn, transformed the utilization of this data. As Haux stated, the use was previously limited to
patient care and administration. This has extended to “patient care, health care planning and
research.” A similar observation was made by Gentil et al. (2017) with regard to EHRs:
“The secondary use of Electronic Health Record (EHR) data, for instance for
epidemiological research, pharmacovigilance or health policy making, is progressively
increasing….a paradigm shift occurred with the development of Big Data analysis
following EHR digitization that facilitates data processing.”
Groves et al., (2013) have listed a combination of four factors that has led to a “tipping
point” for innovation and development in healthcare. The first two are the demand and supply for
data. There is a need for better quality of data to keep up with the developments in the economic
and technological industries. The data from EHRs plays a major role in meeting the demands,
along with consumer data that may not be directly related to healthcare. Furthermore, technical
advancements have made it possible to aggregate the data from multiple resources. As mentioned
in an earlier section, this data can be analyzed for making predictions about user behavior using
machine learning algorithms.
9

In addition to increase in data, Groves et al. state that the tools using them have also
become accessible and more affordable. Finally, government agencies are also interested in
“encouraging the use of its healthcare data, through various policies and initiatives.” Their paper
further talks about some of the initiatives by the US federal government have proved particularly
useful enhancing health data accessibility:
a. The 2009 Open Government Initiative
b.

The Affordable Care Act- 2010

c. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
(HITECH)- 2009
These acts have made data exchange more transparent, while attempting to take measures
to ensure that individual privacy is not harmed in the process. The HITECH Act in particular, by
addressing the privacy and security concerns associated with transferring data across electronic
sources, has widened the scope of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) of 1996 (3Lions Publishing- HITECH Act Summary, 2017).
Interventions through big data should be encouraged as they help save costs of providing
healthcare. The big data has led to an estimated reduction of 300-450 billion dollars in healthcare
costs in the United States (Aggarwal, 2016). Big datasets can be analyzed by machine learning
techniques to make predictions about the occurrence of diseases and the possibility of survival. A
similar study was conducted using the Haberman’s dataset to predict the survival rates of breast
cancer patients who underwent surgery for treatment (Aljawad et al., 2017). While the study
requires inclusion of additional features for better quality of results, it is a good example of using
methodologies such as Bayesian Networks and Support Vector Machines for health research.
Eysenbach (2000), in his paper about Consumer Health Informatics- a branch of

10

health/medical informatics that focuses on consumer needs- has stated that IT and health
(consumer) informatics are now a major component of national and public health policies. He
also talks about how the Internet has facilitated the creation of “decision aid” applications that
enable patients to take decisions about their treatment course of actions. These applications
integrate data from patient’s health records and their preferences; and can be used without
healthcare professionals.
The International Data Corporation has predicted a healthcare digital transformation in
the next 3 years (cited in Foley, 2017). According to the IDC Health Insights by 2018, “drug
makers will double their investment in analytics focused on healthcare provider data to reach
millennial and gen x doctors the way they prefer it: electronically.” Further, the increased
development in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and the Internet of Things (IoT) will transform data
collections such that by 2019, “60% of healthcare applications will collect real-time location data
and clinical IoT device data and embed cognitive capabilities to discover patterns.”
From the above it is clear that the utilization of data by clinicians as well as researchers
will continue to increase, making it essential to focus on the design and utility of health
information systems. This is discussed in detail in the following section.

Application towards health information system design and development
HIS Categories
When discussing the applications of Health Information Technology, the following
systems appear to have the most potential (Williams et al., 2016): “personal health records
(PHRs), electronic medical records (EMR), computerized physician order entry systems
11

(CPOEs), and electronic access to diagnostic results.” Austin and Boxerman (1998) divide them
into 4 similar categories:
a.

Clinical information systems- patient care and support

b.

Administrative systems- nonpatient care

c.

Strategic decision-support systems- assist executives in planning and decision making

d.

Electronic network applications- insurance, medical supplies, and information exchange.

Based on the papers that were reviewed for this study, Electronic Health Records appear
to be the dominant application, described as the “one of the most promising components of
health information technology” (Lee, Kuo & Goodwin, 2013). Therefore, it is imperative that
these systems remain up to speed with latest technological innovations. As mentioned in
Häyrinen et al. “The success of EHRs depends on the quality of the information available to
health care professionals in making decisions about patient care and in the communication
between healthcare professionals during patient care.”

Usability of HIS
In addition to the information, the usability of these systems is an essential aspect.
According to the Institute of Medicine, Health IT systems of poor usability are a major “barrier”
in safe patient care (in Roman et al., 2017). This has been reiterated in a 2017 article in Health
Management Technology- a print and online magazine dedicated to Health IT
(https://www.healthmgttech.com/). The article by Foley goes on to claim that EHR usability will
become such an essential success factor, that it will be “financially prohibitive to practice
medicine without a user-friendly EHR.” Indeed, biomedical cloud systems which use large

12

datasets for analysis, find it challenging to utilize information from multiple sources chiefly due
to usability issues (Chae et al., 2013).
Middleton et al. (2013) have listed 14 usability principles proposed by the National
Center for Cognitive Informatics and Decision Making in Healthcare which should guide the
design of EHRs (Source: https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article/20/e1/e2/692244; Refer Appendix B for
permission license details):

The language utilization principle in the above table is important because consumers use
different terms or expressions to describe health concepts when compared to professionals (Zeng
& Tse, 2006). The paper “Exploring and Developing Consumer Health Vocabularies” supports
the development and usage of Consumer Health Vocabularies (CHVs)- a consistent vocabulary
that maps layman words to corresponding medical terms. This would improve users’ interaction
with the health systems, and lead to better “consumer health information seeking” behavior.
One of the factors affecting usability of health information systems is a user’s familiarity
with the system. This familiarity is based on previous experiences (O’Connell et al., 2004) which
can have a positive impact by describing “intuitive” system features; but the same may also have
13

a negative impact in terms of getting accustomed to a new design. The latter can be tackled only
by effective training, particularly because each health system is unique (Health Canada in
Ludwick and Doucette, 2009). It is crucial that the users of health information systems know
how to do so, because errors can have life-threatening impacts. There have been instances where
introduction of computerized practitioner order entry (CPOE) systems witnessed an increase in
mortality for patient groups (Han, Carcillo, Venkataram et al. in Payne, 2008). Therefore, proper
training and professional support should accompany all HISs. Going back to evaluating usability,
additional “metrics” have been discussed in Middleton et al. (2013):
a.

Completion rate (or error rate);

b.

Time on task; and

c.

Subjective user satisfaction.

Another issue with usability is in terms of actions that require navigating across several
windows (Roman et al., 2017). Even if the system uses a good classification scheme or
taxonomy, navigation tools provide context and flexibility in using the system (Rosenfeld et al.,
2015). It is important to emphasize the navigation of the system because as Roman et al. have
mentioned, EHR data is generally scattered across pages, and inefficient navigation increases
cognitive load, causing users to make more errors.
The usability of EHRs can be further enhanced by combining with additional features.
For instance, in an article by Foley (2017), P. B. Lovett talks about the rising acceptance of
telemedicine (using technology to deliver healthcare at distant locations-American Academy of
Family Physicians, 2018), particularly for patients who are unable to visit the physician’s office
for a variety of reasons. His advice is to integrate telemedicine with EHR, so that patients and

14

doctors can have greater access to the former’s health records. Not only will this expand the
reach of physicians to rural areas and generate more revenue; but the data that can be collected
and applied for research will also increase substantially.
The measures taken to improve usability should also include the system’s reliability.
What sets clinical computing systems apart from other systems is that they are required to be
continuously available 24 hours a day and 7 days a week (Payne, 2008). Because of this, the
system should be thoroughly tested before going live and once implemented, have a readily
available support staff for assistance (Payne, 2008).

Conclusion
We have looked at the various resources for obtaining health data, with mention of some
popular websites and the common information systems. The information systems are an essential
component of healthcare, being not only a source of data; but also utilizing the data to help
medical practitioners carry out their work effectively. This creates a partnership between the
clinician users and the information services departments responsible for developing and
sustaining the HIS (Payne, 2008). Maintaining this partnership in the long run is vital for the
success of these IS; and dependent upon efforts from both parties. As Reed Gardner has stated
(in Payne, 2008), “what we are doing is 90% social and political and only about 10%
technology.”