THE STRUGGLE CONTINUES:
ARCHIVAL APPROACHES TO CIVIL RIGHTS IN NORTHERN IRELAND
AND THE AMERICAN SOUTH
James King, PhD
University of Pittsburgh, 2018
When police and counter-protesters broke up the first march of the Northern Ireland Civil
Rights Association (NICRA) in August 1968, activists sang the African American
spiritual, “We Shall Overcome” before disbanding. The spiritual, so closely associated
with the earlier civil rights struggle in the United States, was indicative of the historical
and material links shared by the movements in Northern Ireland and the American South.
While these bonds have been well documented within history and media studies, the
relationship between these regions’ archived materials and contemporary struggles
remains largely unexplored. While some artifacts from the movements—along with the
oral histories and other materials that came later—remained firmly ensconced within the
archive, others have been digitally reformatted or otherwise repurposed for a range of
educational, judicial, and social projects.
By charting the archival afterlives of civil rights movements, my dissertation
explores how approaches to archiving civil rights materials in Northern Ireland and the
American South have intersected and diverged. In so doing, it reveals how civil rights
archives intervene in contemporary social justice issues. My research is structured as a
qualitative comparative case study, involving semi-structured interviews, field
observations, and the collection of textual data at four research sites in the American
South and Northern Ireland. The study examines how civil rights record keepers in these

iv

two regions interpret and act on a variety of imperatives for both archiving civil rights
materials and potentially repurposing them for contemporary social justice.
While missions, mandates, and organizational structures vary among research
sites, I argue that every archive studied facilitates social justice in some fashion. In fact,
my study finds that civil rights archives in Northern Ireland and the American South draw
on a range of overlapping approaches to intervene in contemporary social justice issues.
The varying types of social justice responses revealed in the study indicates a continuum
of archival social interventions, with each civil rights archive working at points between
the poles of activism and neutrality. The sites are thematically interconnected by
education, digital spaces, and reconciliation, which show how archives turn their activist
or neutral philosophies into real-world actions.


I. RESEARCH PROBLEM

While the interconnected historical roots of the civil rights movements in Northern Ireland
and the American South have been well documented, the linkages between their archived
materials and contemporary struggles remain largely unexplored. What happened, for
instance, after the marches stopped and the placards, newsletters, and pins were no longer
needed? While some materials—along with the photographs, scrapbooks, and oral
histories that came later—inevitably remained idle and un-accessed, others have been
digitally reformatted or otherwise repurposed for a variety of educational, judicial, and
social purposes. By charting the archival afterlives of these historic social movements,
this dissertation explores how approaches to archiving civil rights materials in Northern
Ireland and the American South have intersected and diverged, as well as reveals how
civil rights record keepers in Northern Ireland and the American South intervene, if they
do, in contemporary social justice issues.2 To answer these questions, I have undertaken a
qualitative comparative case study at selected research sites in Northern Ireland and the
American South, involving semi-structured interviews, field observations, and the
collection of textual data. I examine how civil rights record keepers within these two
particular contexts interpret and act on a variety of institutional imperatives for both
archiving civil rights materials and potentially repurposing them for contemporary social
justice issues.
My research topic stems from a long-held interest in the intersection of archives
and social justice. In fact, my interest in such topics began on a school field trip to visit
By record keepers, I am referring to the diverse group of archivists, activists, and other professionals
and non-professionals who curate civil rights materials.
2

1

the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute in the late 1990s. Although I grew up in a
community outside of Birmingham, the trip provided my first exposure to the state’s civil
rights history. The powerful exhibits and stories on display at the museum inspired me to
sign the Birmingham Pledge to end racism—a profound and formative experience that
sparked my interest in how historical events continue to shape the present.
I shaped these interests into an academic research agenda while taking archives
courses at Simmons College. Classes with Jeannette Bastian and Andrew Flinn, whose
work informs later chapters, provided me with a foundational understanding of the
relationship between archives and social justice. At the time, I had recently graduated
from Boston College’s Irish Studies program and was following the ongoing case of the
Belfast Project oral history subpoenas. The controversy would later provide the subject of
my first research publication in the doctoral program at the University of Pittsburgh. The
case also exposed me to the events, themes, and issues that inform this dissertation. My
research into the history of Northern Ireland, coupled with my lived experience as a native
Southerner, led to my comparative analysis of the thread that continues to tie the regions
together: civil rights.
Accordingly, my dissertation touches on a broad range of scholarly domains
outside of information science, including history, communications, and political science.
For instance, the urgent civil rights and racial injustices of today’s America and ongoing
scholarship regarding the diffusion of global protest movements provide just two
examples of other scholarly and popular debates this dissertation obliquely addresses. In
order to engage a problem with contemporary relevance and broad implications, I draw on
a wide-ranging, interdisciplinary body of literature—as reflected in the following literature

2

review—to contribute a unique and productive archival perspective to these conversations.
In this respect, the dissertation furthers previous research exemplifying archival science’s
contributions to a wide range of other scholarly disciplines.3
My dissertation is narrow in focus, comparing two particular cases that encapsulate
the nexus of archives, historical civil rights movements, and contemporary social justice.
More specifically, I chose to compare the civil rights movements in Northern Ireland
(1964-1972) and the United States of America (1954-1968) for multiple reasons: 4 the
well-established historical roots and political parallels between the two regions, the direct
and documented influence of the American movement in Northern Ireland, the largely
divergent ways each movement has subsequently been memorialized, and the variety of
archival contexts in which these movements are preserved and accessed.5 The research
sites selected within these two geopolitical contexts therefore offer congruence between
exploring contemporary civil rights recordkeeping and the resulting research questions
that compare the methods and motivations for archiving and potentially repurposing civil
rights materials for social justice.

For recent instances of archival science studies with cross-disciplinary appeal, see Amelia Acker,
“How Cells Became Records: Standardization and Infrastructure in Tissue Culture” Archival Science 15,
no. 1 (Fall 2013): 1-24 ; David A. Wallace et al., “Stories for Hope-Rwanda: A Psychological-Archival
Collaboration to Promote Healing and Cultural Continuity through Intergenerational Dialogue,”
Archival Science 14, no. 3-4 (Fall 2014): 275-306; Michéle Valerie Cloonan, “The Moral Imperative to
Preserve,” Library Trends 55, no. 3 (Winter 2007): 746-755.
4 I settled on these traditionally accepted date ranges while acknowledging them as imperfect and
debatable. As will be discussed in the proceeding literature review, for instance, scholars have
compellingly argued that the date range of the American Civil Rights movement extends well beyond
the classically accepted dates with which I am working.
5 As a co-founder of the US-based Black Lives Matter, Patrisse Cullors’s attendance at this year’s
Bloody Sunday anniversary march in Derry provides a recent example of how these civil rights
movements remain entwined to some degree. George Jackson, “Bloody Sunday Anniversary March in
Derry Marks 43 Years,” The Irish Times, February 1, 2015, accessed February 11, 2015,
http://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/bloody-sunday-anniversary-march-in-derrymarks-43-years-1.2087239.
3

3

I. A. SIGNIFICANCE OF STUDY

When police and counter-protesters broke up the first march of the Northern Ireland Civil
Rights Association (NICRA) in August 1968, protesters sang the African American
spiritual, “We Shall Overcome” before disbanding.6 The song had crossed the Atlantic
from America via television waves, in some respects foreshadowing the global diffusion
of contemporary protests movements and revolutions through social media and other
digital technologies. Archivists, activists, and others have since reformatted some of these
same civil rights artifacts to circulate within what Manuel Castells famously calls the
“network society.”7 Furthermore, past linkages between the two regions continue to
resurface in other ways directly or tangentially related to cultural heritage, as evidenced by
the recent contact between Mississippi’s William Winter Institute for Racial
Reconciliation and like-minded reconciliation programs based in Belfast.8 My
dissertation furthers our understanding of transnational connections by examining how
record keepers on both sides of the Atlantic have repurposed civil rights materials for
present-day social justice purposes.

The civil rights march was organized in conjunction with the Derry Housing Action Coalition.
Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), “We Shall Overcome”…The History of the Struggle
for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968-1978 (Belfast: Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association
(NICRA), 1978), accessed November 22, 2014,
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/crights/nicra/nicra78.htm.
7 The network society, as defined by Castells, exists as a “social structure that characterizes society in
the early twenty-first century, a social structure constructed around (but not determined by) digital
networks of communication.” Manuel Castells, Communication Power (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2009), 4.
8 Carol V.R. George, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi: Methodists, Murder, and the struggle for Racial
Justice in Neshoba County (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 209.
6

4

Furthermore, the dissertation addresses a fundamental debate within archival
studies, namely how the record keeping profession should respond to social justice
imperatives. Why and how, in the case of this study, have some civil rights archives and
archivists actively intervened in contemporary issues of social justice? I address this
question by building on the emerging archival literature on the subject, best exemplified
by 2013’s “Social Justice Impact of Archives.”9 The article is unique in two respects:
focusing specifically on measurable archival impact and proposing an archive-social
justice framework for others to adopt and expand. In the view of Wendy Duff and her coauthors, social justice actions are neither binary nor necessarily limited to the micro- (i.e.
people, families, and other informal groupings), meso- (i.e. institutional), or macro- (i.e.
societal) levels of scale. Furthermore, the article serves as a reminder “to recognize that
social justice actions, including archival approaches to social justice, may have an array of
impacts and on a range of different groups including positive and negative effects, with
some being intended and others unintended.”10 While focusing on approaches as opposed
to impact, the qualitative, comparative study that I undertake embraces these multifaceted
conceptualizations of archival social justice.
My dissertation research also furthers our understanding of how missions,
mandates, and geopolitical contexts determine the archiving of certain materials. I
compare, for instance, the collection and dissemination policies and practices of varying
archival types both within Northern Ireland and the American South. More specifically,
my research focuses on four sites with unique institutional mandates, missions, and
archival categorizations: The Museum of Free Derry (community archive), The Linen
Wendy M. Duff et al. “Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary Investigation,” Archival Science
13, no. 4 (2013): 317-348.
10 Duff et al. “Social Justice Impact of Archives,” 339.
9

5

Hall Library (independent archive), the Mississippi Department of Archives and History
(state archive) and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute (elements of both municipal and
community archives).11 Since community and independent archives form over half of my
sample, my project advances archival understandings of Andrew Flinn’s categorization of
an ”archive as social movement,” wherein “the collection and preservation of such
materials [those overlooked or silenced] is not about ‘serious leisure’ but about their use
for political and educational purposes, either as tools in contemporary struggles, or to
remember and commemorate past lives whose achievements were disfigured by trauma
and discrimination.”12
While acknowledging the uniqueness of each selected archival institution, my
research explores the role of institutional type in determining how record keepers collect,
manage, and potentially repurpose civil rights materials. In what ways, for instance, might
government archives curate civil rights collections differently from community and
independent archives? My research, therefore, expands the limited pre-existing
scholarship on how interfacing institutions and archival types—and their accompanying
differences in governance, funding, and mission—influence the preservation, access, and
at times, repurposing of civil rights materials.

All of these categorizations are my own and are thus imperfect and debatable. Many of these
archives could be easily interpreted as falling into another category (e.g. community instead of
independent or vice versa). I categorized them based upon my interpretation of each institution’s
origins, funding, mission, user community, and other indicators. If I expand this study in the future, I
intend to include a clear governmental archive, such as the Public Records Office of Northern Ireland
(PRONI).
12 Flinn, “The impact of independent and community archives on professional archival thinking and
practice,” in J. Hill (Ed.), The Future of Archives and Recordkeeping (London UK: Facet), 151.
11

6

Moreover, my research investigates how archivists interpret and act on advocacy
and outreach opportunities unique to civil rights materials.13 Although advocacy and
outreach are two different concerns—with advocacy directed towards those who may help
the institution and outreach towards those who may not yet be aware of its services—these
purposes often intersect and build on one another. In her discussion on the interplay of
outreach and advocacy in relation to digital technologies, Kate Theimer writes,
The web allowed archives to move their collections and missions beyond their
physical limitations. Most archives quickly learned that an effective Web presence
communicates clearly who you are and what you are about—an important
contribution to building the kind of basic understanding that lays the groundwork
for effective advocacy.14
Some of the archives selected for this study use digital outreach and advocacy for both
furthering the interests of the institution itself and advocating the social justice causes
implicit or explicit within the institution’s mission. By examining each archive’s
employment of web 1.0 tools such as websites, web 2.0 tools such as Facebook and blogs,
and analog and digital exhibits and institutional publications, my research contributes to
our understanding of how, in some instances, advocacy for an institution and its social
justice causes may be intertwined.
Lastly, the comparative structure of my study is an innovative departure from
archival science’s traditional single-site case study approach. Seminal case studies such as

For examples of the sizeable archival literature concerning archival advocacy and outreach, see
Richard J. Cox, "Advocacy in the Graduate Archives Curriculum: A North American Perspective," Janus
no. 1 (1997): 30-41; Jeremy Brett & Jasmine Jones, “Persuasion, Promotion, Perception: Untangling
Archivists’ Understanding of Advocacy and Outreach,” Provenance, Journal of the Society of Georgia
Archivists 31, no. 1 (2013); 51-74; Elizabeth Hallam Smith, “Customer Focus and Marketing in Archive
Service Delivery: Theory and Practice,” Journal of the Society of American Archivists 24, no. 1 (2003):
35-53; Larry J. Hackman, ed., Many Happy Returns: Advocacy and the Development Archives (Chicago:
Society of American Archivists, 2011).
14 Kate Theimer, “Building a Community of Supporters: The Role of New Technologies in Advocacy,” in
Many Happy Returns: Advocacy and the Development Archives, Larry J. Hackman, ed. (Chicago: Society
of American Archivists, 2011), 339.
13

7

Verne Harris’s work concerning South Africa and Michelle Caswell’s research into
archives and social justice in Cambodia have rightly had an immense influence on
subsequent archival approaches to questions of social justice.15 The predominance of
single-site case studies, however, has led scholars such as Joel Blanco-Rivera—following
Sue McKemmish and Anne Gilliland’s earlier criticism—to remark in his 2012
dissertation on the National Security Archive that “next steps in archival scholarly work
should consider the application of comparative studies.”16 By comparing archivist
interventions into social causes in two different geopolitical contexts, my research opens
new, productive approaches to investigating these issues. This project also, by extension,
offers a methodological model for other archival scholars to follow.

I.B. RESEARCH QUESTIONS

To address the intersection of archives, historical civil rights movements, and
contemporary acts of social justice, this dissertation examines the following questions:

Question 1: How have approaches to archiving civil rights materials in Northern Ireland
and the American South intersected and diverged?

See, for example, Verne Harris, “ ‘They Should Have Destroyed More’: The Destruction of Public
Records by the South African State in the Final Years of Apartheid, 1990-1994,” in Archives and the
Public Good: Accountability and Records in Modern Society,” eds. Richard J. Cox and David A. Wallace
(Westport, CT: Quorum Books, 2002), 201-228, and Michelle Caswell, “Khmer Rouge Archives:
Accountability, truth, and memory in Cambodia,” Archival Science 10, no. 1 (2010): 25-44.
16 Joel A. Blanco-Rivera, Archives as Agents of Accountability and Justice: An Examination of the National
Security Archive in the Context of Transitional Justice in Latin America (Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest, 2012),
72.
15

8

Question 2: How do civil rights archives in Northern Ireland and the American South
intervene, if they do, in contemporary social justice issues?

I.C. CORE CONCEPTS OF STUDY

CIVIL RIGHTS
The Oxford English Dictionary’s earliest written reference to civil rights occurred in G.
Chapman’s circa-1614 translation of Homer’s Odysseus: “Those that are proud still at
anothers [sic] cost, Past measure, and the ciuill [sic] rights of men.”17 Contemporary
references to civil rights tend to be less general, often tethering the term to a specific
historical and political context. As the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy states, “In
contemporary political thought, the term ‘civil rights’ is indissolubly linked to the struggle
for equality of American blacks during the 1950s and 60s […] They [civil rights] are the
rights that constitute free and equal citizenship and include personal, political and
economic rights.”18 This definition of civil rights—as both anchored to a specific
historical context and protean in its ability to address contemporary injustices—shows the
complex and multifaceted usage of the term in the dissertation.
I realized early in data collection at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute that the
distinction between civil and human rights is a subtle but significant one. As I discuss in a

"civil right, n.". OED Online. September 2014. Oxford University Press.
http://www.oed.com.pitt.idm.oclc.org/view/Entry/273203?redirectedFrom=CIVIL+RIGHTS
(accessed November 15, 2014).
18 Andrew Altman, "Civil Rights", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013 Edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), accessed November 21,2014,
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/civil-rights/ .
17

9

later chapter focusing on the BCRI, some civil rights icons, such as Birmingham’s Fred
Shuttlesworth, envisioned their work in general terms of human rights. In fact, human
rights is sometimes thought of as being too broad a category, with Andrew Clapham’s
Human Rights: A Very Short Introduction lamenting how human rights is often lost in
what he calls “rights talk.”19 When talking about human rights specifically, Clapham
reminds us that you are discussing a concept with origins “in the natural, constitutional,
and political rights discourses that emerged in the Enlightenment.”20 It has become more
common for activists, governments, and others to conceive of human rights in legal terms
“recognized in international and national law” with clearly defined parameters.21 As
Judith Blau and Louis Edgar Esparza note in Human Rights: A Primer, human rights is
often thought of generationally: “civil and political rights (first-generation rights) are
rights vis-à-vis the state, whereas second-generation rights focus on fundamental social
equalities.”22 Human rights also encompasses third-generation rights, which includes the
interconnection of people and environments globally.23 In terms of distinguishing between
human and civil rights, the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy states, “when rights are
embedded in international law we speak of them as human rights; but when they are
enacted in national law we more frequently describe them as civil or constitutional
rights.”24 In this respect, the term “human rights” captures the global scope of social
justice work in a way not typically associated with civil rights alone.

19

Andrew Clapham, Human Rights: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2007), 31.
Ibid.
21
Ibid., 32.
22
Judith Blau and Louis Edgar Esparza, Human Rights: A Primer (Boston: Taylor and Francis, 2016),
19.
23
Ibid.
24
Andrew Altman, "Civil Rights", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013 Edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), accessed February 14, 2018,
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rights-human/.
20

10

For the purposes of this dissertation, I conceptualize the struggle for human and
civil rights as a specific instance of what is often more broadly termed “social justice.” In
this respect, I use social justice in reference to the continuing civil rights struggle, which I
will argue draws on specific inspiration and materials from the historical civil rights
movements. At times, there is some conflation of the civil rights struggle and movement,
but I attempt to clearly differentiate between the two whenever possible. I use the term
“civil rights movement,” for instance, specifically in reference to the historical movements
of the American South and Northern Ireland, whereas I use the term, “social justice” to
refer to ongoing struggles against injustice as defined in the following frameworkconceptualization:
Ideal vision that every human being is of equal and incalculable value, entitled to
shared standards of freedom, equality, and respect. These standards also apply to
broader social aggregations such as communities and cultural groups. Violations
of these standards must be acknowledged and confronted. It specifically draws
attention to inequalities of power and how they manifest in institutional
arrangements and systemic inequities that further the interests of some groups at
the expense of others in the distribution of material goods, social benefits, rights,
protections, and opportunities. Social justice is always a process and can never be
fully achieved.25
Conceptualizing social justice as a continual process frees it from temporal and
geographical fetters, allowing the cause of justice to be multiple, interconnected, and
continuous. In some respects, this comparative study crosses temporal as well as national
boundaries by exposing links between historical and contemporary struggles against civil
injustices.
Furthermore, I rely on the specific terminology of social justice because the
phrasing itself—inclusive and somewhat subjective and debatable—connotes a kind of

25

Duff et al., “Social Justice Impact of Archives,” 324-325.

11

drawing together of disparate elements. Author and political activist John Anner, for
instance, describes how the civil rights cause of the 1960s might transcend its original
temporal context to become a vital force for reform in today’s society by “putting matters
of economic justice on the front burner while showing how a racist, sexist power
structure—now somewhat more integrated—works to deny most people the basics of a
decent life.”26 Manuel Castells uses a similar term, “counterpower,” to further explore
instances of social justice within the global protests that challenged hegemonic power
structures for the rights of underrepresented individuals and groups.27 Although such
concepts as counterpower, civic protest, and identity politics all inform this dissertation’s
research, I attempt to avoid confusion among these similar and often overlapping terms by
solely relying on the term “social justice” to discuss my research.28

SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
Social movements, in their present incarnation, began in Europe and North America in the
late 18th century. As sociologist Suzanne Staggenborg explains, social movements prior to
that period had typically been brief, localized, and lacking in the now familiar “new
repertoire of collective action, consisting of tactics such as large-scale demonstrations,
John Anner, introduction to Beyond Identity Politics: Emerging Social Justice Movements in
Communities of Color, ed. John Anner (Boston: South End Press, 1996), 11.
27 Manuel Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age (Malden, MA:
Polity Press, 2012), 5.
28 Identity politics, for instance, informs my conceptualization of social justice. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy defines identity politics as signifying “a wide range of political activity and
theorizing founded in the shared experiences of injustices of members of certain social groups. Rather
than organizing solely around belief systems, programmatic manifestos, or party affiliation, identity
political formations typically aim to secure the political freedom of a specific constituency
marginalized within its larger context. Members of that constituency assert or reclaim ways of
understanding their distinctiveness that challenge dominant oppressive characterizations, with the
goal of greater self-determination.” Heyes, Cressida, "Identity Politics", The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Spring 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2012/entries/identity-politics/ (accessed November 21,
2014).
26

12

strikes, and boycotts.”29 Protesting through the “repertoire of collective action” has
remained the norm since the rise of capitalism and nation states, weathering centuries of
global political shifts and technological revolutions. In many respects, the global social
movements of the 1960s were employing the same tactics as localized protests a century
earlier. Sociologists Linda Connolly and Niamh Hourigan explain that this decade of
protests is collectively referred to as the “new social movement,” and include such
prominent causes as the “women’s, peace, civil rights, and student movements.”30
Given the unprecedented focus on social movements during the 1960s, scholarship
on the matter grew in quantity and sophistication. Sociologists Donatella Della Porta and
Mario Diani describe the shift in scholarship from being moribund in the 1940s to an
“unprecedented pace” of development in the 1970s. Della Porta and Diani write, “Today,
the study of social movements is solidly established […] The excitement and optimism of
the roaring 1960s may be long gone, but social and political events over the last four
decades have hardly rendered the investigation of grassroots activism any less relevant or
urgent.”31 In terms of how to define social movements, however, scholarship remains
unsettled on a definitive definition. As David A. Snow relates in the Encyclopedia of
Social and Political Movements, some scholars choose to emphasize such characteristics
as the movement’s ideology or structure, while others may focus on its networked or
political nature.32 Sydney Tarrow and others have gone further, arguing that social
movements are part of a larger category termed “contentious politics,” which “also
Suzanne Staggenborg, Social Movements (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 4.
Linda Connolly and Niamh Hourigan, “Introduction,” in Social Movements and Ireland, edited by
Linda Connolly and Niamh Hourigan (New York: Manchester University Press, 2006), 1.
31 Donatella Della Porta and Mario Diani, Social Movements: An Introduction, 2nd edition (Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing, 2006), 1.
32 David A. Snow, “Social Movements,” in The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social and Political
Movements, edited by David A. Snow, et. al. (West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 1200-1201.
29
30

13

includes less sustained forms of contention—like riots and strike waves—and more
extensive ones—like civil wars, revolutions, and episodes of democratization—and it
intersects with routine political processes—like elections and interest group politics.”33
While acknowledging the variety of legitimate alternate classifications, I have
chosen to adopt Mario Diani’s definition of “social movements,” which places more
emphasis on their networked nature:
Social movements are a distinct social process, consisting of the mechanisms
through which actors engaged in collective action:
• are involved in conflictual relations with clearly identified opponents
• are linked by dense informal networks
• share a distinct collective identity34
I chose the definition because it is well established and aligns with my dissertation’s focus
on transnational networks of social movements. Diani’s definition is also consonant with
Connolly and Hourigan’s assessment of social movements in Ireland, which occur in a
country traditionally assumed impervious to large-scale protests due to the hegemony of
the Catholic Church and the State.35 Connolly and Hourigan describe social movements as
“elusive phenomena with unclear boundaries in time and space” that “mobilise in several
different centres at the same time.”36 As a result, by adopting a definition that focuses on
the porous boundaries and networked nature of social movements, I explore linkages
between historical social movements and continuing issues of social justice.

Sydney Tarrow, “Contentious Politics,” in The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social and Political
Movements, edited by David A. Snow, et. al. (West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 266.
34 Della Porta and Diani, Social Movements, 20.
35 Connolly and Hourigan write, “Additionally, it is often inaccurately assumed that NSMs could not
and did not flourish in societies ‘like Ireland’ (a country with a small, predominantly rural, population
on the periphery of Western Europe) either before or after the 1960s, because of the social and
political dominance of the Catholic Church and its close relationship with the State.” Social Movements
and Ireland, 3.
36 Connolly and Hourigan, Social Movements and Ireland, 4.
33

14

I.D. SITES OF STUDY

As previously mentioned, my dissertation focuses on four sites within Northern Ireland
and the American South: the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, the Mississippi
Department of Archives and History, the Linen Hall Library, and the Museum of Free
Derry. The sample, therefore, includes two sites from the American South and two from
Northern Ireland. Prior to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History joining the
study, I had unsuccessfully solicited the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery,
AL and the National Voting Rights Museum and Institute in Selma, AL to take part in the
study. My future research might expand this study by including one of these sites, as well
as the Public Records Office of Northern Ireland, which would allow me to more fully
compare how archivists in Northern Ireland and the American South archive and
potentially repurpose civil rights materials. For the present study, however, I believe that
the four sites selected provide a strong and balanced sample for conducting exploratory
research.

BIRMINGHAM CIVIL RIGHTS INSTITUTE
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute (BCRI) opened in 1992 and has since had over two
million visitors from around the world. A self-described “cultural and educational
research center,” the BCRI hosts permanent and traveling civil rights exhibits, an archive
and oral history project, and multiple education and community facilities. Its current
mission statement reflects the institution’s scope and purpose: “To enlighten each

15

generation about civil and human rights by exploring our common past and working
together in the present to build a better future.”37 The BCRI further emphasizes its
commitment to present-day justice by describing itself as a “ ‘living institution’ that views
the lessons of the past as crucial to understanding our heritage and defining our future.”38
Furthermore, the BCRI boasts a unique focus on youth and adult education, which
includes such offerings as a K-12 curriculum guide with lesson plans for teachers, the
“Parents Plus” program to educate and empower parents through community resources,
and the “Heritage Alive” interactive book series for young people.
In terms of its scope, the BCRI’s origins are firmly rooted within the Birmingham
municipality. In Susan Anderson’s dissertation, The Past on Trial: The Sixteenth Street
Baptist Church Bombing, Civil Rights Memory and the Remaking of Birmingham, she
points out that the BCRI creators acted with a specific political agenda to demonstrate the
city’s progress:
Located at the corner of Sixteenth Street and Sixth Avenue North, across from the
rebuilt church and the park that staged the mass demonstrations of 1963, the
Institute presented a dramatic narrative of the civil rights story with Birmingham at
its center and represented, by its very presence on the downtown landscape, a
shifting of political power and priorities.39
In the more than twenty years since its founding, the BCRI has continued to educate both
local and global visitors about Birmingham’s unique civil rights story through dynamic
exhibits, programs, and digital outreach such as “The Struggle Continues” blog. Given its
focus on social justice through education and its unique municipal origins and
commitments, the BCRI has proven a rich research site.
“About BCRI,” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, accessed January 29, 2015,
http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.
38 Ibid.
39 Susan Willoughby Anderson, The Past on Trial: The Sixteenth Street Baptist Church Bombing, Civil
Rights Memory and the Remaking of Birmingham (PhD. Diss., Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest LLC, 2008), 175.
37

16

MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES AND HISTORY
In many respects, the Mississippi Department of Archives and History (MDAH) is a tale
of two archives. Such historical duality seems commonplace in Mississippi, as
encapsulated in the title of historian Carol V. R. George’s 2015 book on religion and racial
justice, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi. George’s work explores the ongoing conflict of
two oppositional visions for what the state presently is and what it should or should not
become: “one the old, ‘closed society’ of segregationists who memorialized the ‘Southern
way of life,’ and the other a loose coalition of black and white moderates who accepted
integration as an aspect of modernity, morality, and economic progress.”40 The MDAH
has, at different junctures, served as an exemplar of both versions of Mississippi,
originating as a part of the governmental machinery of the “culturally dominant
Mississippi” before becoming a force within the “other Mississippi” of racial
reconciliation and progress.
Boasting one of the earliest state archives, Mississippi followed Alabama’s
example with the creation of its own state archive in 1902. Beginning in 1941, as Ernst
Posner’s history of state archives relates, the MDAH was housed in a small, inadequate
space within the War Memorial building, wherein it would remain for 23 years before
receiving its own facilities in 1964.41 It seems fitting that the MDAH’s early years were
spent inside a War Memorial, given the institution’s origins within a segregated, postreconstruction South desperate to memorialize a politically romanticized “Lost Cause”
history of the confederacy. Both the first and second directors of the Mississippi

40
41

George, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi, 216.
Ernst Posner, American State Archives (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1964), 159.

17

Department of Archives and History—Dunbar Rowland (1902-1937) and William
McCain (1938-1955)—perpetuated the dominant, Pro-Southern view of history. McCain
was particularly well known as one of the Mississippi establishment who fought
segregation in the 1960s, and his archival bias towards preserving confederate history—
such as hidden Masonic records that might have disenfranchised white Mississippians
during reconstruction—to the exclusion of African American history is obvious in such
writings as his 1950 history and program rationale of the MDAH for The American
Archivist.42
In more recent times, however, the MDAH has become increasingly recognized for
its focus on preserving and commemorating the civil rights movement. Remarking on a
2014 MDAH exhibit on the “Freedom Summer” of 1964 wherein white activists had come
to the state to draw national attention to the disenfranchisement of African-American
Mississippians, the museum’s project manager, Jacqueline Dace stated, “Fifty years ago,
this exhibit would not have been within this space.” 43 The MDAH archive now houses
significant civil rights materials, featuring such notable collections as the Medgar and
Myrlie Evers Papers and the Tougaloo College Civil Rights Collections, which is
comprised of unique photographs, personal papers, oral histories, and other artifacts
related to Mississippi’s role in the civil rights movement. Furthermore, the archive

McCain’s biases are completely unsurprising given the ideology of Mississippi’s ruling elite at the
time and his personal longtime role as head of the Sons of Confederate Veterans. McCain’s article is
also telling in its lack of any acknowledgement of the history of its large African American community.
William D. McCain, “History and Program of the Mississippi State Department of Archives and
History,” The American Archivist 13, no. 1 (Jan.,1950): 27-34.
43 Debbie Elliott, “Mississippi Marks 50 Years since History-Changing ‘Freedom Summer’,” NPR, June
05, 2014, accessed May 09, 2015,
http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/06/05/319099188/mississippi-marks-50-years-sincehistory-changing-freedom-summer
42

18

interfaces with MDAH’s Museum Division, which features the civil rights artifacts on
display in the recently opened Mississippi Civil Rights Museum.

LINEN HALL LIBRARY
The Linen Hall Library prides itself on its unique status as both Belfast’s oldest library—
founded in 1788—and the sole remaining subscription library in Ireland.44 The Library
self-identifies as an institution acting on behalf of its local user population, describing
itself as independent and providing “resources [that] are owned by the community for the
community.”45 Alongside other well-respected collections, it boasts a 250,000-item
Northern Ireland Political Collection (NIPC), which is specifically devoted to the recent
sectarian conflict known as the Troubles. Furthermore, the Library recently won a
£400,000 grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund to conserve and digitize portions of its
Political Collection. Looking to increase access to materials providing “unique insight
into a difficult and contested heritage,” the Library chose to use the funding to digitize
political posters and periodicals from 1966 to 2014, due to their cultural and historical
significance.46 To supplement the digitization project, the Library has embarked on
several exhibitions, a schools outreach project, and an oral archive of community
recollections of the Troubles.
The Library describes its collection in terms that align with the BCRI’s earlier
stated commitment to local communities:

“About Us,” Linen Hall Library, Accessed January 29, 2015,
https://www.linenhall.com/pages/about-us
45 Ibid.
46 “HLF Announcement of grant for linen Hall Library ‘Troubles’ history collection,” The Linen Hall
Library, accessed May 11, 2015, https://www.linenhall.com/news/79.
44

19

The Linen Hall Library collects ‘without fear or favour’ and provides a neutral city
centre location. Within it, the Northern Ireland Political Collection is a place
where any view can be consulted. Here our community can find what, after all, is
the literature they produced, decision makers can find material on which to base
opinions, political opponents can view each other’s material, and students of
political conflict can find an unrivalled resource. By making the material available,
the library aims to play a vital role in contributing to a better understanding of the
conflict.47
In this respect, the archive acts as a unique space for drawing together, preserving, and
disseminating Northern Ireland’s varied, contested narratives of the Troubles.
Furthermore, the NIPC houses materials particular to the civil rights movement in
Northern Ireland, which most notably include the archive of the Northern Ireland Civil
Rights Association. The Linen Hall Library therefore has provided an ideal research site
given its unique approach to archiving the Troubles, its extensive civil rights holdings, and
its unprecedented opportunity to increase access to NIPC materials through digitization.

MUSEUM OF FREE DERRY: THE NATIONAL CIVIL RIGHTS ARCHIVE
A self-described “archive focusing on the civil rights era of the 1960s and the Free
Derry/early troubles era of the 1970s,” the Museum of Free Derry has an archive of
25,000 items related to its mission. The Museum opened in 2006 as an extension of the
Bloody Sunday Trust, “a Derry based history and educational project established to
commemorate the events of Bloody Sunday, and to preserve the memory of those
murdered that day.”48 It continues to be managed by the Bloody Sunday Trust and is
currently entering a phase of transition due to the museum’s success. The museum moved
to new facilities in 2017 to better accommodate visitors and make its archival holdings

Yvonne Murphy, et. al., Troubled Images: Posters and Images of the Northern Ireland Conflict from the
Linen Hall Library (Belfast: Linen Hall Library, 2001).
48 Bloody Sunday Trust, accessed May 11, 2015, http://www.bloodysundaytrust.org/index-02.html.
47

20

available. Along with changes in its physical space, the archive is working towards a
digital and searchable database that would replaces its current handwritten record of
collections.
The Museum echoes both the BCRI and the Linen Hall Library in explicitly
referencing its commitment to community: “It [The Museum of Free Derry] will be the
community’s story told from the community’s perspective, not the distorted version
parroted by the government and most of the media over the years.”49 In fact, as the
University of Ulster’s Elizabeth Crooke relates, the Museum exists to act as “an active
part of the local community.”50 As shown by its overt political stance, the Museum fits
Andrew Flinn’s description of a “politically motivated” community archive, which
“emphasizes both the absence of material from mainstream archives and museums and the
benefits which preserving and using this material brings to individuals and to the group.”51
In this respect, the Museum offers an alternative perspective to the Linen Hall Library’s
ethic of “engaged neutrality,” thereby providing my dissertation with two divergent
philosophies for archiving civil rights in Northern Ireland.

“Introduction,” The Museum of Free Derry: The National Civil Rights Archive, accessed January 29,
2015, http://www.museumoffreederry.org/introduction.html
50 Elizabeth Crooke, “The Material Culture of Conflict: Artefacts in the Museum of Free Derry, Northern
Ireland,” in Narrating Objects, Collecting Stories, ed. Sandra H. Dudley et. al. (New York: Routledge,
2012), 28.
51 Flinn, “The impact of independent and community archives on professional archival thinking and
practice,” 151.
49

21

II. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

The dissertation’s research questions address three fundamental intersections: the civil
rights movements of Northern Ireland and the American South, information and power,
and archives and social justice. The first topic, in particular, delves into a vast literature,
which necessitated that I limit my review to civil rights scholarship addressing the
dissemination of civil rights philosophies, strategies, and materials. Secondly, my review
addresses information’s capacity to both construct and counteract hegemonic power—a
well-documented phenomenon within historical and present-day digital contexts. I
conclude the review by funneling my focus to the archival concept of social justice. In so
doing, I hope to show how information science and archival literatures align and
complement one another to address my research problem. Overall, the review is intended
to orient readers both to the dissertation’s multidisciplinary theoretical stakes and its
specifically archival considerations of practice.

II.A. CIVIL RIGHTS IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH

Historian Mark Newman defines the civil right movement of the 1960s as “America’s preeminent social movement of the twentieth century, […which], overturned de jure racial
segregation and African American disfranchisement in the South, enhanced black pride,
and helped open up economic, political and cultural opportunities for many blacks across

22

the nation.”52 Although Newman’s definition captures the stable, popular understanding
of the movement, scholarly interpretations of American civil rights have shifted over time.
Barbara Comb’s 2014 study of the civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery offers a
succinct explanation of how historical approaches to the movement have changed:
Traditionally, the consensus among historians is that America’s Civil Rights
Movement began with the Montgomery Bus Boycott and ended in the mid-1960s
with the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Recently, historians have
begun to reframe the African-American struggle for freedom and popularize the
concept of the long Civil Rights Movement, which extends the undertaking by
including civil liberties struggles of the 1930s, and also expands the Movement’s
influence beyond the continental United States.53
Herein Combs signals transnational comparative research—in the vein of this
dissertation—as indicative of the fresh approaches to civil rights scholarship extending the
movement’s chronology both backwards and forwords.54
Both traditional and revisionist civil rights scholarship inevitably addresses the
long, horrific history of a period of systemic racial injustice known as the Jim Crow
South.55 Writing in 1903, W.E.B. DuBois’s The Souls of Black Folk, provides a
representative snapshot of the Jim Crow South at the turn of the twentieth century:
Slowly but surely his eyes begin to catch the shadows of the color-line: here he
meets crowds of Negroes and whites; then he is suddenly aware that he cannot
discover a single dark face […]He realizes at last that silently, restlessly, the world
about flows by in two great streams: they ripple on in the same sunshine, they
approach and mingle their waters in seeming carelessness,--then they divide and
flow wide apart. It is done quietly; no mistakes are made, or if one occurs, the
swift arm of the law and of public opinion swings down for a moment, as when the
Mark Newman, The Civil Rights Movement (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004), 1.
Barbara Harris Combs, From Selma to Montgomery: The Long March to Freedom (New York:
Routledge, 2014), 11.
54 While acknowledging the expanded historical roots of the movement, I limit this review to the
traditional period of the 1960s South, which provides the most appropriate historical context for this
dissertation’s comparative analysis with Northern Ireland.
55 For a recently published and deeply disturbing analysis of how African Americans were terrorized
during that period, see: Equal Justice Initiative, Lynching in America: Confronting the Legacy of Racial
Terror, report summary, accessed February 11, 2015,
http://www.eji.org/files/EJI%20Lynching%20in%20America%20SUMMARY.pdf
52
53

23

other day a black man and a white woman were arrested for talking together on
Whitehall Street in Atlanta.56
Echoing DuBois’s insight into the outside observer traveling through or embedded in
Southern culture, the historian and social activist Howard Zinn’s The Southern Mystique
recounts his experiences at Atlanta’s Spelman College. Describing his seven years
“within the Negro community of the Deep South,” Zinn begins by offering his first
impression of driving south and encountering “an invisible mist over the entire Deep
South, distorting justice, blurring perspective, and, most of all, indissoluble by reason.”57
Zinn’s work presaged the expanded geographical focus of later studies of the civil rights
movement by arguing against his own mysterious and inscrutable first impression of the
South. His assumption, he argues, was symptomatic of a national rendering of the South
as “strange” in order to shield ostensibly more progressive parts of the nation from their
own unjust acts.58
Although a survey of the voluminous literature focusing on the Jim Crow South is
beyond the scope of this dissertation, C. Vann Woodward’s seminal 1955 text, The
Strange Career of Jim Crow, merits some discussion due to its influence on subsequent
scholarship.59 Woodward set out to remedy two common misconceptions:

W.E.Burghardt Dubois, The Souls of Black Folk (New York: The New American Library, 1969), 204
Howard Zinn, The Southern Mystique (Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books, 2013), 4.
58 In archival scholar Rand Jimerson’s reflections on a childhood move to 1960s Alabama, he echoes
the trope of a mysterious and foreign South in describing the place as “exotic and remote like China or
Africa.” Randall C. Jimerson, Shattered Glass in Birmingham: My Family’s Fight for Civil Rights, 19611964 (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2014), 6.
59 C. Vann Woodward, The Strange Career of Jim Crow (New York: Oxford UP, 1955). For a brief
sample of relatively recent texts focusing specifically on the historical Jim Crow code in the South, see:
William H. Chafe, Raymond Gavin, and Robert Korstad, Remembering Jim Crow: African Americans Tell
About Life in the Segregated South (New York: New Press, 2001); R. Volney Riser, Defying
Disfranchisement: Black Voting Rights Activism in the Jim Crow South, 1890-1908 (Baton Rouge, LA:
Louisiana State University Press, 2010); Stephanie Cole and Natalie J. Ring, Folly of Jim Crow:
Rethinking the Segregated South (College Station, TX: Texas A&M UP, 2012); Mark Shultz, The Rural
Face of White Supremacy: Beyond Jim Crow (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2006); Malinda
56
57

24

“Reconstruction constituted an interruption of normal relations between the races in the
South” and that the Jim Crow system “followed automatically upon the overthrow of
Reconstruction as an immediate consequence of Redemption.”60 Writing at the dawn of
what he termed, a “New Reconstruction,” Woodward notes that civil rights activists were
then beginning to challenge the oppressive Jim Crow system of segregation, which “lent
the sanction of law to a racial ostracism that extended to churches and schools, to housing
and jobs, to eating and drinking.”61 Subsequent historians have since challenged
Woodward’s thesis regarding the late 19th century origins of Jim Crow, but his bold
prediction that the burgeoning activism against segregation were “of sufficient depth and
impact as to define the end of an era of Southern history” proved prescient.62
Monumental figures such as Martin Luther King, Jr. and Rosa Parks tended to
dominate historical narratives published in the immediate aftermath of the civil rights
movement. Along with a sometimes myopic focus on key individuals, some early
historians also portrayed the movement as both void of internal conflict and linear in its
progression. For instance, the cover art for Dorothy Sterling’s 1968 history of the
movement—in press, according to Sterling’s addendum, during King’s assassination—
mirrors its content by featuring oversized water-colored faces of a pantheon of African
American leaders from Frederick Douglas to Ralph Abernathy watching over depictions
of key civil rights events.63 Histories written by Thomas Brooks and David Garrow during

Maynor Lowery, Lumbee Indians in the Jim Crow South: Race, Identity, and the Making of a Nation
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010).
60 Woodward, The Strange Career of Jim Crow, 13-14.
61
Ibid., 8.
62 Ibid., 11. For a concise survey of how subsequent scholars have built on Woodward’s work, see: W.
Fitzugh Brundage, “Introduction,” Folly of Jim Crow: Rethinking the Segregated South, Stephanie Cole
and Natalie J. Ring (College Station, TX: Texas A&M UP, 2012), 1-16.
63 Dorothy Sterling, Tear Down the Walls! A History of the American Civil Rights Movement. (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday & Company, 1968).

25

the mid to late 1970s, respectively, chart the movement from post-war 1940s to the
eventual rise of the black power movement in the late 1960s.64 Brooks’ structure is
indicative of what revisionist historians call a “classical” telling of the civil rights
movement, wherein, as in the case of Brooks, the movement becomes “a line of march
that flows from A. Philip Randolph’s great gesture of defiance in 1941 down to the
magnificent March on Washington on August 28, 1963.”65 As historian Emilye Crosby
points out, the tidy, “classical” historical narrative continued for decades in such forms as
the “somewhat top-down angle” of Charles Eagles and Jacqueline Dowd Hall’s influential
civil rights histories.66
Gradually the analytical focus of scholarship expanded to include both everyday
activists and previously unaddressed regional and localized civil rights events. By 2000,
Eagles’s call for, in part, a new generation of historians more detached from the “profound
and justifiable moral commitment to the aims of the civil rights movement,” had already
been set in motion within the growing diversity of perspectives and analytical topics.67
Clayborne Carson, for instance, had previously challenged the civil rights moniker itself,
arguing instead for a phrase like “black freedom struggle,” which shifted the emphasis
from a monolithic national campaign to a “locally-based social movement.”68 As Crosby
states in her 2011 introduction to the Civil Rights History from the Ground Up, the

Thomas R. Brooks, Walls Come Tumbling Down: A History of the Civil Rights Movement 1940-1970
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc, 1974); David J. Garrow, Protest at Selma: Martin Luther King,
Jr., and the Voting rights Act of 1965 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978).
65 Brooks, Walls Come Tumbling Down, 296.
66 Crosby, Civil Rights History from the Ground Up: Local Struggles, a National Movement (Athens: The
University of Georgia Press, 2011), 7. For an example of the material criticized by Crosby, see, Charles
W. Eagles, ed., The Civil Rights Movement in America (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1986).
67 Charles W. Eagles, “Toward New Histories of the Civil Rights Era,” The Journal of Southern History
66, no. 4 (2000): 815.
68 Clayborne Carson, “Civil Rights and the Black Freedom Struggle,” in The Civil Rights Movement in
America, ed. Charles W. Eagles (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1986), 23.
64

26

“subsequent decade and a half has seen a proliferation of local studies that range widely in
terms of their emphases, approaches, time frames, conclusions, and locations.”69
The oft-repeated “superficial, sugar-coated narrative” of the civil rights movement,
to use Crosby’s words, has given way to recent scholarship focusing on such varied topics
as women, economics, and armed self-defense.70 Nicholas Johnson’s 2014 book, Negroes
and the Gun; The Black Tradition of Arms, for instance, challenges the typical non-violent
narrative of the civil rights movement. By charting the African American community’s
tradition of armed self-defense from Frederick Douglas to Martin Luther King and
beyond, Johnson provides a very recent instance of historians reviving civil rights stories
“submerged because it seems hard to reconcile with the dominant narrative.”71 Johnson’s
sentiments echo, among many others, Belinda Robnett’s 1997 study of the role of women
in the civil rights movement. Robnett’s work provides yet another window into the
shifting historical perceptions of civil rights, wherein, she argues that the fact that
“African-American women, for the most part, did not share primary or secondary formal
leadership titles should in no way obscure the fact that they were leaders.”72
Jacqueline Hall’s seminal 2005 essay, “The Long Civil Rights Movement and the
Political Uses of the Past” provided historians a further touch point for expanding the

Crosby, Civil Rights History from the Ground Up, 6.
Ibid., 24.
71 Nicholas Johnson, Negroes and the Gun: The Black Tradition of Arms (Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 2014), 13.
72 Belinda Robnett, How Long? How Long?: African American Women in the Struggle for Civil Rights
(Oxford: Oxford UP, 1997), 191. For other examples of recent scholarship concerning women and the
civil rights movement, see: Davis W. Houck and David E. Dixon, Women and the Civil Rights Movement,
1954-1965 (Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi, 2009) & Bruce A. Glasrud and Merline Pitre,
Southern Black Women in the Modern Civil Rights Movement (College Station, TX: Texas A&M Press,
2013).
69
70

27

movement’s chronology.73 In the essay, Hall defines the “long civil rights movement” as a
kind of “harder” and “truer story:”
[The civil rights movement’s] root in the liberal and radical milieu of the late
1930s, was intimately tied to the ‘rise and fall of the New Deal Order,’ accelerated
during World War II, stretched far beyond the South, was continuously and
ferociously contested, and in the 1960s and 1970s inspired a ‘movement of
movements’ that ‘def[ies] any narrative of collapse.74
Oxford historian, Stephen Tuck, provides an example of how scholars have since shifted
the movement’s scope well beyond the late 1960s. In his “‘We are Taking up Where the
Movement of the 1960s Left off’: The Proliferation and Power of African American
Protests during the 1970s,” Tuck identifies the “often hidden grassroots struggle which
tells a markedly different story: one of continued activism.”75 Herein Tuck makes visible
the vital link between the historical civil rights movement and the ongoing civil rights
struggle—a continuity that remains visible in the rise of the Black Lives Matter
movement.

II.B. CIVIL RIGHTS IN NORTHERN IRELAND

Across the Atlantic, tensions between Ulster’s “native” and colonial populations have
existed in Northern Ireland for centuries. As Tim Pat Coogan’s history of politics in
Northern Ireland from 1966 to 1996 notes, “the planters’ descendants still live in the area,

Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, “The Long Civil Rights Movement and the Political Uses of the Past,” The
Journal of American History 91, no. 4 (Mar., 2005): 1233-1263.
74 Hall, “The Long Civil Rights Movement,” 1235.
75 Stephen Tuck, “ ‘We Are Taking up Where the Movement of the 1960s Left off’: The Proliferation
and Power of African American Protest during the 1970s,” Journal of Contemporary History 43, no. 4
(Oct., 2008): 640.
73

28

some of them as keenly aware of the dangers, real or imagined, posed by their Catholic
neighbours as were their ancestors during the periods of ferocious warfare involving
Protestants and Catholics which ensued throughout the seventh century.”76 Relations
between the communities further deteriorated upon the treaty for Irish independence from
England, which in 1921, sealed a minority Catholic population together with the
Protestant majority in a country called Northern Ireland. 77 Max Hastings, a journalist in
Northern Ireland during the 1960s, describes how Protestants saw the newfound Northern
Ireland as “a fortress, whose establishment and survival had been desperately threatened
for years by politicians, Catholics and Irish nationalists.”78 In reaction to real and
perceived threats, the Protestant ruling class allied themselves with working class
Protestants to exclude Catholics from certain segments of society.79 Systemic injustices
against the marginalized Catholic population would continue for decades before
eventually giving rise to the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
Civil Rights in Northern Ireland, as Joanne McEvoy’s Politics of Northern Ireland
relates, grew from multiple movements—including the Campaign for Social Justice, Derry
Citizens’ Action Committee, and the People’s Democracy—that to some degree coalesced
into the singular Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA).80 When NICRA
officially began in 1967, it was a self-described “product of frustration” with the failure of

Tim Pat Coogan, The Troubles: Ireland’s Ordeal 1966-1996 and the Search
for Peace (Boulder, CO: Roberts Rinehart Publishers, 1996), 5.
77 Diarmaid Ferriter, The Transformation of Ireland (New York: The Overlook Press, 2004), 292.
78 Max Hastings, Barricades in Belfast: The Fight for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland (New York:
Taplinger Publishing Company, 1970), 22.
79 Liam O’Dowd, Bill Rolston, and Mike Tomlinson, Northern Ireland: Between Civil Rights and Civil
War (London: CSE Books, 1980), 9.
80 Joanne McEvoy, Politics of Northern Ireland (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2008), 33.
76

29

earlier politics and violence to end “47 years of effective dictatorship.”81 John J. Kane’s
1970 Review of Politics analysis, “Civil Rights in Northern Ireland,” echoed NICRA’s
assessment of the situation in Northern Ireland arguing, “discrimination practices against
Northern Irish Catholics in voting, housing, and jobs [were] perhaps one of the most
notorious violations of civil liberty.”82
Kane goes on to describe the Special Powers Act—which, among other things,
permits arrest without a warrant, imprisonment without charge or trial, and flogging—as
representative of the fact that at the time “some of the most serious abuses of individual
liberty are legal in Northern Ireland.”83 Present day historians tend to concur, with social
scientist Joanne McEvoy observing, “The Northern Ireland ‘state’ was based on fifty years
of unionist rule that discriminated against the Catholic minority […] by the 1960s
minority grievances were expressed by an organized civil rights campaign which called
for an end to discrimination and the reform of the state.”84 Whereas NICRA reacted
against systemic, nation-wide injustice, Niall Ó Dochartaigh’s 1997 study of the city of
Derry examines how local politics mobilized the national civil rights movement. In From
Civil Rights to Armalites: Derry and the Birth of the Irish Troubles, Ó Dochartaigh writes,
Prior to 1968, local authorities had extensive powers, including powers to allocate
public housing. Sectarian discrimination at local government level was at the heart
of Catholic dissatisfaction with the status quo in Northern Ireland and was the
principle focus of the early civil rights mobilization.85

Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), “We Shall Overcome”…. The History of the
Struggle for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968-1978 (Belfast: NICRA, 1978),
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/crights/nicra/nicra78.htm#contents
82 John J. Kane, “Civil Rights in Northern Ireland,” The Review of Politics 33.1 (Jan., 1971), 62.
83 Ibid., 64.
84 McEvoy, Politics of Northern Ireland, 31.
85 Niall Ó Dochartaigh, From Civil Rights to Armalites: Derry and the Birth of the Irish Troubles (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1997), 2.
81

30

Ó Dochartaigh goes on to explain how housing discrimination effectively negated the will
of the Catholic majority in Derry and, thereby, helped sparked the civil rights movement
in Derry and the rest of Northern Ireland.86
The particular motivations and objectives of that movement, however, remain
much debated to this day. McEvoy, for instance, discusses the multifaceted—and
sometimes antagonistic—motivations of campaigners, unionists, and others:
For some, the objective of the movement was to undermine Stormont and bring
about a united Ireland. For others, the primary goal was civil rights first to be
followed by pressure for a united Ireland at a future date. For many unionists,
however, civil rights was simply a tactic to secure a united Ireland and destabilize
Stormont. They pointed to the anti-partitionist rhetoric of the civil rights
movement.87
Hastings, writing just two years after the movement began, relates how its original
motivations were simply “basic democratic rights for every Ulster citizen,” which would
have seemed reasonable, he argues, to anyone outside of a country with a three hundred
year “tradition of suspicion and hatred.”88 Others, such as the civil rights leader
Bernadette Devlin, found motivation within a global socialist struggle not bounded by
religious communities. From her perspective, those marching were not spurred by
Catholic equality per se, but rather “people’s needs” within an unjust society taking
economic advantage of a marginalized minority.89 Despite the mosaic of motivations
driving the movement, its core leadership showed commitment to a unified strategy of
non-violent protest.

Ibid., 2.
McEvoy, Politics of Northern Ireland, 35.
88 Hastings, Barricades in Belfast, 40.
89 Devlin, The Price of My Soul, 96. Prince provides further information regarding Devlin’s global
perspective on the movement, offering the anecdote of when she became “an honorary Black Panther
sister” and gave the group a golden key to New York City that she had been awarded. Prince, Northern
Ireland’s ’68, 213.
86
87

31

Reverend Ian Paisley and his Loyalist counter marchers—in collusion with the
policing Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC)—met non-violence with violence in Derry’s
Bogside in October 1968 and on the Burntollet Bridge in January 1969. 90 Such
unwarranted and disturbing showings of violence in conjunction with other sociopolitical
factors would later precipitate what Ó Dochartaigh memorably describes as a shift “from
civil rights to armalites.” The University of Pittsburgh’s Tony Novosel relates in his
recent publication, Northern Ireland’s Lost Opportunity, that the common Unionist
perception of the civil rights movement as a front for the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
might have actually “created the very ‘devil’ that it believed already existed.”91 Novosel
identifies the direct correlation between the RUC assault on the October 5, 1968 NICRA
march in Derry and the beginning of the long and bloody conflict commonly known as the
Troubles.92
As Ó Dochartaigh describes in the particular context of Derry, the conflict had
escalated beyond the “possibility of resolution through the granting of the original civil
rights demands” and the IRA sensed an opportunity to capitalize on the unprecedented ill
will towards the RUC and British army.93 By 1971, the self-destructive cycle of
government actions and sectarian responses precluded the possibility of a non-violent
resolution at that time. Ó Dochartaigh provides a succinct account of the deepening
conflict and its tragic effects:
[T]he Catholic community in Derry would be policed and controlled totally
without its consent, a situation which amounted to a military occupation. Once
To read more about the impact of these incidents, see: Maurice Punch, State Violence, Collusion and
the Troubles (London: Pluto Press, 2012), 65-70.
91 Tony Novosel, Northern Ireland’s Lost Opportunity: The Frustrated Promise of Political Loyalism
(London: Pluto Press, 2013).
92 Ibid., 23.
93 Ó Dochartaigh, From Civil Rights to Armalites, 98, 162.
90

32

this was the case, it opened the way for mass radicalization, and a drastic
alienation of Catholics in Derry from the state which by now was as much another
British state as the Northern Irish state. From such a situation there would develop
a framework of repression, control and continued widespread alienation which
facilitated continued conflict.94
As both Ó Dochartaigh and Novosel point out, missed opportunities coupled with
decades-long, cyclical patterns of violence superseded those promising, early days of nonviolent civil resistance.95
Political and historical scholarship on the later period in Northern Ireland between
1969 and 1974 dwells on the unprecedented violence in the form of Loyalist and
Republican paramilitary groups.96 The cracks in the partition of Ireland became visible in
what David Fitzpatrick, a Trinity College historian, termed the belated demonstration of
“the futility of a constitutional ‘settlement’ which left the Catholic third of Northern
Ireland’s population to fend for itself” in a hostile state.97 In 1969, as Coogan relates, the
“gathering storm of Catholic grievance burst” into what is now known as the Troubles.98
Car bombings, assassinations, mass internment without trial, and civilian casualties
became everyday realities in Belfast, Derry, and other parts of Northern Ireland, as
decades of paramilitary conflict raged between the Irish Republican Army (IRA)99, the
British military forces, and Loyalist groups like the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and the
Ulster Defense Association (UDA). In 1972 alone, the bloodiest year of the Troubles, 496
people died: fourteen in the “Bloody Sunday” British massacre of Catholic Civil Rights

Ibid., 193.
Ibid., 290; Novosel, Northern Ireland’s Lost Opportunity, 215.
96 Brian M. Walker, A Political History of the Two Irelands: From Partition to Peace (New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 119.
97 David Fitzpatrick, “Ireland Since 1870.” in The Oxford History of Ireland. R.F. Foster, ed. (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1989), 229.
98 Coogan, Troubles, 25.
99 I am using IRA here in the broad sense, including the Official and Provisional IRA and its subsequent
derivations.
94
95

33

protesters and bystanders and nine in IRA bombings on “Bloody Friday.”100 As historian
Paul Bew’s tally of those killed from 1972-1973 shows, no one group had a monopoly on
suffering: “These years saw an intense republican onslaught, but the largest single group
of casualties was amongst Catholic civilians, who suffered 254 deaths out of a total of
759, which included also 125 Protestant civilians, 167 British army soldiers, twenty-six
members of the UDR, and twenty-four policeman.”101 Murders and bombings would
continue to plague the citizens of Northern Ireland, as a menacing stalemate stretched
from 1974 to 1990.102
The first promising break in the violence came with the 1994 IRA declaration of a
“complete cessation of military operations”.103 A Loyalist ceasefire soon followed, and all
parties began the long process towards peace. In 1998, voters of Northern Ireland
approved the Belfast Agreement (also known as the Good Friday Agreement) and ushered
in the present power-sharing government. Brian Walker’s A Political History of the Two
Irelands credits the Agreement’s overarching philosophy for its success:
Unionists remained unionist, nationalists remained nationalist and there were still
differences between north and south and between Britain and Ireland. Some
aspects of the agreement were ambiguous and some problems were left to the
future. Nonetheless, the agreement was a major achievement. It established
innovative ways for people and communities to co-exist and to create a broadly
acceptable accommodation of different views.104
Although the peace process freed Northern Ireland from decades of continuous violence,
the enmity of the Troubles lingers in other forms. In their sociological study of class
division in Northern Ireland, Colin Coulter and Michael Murray argue that the Troubles
Ed Moloney, Voices from the Grave (New York: Public Affairs, 2010), 485.
101 Paul Bew, Ireland: The Politics of Enmity 1789-2006 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007),
510.
102 Walker, Two Irelands, 126.
103 Colin Coulter and Michael Murray, Introduction to Northern Ireland After the Troubles, edited by
Colin Coulter and Michael Murray. (New York: Manchester UP, 2008), 1.
104 Walker, Two Irelands, 147.
100

34

has not truly concluded: “While Northern Ireland may no longer be at war with itself,
neither can it be said to be genuinely at peace. Those hatreds that were in part the source
of the conflict remain clearly evident and may even in fact have grown.”105 Minor
miracles such as the late Martin McGuinness—ex-IRA commander and Deputy First
Minister—shaking hands with the Queen in Belfast signal undeniable steps away from the
Troubles, but the specter of violence, both past and present, continues to haunt a country
struggling to remain on the slow road to peace.106

II.C. ATLANTIC CROSSINGS

Rather than focusing on the geopolitical boundaries that divide and circumscribe people
groups, a growing body of multi-disciplinary scholarship has begun to prioritize the
oceanic links between countries and cultures.107 The idea of a trans-Atlantic method of
analysis, or what Paul Gilroy’s groundbreaking The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double
Consciousness termed the “Black Atlantic,” has yielded much fruitful comparative
analyses that might not have been thinkable previous to his 1993 text.108 In part, Gilroy’s
The Black Atlantic sought to undo tidy narratives of racial mystification and essentialism
Coulter and Murray, After the Troubles, 21.
Óglaigh na hÉireann’s, a dissident republican group, attempt to bomb a hotel on March 25, 2013,
and the January 8, 2015 disarming of an explosive device at the Police Service of Northern Ireland
(PSNI) headquarters provide relatively recent examples of lingering political violence in Northern
Ireland. For the Irish Times coverage of the latter incident, see: “British Army Bomb Experts Make
Safe a Viable Device Sent to PSNI,” The Irish Times, last modified January 8, 2015,
http://www.irishtimes.com/news/consumer/british-army-bomb-experts-make-safe-a-viable-devicesent-to-psni-1.2059505
107 For a recent example, see: Rachel Price, The Object of the Atlantic: Concrete Aesthetics in Cuba,
Brazil, and Spain 1868-1968 (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2014).
108 Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1993).
105
106

35

of what he terms the “ontological essentialist” or “brute pan-Africanism” strand within
black art and cultural criticism.109 As Gilroy writes,
If this appears to be little more than a roundabout way of saying that the reflexive
cultures and consciousness of the European settlers and those of the Africans they
enslaved, the “Indians” they slaughtered, and the Asians they indentured were not,
even in situations of the most extreme brutality, sealed off hermetically from each
other, then so be it.110
Situating African identity within a web of local and global connections belies both
national and racial essentialism, as well as disrupts “the tidy flow of cultural output into
neat, symmetrical units.”111
Gilroy’s work has influenced scholarship in various disciplines, stimulating new
ways of interpreting the interconnected cultures of ostensibly differing people groups. He
has also garnered criticism, however, for not historically contextualizing slavery and for
limiting his focus to North America—a critique to which Bénédicte Ledent and Pilar
Cuder-Domínguez’s New Perspectives on the Black Atlantic responded in part by
expanding their analysis to European connections.112 In so doing, Ledent and CuderDomínguez’s anthology encouraged analysis of how enslaved and emigrated Africans
“dramatically increase[ed] the diversity of racial, religious and cultural backgrounds on
the old continent.”113 Since Ledent and Cuder-Domínguez’s 2012 work, scholars have
continued to identify new nodal points within the historical network of African cultural
contacts, thereby adding an array of hues to Gilroy’s Black Atlantic.114

Gilroy, Black Atlantic, 31.
Ibid., 2.
111 Ibid., 29
112 Bénédicte Ledent and Pilar Cuder-Domínguez, New Perspectives on the Black Atlantic: Definitions,
Readings, Practices, Dialogues (Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang, 2012).
113 Ledent and Cuder-Domínguez, New Perspectives on the Black Atlantic, 11.
114 For recent instances, see: Kristina Wirtz, Performing Afro-Cuba: Image, Voice, Spectacle in the
Making of Race and History (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 2014); Jean Muteba Rahier,
Blackness in the Andes: Ethnographic Vignettes of Cultural Politics in the Time of Multiculturalism (New
109
110

36

Applying Gilroy’s “Black Atlantic” framework to the specific intersection of
African and Irish Diasporas, Peter D. O’Neill and David Lloyd’s The Black and Green
Atlantic identifies “points of contact, overlap and cooperation—as well as competition and
exploitation across the Atlantic.”115 O’Neill and Lloyd’s 2009 text remedied a lag in Irish
studies to examine the crosscurrents between the literatures and histories of the Irish and
African communities in the U.S., Caribbean islands, and other overlapping locales.
Furthermore, it raised uncomfortable and complex questions regarding the Irish diaspora’s
complicity in African American oppression, ranging from 19th century slavery to the 20th
century fire hoses of Birmingham’s Eugene “Bull” Connor. Why, O’Neill and Lloyd ask,
“did a people so versed in the techniques and effects of racial oppression—for there is no
doubt that British colonialism understood the Irish as racially inferior and that those
attitudes transferred throughout the British settler colonies—not show greater solidarity
with their fellow oppressed?”116
Ireland’s relationship with both the African American community and slavery in
general has a long and complex history. As Nini Rodgers’s Ireland, Slavery and AntiSlavery: 1612-1865 points out, “The seventeenth-century flow of indentured labourers to
the Caribbean surfaces in the memory that Cromwell transported Irish men and women to
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013); Sonia Song-Ha Lee, Building a Latin Civil Rights Movement: Puerto
Ricans, African Americans, and the Pursuit of Racial Justice in New York City (Chapel Hill, NC: University
of North Carolina Press, 2014).
115 Peter D. O’Neill and David Lloyd, Introduction to The Black and Green Atlantic: Cross Currents of the
African and Irish Diaspora, eds. Peter D. O’Neill and David Lloyd (New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2009), xvi.
116 O’Neill and Lloyd, Introduction to The Black and Green Atlantic, xvii. Despite its impact on Irish
studies, O’Neill and Lloyd’s work was not the first to comment on the complex historical relationship
between Irish immigrants and African Americans. Noel Ignatiev’s seminal 1995 How the Irish Became
White and James O’Toole’s 2002 study of the Irish-African Healy family in Passing for White: Race,
Religion, and the Healy Family, 1820-1920, for instance, both provide early instances of unpacking the
historical relationship between the two communities. See, Noel Ignatiev, How the Irish Became White
(Madison Ave, NY: Routledge, 2008); James O’Toole, Passing for White: Race, Religion, and the Healy
Family, 1820-1920 (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2002).

37

the West Indies as slaves.”117 Even preceding Cromwell’s exile of Irish men and women,
the anti-slavery strand in Ireland purportedly extended back as far as the Council of
Armagh in 1171, “which prohibited Irish trading in English slaves and stressing the duty
of every Irishman to remain true to this heritage.”118
The abolitionist tradition appears to have continued for centuries, as evidenced
within a 1840s issue of the Irish Penny Journal. Published just five years before the
catastrophic potato famine caused a mass exodus to America, the periodical’s tongue-andcheek anti-slavery piece entitled, “The Comparative Value of Black Boys in American and
Ireland,” facetiously implored the Irish in America to “import our black boys” who
“generally are believed to be of the true Caucasian breed—the descendants of Japhet; and
their blackness is on the outer surface of the skin, and may, though we believe with
difficulty, be removed.”119 The article goes on to remind readers that the Journal had
“often lamented the abject condition and sufferings of our black urchins, and have come to
the resolution never to assist in encouraging their degradation, but on the contrary to do
everything in our power to oppose it.” A previous Journal article entitled “Horrors of the
Slave Trade,” had born out this editorial stance, informing its readership of the murder of
hundreds of slaves aboard a Spanish brig captured by the Royal Navy.”120 Of course, the
Journal provides just one Irish perspective of many at the time and researchers should

117

Nini Rodgers, Ireland, Slavery and Anti-Slavery: 1612-1865 (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007),

2.
Rodgers, Ireland, Slavery, and Anti-Slavery, 259.
The Irish Penny Journal: Containing Original Contributions by Several of the Most Eminent Irish
Writers 1840-41 (Dublin: Gunn and Cameron, 1841) 1.23 (December 5, 1840), 181-182.
120 The Irish Penny Journal 1.22 (November 28, 1840), 176
118
119

38

temper its editorial stance with Kieran Quinlan’s reminder of Civil War-era pro-slavery
discourses and Southern sympathies among the Irish.121
Regardless of the somewhat ambiguous Irish stance on the antebellum slave trade,
the concept of slavery proved a powerful symbol within Irish nationalist discourse. The
great Irish statesman Daniel O’Connell, for instance, reproved pro-slavery IrishAmericans saying, “It was not in Ireland that you learned this cruelty.”122 Furthermore, Lee
M. Jenkins’s, “Beyond the Pale: Green, Black, and Cork,” reveals how the Irish press
employed the concept of enslavement and emancipation during the mid-nineteenth
century. In discussing the ex-slave and social reformer Frederick Douglass’ visit to Ireland
in 1845, Jenkins observes how the Irish press regularly made analogies between slavery
and Irish colonization.123 As Jenkins goes on to explain, a gulf began to emerge between
Ireland and its American diaspora who had fled the famine: “If nationalists in Ireland
often appropriated the discourse of slavery to define their own colonial dilemma, IrishAmericans were downright hostile to attempts on the part of abolitionists to make
common cause between the American slave and the Irish immigrant.”124
Borrowing Noel Ignatiev’s famous phrasing from How the Irish Became White,
Jenkins explains how for Irish trying to solidify their place within a developing America,
“making common cause with the black slave would not help the Irish become white.”125
Becoming socially acceptable proved a pressing concern for Irish immigrants in America

Kieran Quinlin, Strange Kin: Ireland and the American South (Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State UP,
2005); Lee Jenkins makes a similar observation regarding the Confederate flags that some County
Cork supporters wave at Gaelic Games; Lee M. Jenkins, “Beyond the Pale: Green and Black and Cork,”
in Peter D. O’Neill and David Lloyd, eds, The Black and Green Atlantic: Cross Currents of the African and
Irish Diasporas (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), 172.
122 qtd. in Quinlin, Strange Kin, 46.
123 Jenkins, “Beyond the Pale,” 173.
124
Ibid.
125 Ibid., 174.
121

39

at the time. Brian Dooley’s Black and Green explains how the British transplanted a
sense of racial superiority in America, wherein “newly-arrived Irish immigrants, although
not slaves, were often regarded as belonging to the same social, if not genetic, category as
black Americans.”126
An earlier wave of Irish immigrants to America during the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries also endured a tenuous social standing. Ulster Presbyterians, who
self-identified as Irish though neither Catholic nor Gaelic speaking, settled first in
Pennsylvania before continued migrations further South. One critical feature the Ulster
Presbyterians would share with the later, Catholic emigration wave was a strategic
employment of their racial status. As Nini Rodgers’s article, “Green Presbyterians, Black
Irish and Some Literary Consequences,” relates
Yet emigrants from Ireland, whether descended from native Irish or planter stock,
had much in common; their enthusiasm for communal protest, religion, and
politics followed them across the Atlantic. Both groups were accepted as useful
protectors of their new land; frontier farmers, Indian fighters, slave overseers,
soldiers, policemen, and firefighters. Both regarded the color line as something
that secured their position as citizens. The Black Atlantic predated and helped to
shape the Green Atlantic.127
Rodgers further explains how Ulster Presbyterians would later adopt the name ScotchIrish as a way to differentiate themselves from the famine-era Irish emigrants, and, in so
doing, “did Ireland replant its ethnic and religious divisions in the USA.”128
Of course, as Cheryl Temple Herr and Kieran Quinlin warn in their comparative
analyses of Ireland and the American Midwest and South, respectively, researchers must

Brian Dooley, Black and Green: The Fight for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland and Black America
(Chicago, IL: Pluto Press, 1998), 2.
127 Nini Rodgers, “Green Presbyterians, Black Irish and Some Literary Consequences,” in Peter D.
O’Neill and David Lloyd, eds, The Black and Green Atlantic: Cross Currents of the African and Irish
Diasporas (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), 46.
128 Rodgers, “Green Presbyterians, Black Irish,” 38.
126

40

avoid the temptation of static or essentialist national comparisons.129 The stereotypes
historically foisted upon Southerners and Irish—fiercely religious, romantic, literary,
ignorant, and poor, to name just a few—are rooted within each region’s relationship with
its dominant neighbor. As Quinlin writes, “For a multitude of reasons, then, Ireland within
the United Kingdom and the South within the United States have stood out as places of
cultural difference, peculiarity, potential, and active rebelliousness, not infrequently too as
benighted and impoverished departures from the metropolitan, and supposedly more
civilized norm.”130 Their shared cultures—both perceived and real—offered fodder for
those either seeking either to denigrate or romanticize one or both of the regions. For
instances of the latter, the great Irish short story writer, Seán O’Faoláin fondly remarked
that Southerners and Irishmen shared, among other things, “the same vanity of the old
race; the same gnawing sense of defeat; the same capacity for intense hatred;” not for
nothing, Quinlin relates, did the O’Haras of Gone with the Wind name their Southern
plantation Tara, wherein nostalgia for a romanticized Ireland foreshadowed the loss of an
even more romanticized South. 131
Historical comparisons between Ireland and the American South tend to emphasize
how both cultures share a traditional emphasis on religious beliefs and practices.132 Be it
the Protestants of the first wave of Irish immigration, the Catholics of the second, or the
multitude of Protestant denominations at the core of 19th and 20th century Southern
culture, the South—like the Ireland from which a portion of its citizenry’s ancestors

Cheryl Temple Herr, Critical Regionalism and Cultural Studies: From Ireland to the American
Midwest (Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1996).
130 Quinlin, Strange Kin, 140-141.
131 Qtd. in Quinlin, Strange Kin, 186,
132 For instance, see Quinlin, Strange Kin, and David T. Gleeson “ ‘To Live and Die [for] Dixie’: Irish
Civilians and the Confederate States of America,” Irish Studies Review 18.2 (May 2010): 139-153.
129

41

came—has in popular culture been synonymous with a fierce religiosity. Quinlin places a
particular emphasis on the social significance of spirituality within the South’s African
American community:
Relatively dormant among most whites, both Irish and southern, by the midtwentieth century, that long tradition of a coming together of religions and civic
cause had been most potent in the southern black community […] which found its
powerful inspiration and sustenance in the Christian churches and under the
leadership of Baptist pastors.133
In Andrew Manis’s biography of one of the South’s most respected “civil rights
preacher[s]”, he explains how Fred Shuttlesworth presents an exemplary yet unique
example of an activist preacher—such as Martin Luther King and Ralph David
Abernathy—who “understood their activism as part of their responsibilities as Christian
ministers in the African American community.134
Seeking to replicate the success of the American Movement, the Catholic,
nationalist population of Northern Ireland in the 1960s drew on parallels between their
own experiences and those of the oppressed peoples of America. Fionnbarra Ó
Dochartaigh, Derry activist and author of Ulster’s White Negroes, compares the Northern
Ireland state’s injustice towards Catholics to that of both “American Indians who were
forced to stay in reservation upon [their] own stolen lands” and “the poor blacks of the US
ghettos and those suffering under the cruel system of apartheid in racist South Africa.”135
Furthermore Bernadette Devlin’s autobiography, The Price of My Soul, and The Northern
Ireland Civil Rights Association’s [NICRA] “We Shall Overcome:” The History of the
Struggle for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968-1978 recall how the singing of the

Quinlin, Strange Kin, 161.
Andrew Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham’s Reverend Fred
Shuttlesworth (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1999), 3.
135 Fionnbarra Ó Dochartaigh, Ulster’s White Negroes (San Francisco: AK Press, 1994), 7,14.
133
134

42

negro spiritual, “We Shall Overcome,” steeled protesters in the face of opposition on such
occasions as the first NICRA civil rights march in August 1968.136 In this respect, the
movement in Northern Ireland cultivated the link between themselves and African
American civil rights activists, drawing inspiration and tactics from the struggle across the
Atlantic.
As scholars have noted, however, the movements also had critical differences. In
2009’s Civil Resistance and Power Politics: The Experience of Non-violent Action from
Gandhi to the Present, Richard English lists the key differences between civil rights in
America and Northern Ireland:
The 1960s civil rights movement in Northern Ireland did involve a conscious
glance towards civil rights in the US. However, the two cases were very different.
The discrimination experienced by the Northern Irish Catholic minority was milder
than that known to US blacks. Moreover, the US civil rights movement did not
involve a historic battle over the legitimacy or existence of the United States itself;
the Northern Irish version clearly did involve precisely such a war over state
legitimacy.137
Although I disagree with English’s dismissal of the African American impact on the
movement in Northern Ireland, his work provides a nice complement to both Patrick
Reilly’s case study of political systems in America and Northern Ireland and Frank
Wright’s 1988 comparative analysis of their differing political contexts.138 Focusing
specifically on differences between the British and U.S. governmental responses to civil
rights, Wright relates how “the immediacy of the Republic [the Republic of Ireland]

Devlin, The Price of My Soul, 187; Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), “We Shall
Overcome”…. The History of the Struggle for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968-1978 (Belfast: NICRA,
1978), http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/crights/nicra/nicra78.htm#contents
137 Richard English, “The Interplay of Non-violent and Violent Action in Northern Ireland, 1967-72,” in
Adam Roberts and Timothy Garton Ash, eds., Civil Resistance and Power Politics: The Experience of
Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 86.
138 Patrick Reilly, Politics and Protest: How Political Systems Influenced the American and Northern
Ireland Civil Rights Movement (Berlin: VDM Verlag Dr. Muller Aktiengesellschaft and Co, 2008); Frank
Wright, Northern Ireland: A Comparative Analysis (Totowa, NJ: Gill and Macmillan, 1988).
136

43

enabled alienated Catholics to give up non-violent protest much more quickly” than
African American activists following King’s strategy of non-violence.139
Perhaps most compellingly, Oxford historian Simon Prince makes the case for the
African American influence on Northern Ireland within the context of other synchronous
global events. In his 2008 book, Northern Ireland’s ’68: Civil Rights, Global Revolt and
the Origins of the Troubles, Prince analyzes Northern Ireland as a case study of the global
revolutions underway in 1968.140 In the following quotation, Prince responds to Roy
Foster and other historians who have tended to examine Northern Irish political activity in
a vacuum: “Northern Ireland was not under quarantine while the revolutionary contagion
raged through the Western World.”141 Northern Ireland, therefore, was “different, but not
exceptional” from relatively synchronous European protests in London, Berlin, and Paris,
and other locations.142 The American influence, however, came via television, providing
activists in Northern Ireland with a model for how to attract media attention through nonviolent antagonism of the police.

II.D. DISSEMINATING CIVIL RIGHTS

The links between the civil rights movements in Northern Ireland and America correspond
to overarching patterns of cross-national diffusion, which sociologists such as Doug
McAdam, Dieter Rucht, and Sidney Tarrow first identified in the 1990s. McAdam and
Wright, Northern Ireland, 211.
Simon Prince, Northern Ireland’s ’68: Civil Rights, Global Revolt, and the Origins of the Troubles
(Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 2007).
141 Prince, Northern Ireland’s ’68, 155.
142 Ibid., 6.
139
140

44

Rucht’s seminal essay, “The Cross-National Diffusion of Movement Ideas,” explains how
social movements often draw on the ideas and tactics of their peers and predecessors:
“Protest makers do not have to reinvent the wheel at each place and in each conflict […]
they often find inspiration elsewhere in the ideas and tactics espoused and practiced by
other activists.”143 Subsequent scholars further refined their description of the diffusion
process within what is now commonly called “contentious politics.” 2010’s The Diffusion
of Social Movements is representative of recent “contentious politics” scholarship, arguing
“one of the central insights of this body of research is the multidimensionality of diffusion
processes—a multidimensionality that reflects the plethora of actors, networks, and
mechanisms, involved in the spread of social movements.”144
The roots of contemporary civil rights movements extend back, as sociologist Sean
Chabot explains, to Mohandas Gandhi in turn-of-the-century South Africa. In his 2012,
Transnational Roots of the Civil Rights Movement, Chabot shows how Gandhi’s ethic of
nonviolent protest spread to America and was slowly adopted by the African American
community over an extended period of time. Chabot stresses the importance of collective
learning throughout the diffusion process as he charts “the rise and fall of transnational
diffusion between the two social movements,” which in America spanned from the 1920s
to the “full implementation of the Gandhian repertoire in the late 1950s and early 1960s”
prior to the Black Power Movement.145 Of course, as has been previously discussed,

Doug McAdam and Dieter Rucht, “The Cross-National Diffusion of Movement Ideas,” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 528 (Jul., 1993), 58.
144 Rebecca Kolins Givan, Kenneth M. Roberts, and Sarah A. Soule, The Diffusion of Social Movements:
Actors, Mechanisms, and Political Effects (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 1.
145 Sean Chabot, Transnational Roots of the Civil Rights Movement: African American Explorations of the
Gandhian Repertoire (Lanham, MA: Lexington Books, 2012), 9.
143

45

Gandhi’s principles and tactics were transplanted later to yet another part of the globe,
Northern Ireland.
The transfer of civil rights strategies and tactics from America to Northern Ireland
relied on what sociologist Sydney Tarrow calls a “mechanism.” In his Strangers at the
Gates: Movements and States in Contentious Politics, Tarrow defines “mechanism” as “a
delimited class of changes that alter relations among specific sets of elements in identical
or closely similar ways over a variety of situations.”146 Tarrow goes on to explicate the
three basic types of mechanisms that trigger social and historical events: Dispositional,
e.g. “the perception and attribution of opportunity or threat;” Environmental, e.g.
“population growth or resource depletion;” and relational, e.g. “the brokerage of a
coalition among actors with no previous contact by a third actor who has contact with
both.”147 Tarrow’s work has been widely influential, informing scholars such as Chabot
who study the transference of social activism. In particular, Chabot applies Tarrow’s
typologies to the transnational context, wherein “receivers imitate transmitters’ ideas and
practices, adopting them to initiate ‘non-localized’ protest action in their own context” in a
process Tarrow terms, “emulation.”148
In the diffusion of the American civil rights movement to Northern Ireland, mass
media—particularly television broadcasts—provided the primary means of conveyance.
Television broadcasts of non-violent protesters facing down a draconian police response,
brought, in the words of Aniko Bodroghkozy’s Equal Time, “black people, imaginatively

Sydney Tarrow, Strangers at the Gates: Movements and States in Contentious Politics (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2012), 23.
147 Ibid., 23.
148 Ibid., 3-4.
146

46

at least, into white people’s living rooms.”149 Bodroghkozy’s work challenges past
scholarship on the media’s role within the civil rights movement, which he succinctly
describes in the following overview:
Conventional wisdom has it that network television, at least in its news divisions,
functioned as an ‘instrument of the revolution’ wielded by civil rights activists to
broadcast their messages, demands, and actions to a sympathetic, nationwide
audience. Civil rights histories often note the crucial presence of television
cameras with the assumption that the resulting news reports carried unmediated
discourses and imagery serving the political goals of the movement. An
accompanying assumption is that TV viewers received and decoded the televised
material in the appropriate way, leading the American public to embrace those
movement goals.150
Scholars took their lead from the civil rights leaders themselves, Bodroghkozy argues, by
recognizing the potency of televised images of police brutality. Maurice Berger’s For All
the World to See: Visual Culture and the Struggle for Civil Rights complements
Bodroghkozy’s work by examining how both the civil rights movement and their enemies
operationalized a host of media types in the war for public opinion.151 Berger’s analysis
notes that both sets of leaders “were often exceptionally gifted image-makers” who
skillfully navigated “the complex relationship between innovative technologies for
representing the world and a society eager for new ways of seeing.”152
Televised images of the 1960s civil rights movement not only resonated at home
but were also beamed across the Atlantic, thus influencing a like-minded movement
within a completely different sociopolitical context. Thanks in large part to television’s
increasing pervasiveness at the time, the ideologies and tactics of social movements could

Aniko Bodroghkozy, Equal Time: Television and the Civil Rights Movement (Chicago: University of
Illinois Press, 2012), 3.
150 Bodroghkozy, Equal Time, 3.
151 Maurice Berger, For All the World to See: Visual Culture and the Struggle for Civil Rights (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2010).
152 Ibid., 9.
149

47

cross national boundaries with unprecedented rapidity and impact. By the early to mid
1960s television sets had become much more commonplace in Northern Ireland, with
television licenses increasing from 10,000 in 1954 to 194,000 in 1962.153 Activists in
Northern Ireland, as Dooley explains, learned about and adopted the tactics and techniques
of non-violent protest almost exclusively from the regularly televised reports of American
civil rights. For example, Dooley quotes Bernadette Devlin’s remarks on how the
movement in Northern Ireland emulated those televised images: “We saw the civil rights
[protests] in America and they sat down, and so did we, but they didn’t show you on the
television all the debate and planning and organizing of the non-violent approach, [so] we
didn’t do any of it.”154
Dooley is not alone in observing both the impact and inevitable limitations of a
movement diffused via television. Quinlin, for instance, notes how “Ulster Catholics
didn’t always understand what was going on in the South.” Prince seconds Quinlin’s
assessment by remarking, “what interested those watching on their televisions in Northern
Ireland was not why King embarked upon his last campaign but how he and his successors
planned to gain mass support and the interest of the media.”155 While Quinlin, Prince, and
Dooley stress the diffusion of non-violent strategies and methods, Bonnye Stuart’s 2014
article, “From Selma, Alabama, to Derry, Northern Ireland: Media Images and their
Influence on Civil Rights Demonstrations,” reminds us that televised activism also
conveys the movement’s abstract spirit and conviction. As Stuart writes, “what they
[Northern Irish activists] saw on their televisions in their homes and their neighbors’

Dooley, Black and Green, 28.
Qtd. in Dooley, Black and Green, 108.
155 Quinlin, Strange Kin, 161 and Prince, Northern Ireland’s ’68, 120.
153
154

48

homes gave them the information they needed, the incentive to repeat what they had seen
and the conviction that they, too, could win in the end.”156
Following initial failures in emulating American activism, the civil rights
movement in Northern Ireland began to sway public opinion through their own televised
juxtaposition of non-violent tactics and state-sanctioned brutality.157 Both Devlin’s and Ó
Dochartaigh’s memoirs, for instance, stress the importance of harnessing what Marshall
McLuhan described as the participatory and “unifying medium” of television.158
Furthermore, Max Hastings, a British journalist, wrote in his 1970 history of the civil
rights movement in Northern Ireland, “without the media, there is no shadow of doubt that
the Catholic cause could never have triumphed either as speedily or as completely as it
did.”159 Ó Dochartaigh’s account of a televised assault on protesters vividly portrays what
Richard English describes as furthering a “delegitimiz[ation]” of the current powers in
Northern Ireland:160
The civil rights cause that afternoon attracted the missing ingredient that was to
turn our agitation into a mass movement literally overnight. This ingredient was
the power of modern modes of communication, which brought the thud of the
batons, the force of the water-cannon, the cries of the people, and the blood on the
tarmac in to the very living rooms of millions.161
Dermot Healy’s 1995 award-winning novel, A Goat’s Song, offers complimentary insight
into the power of television through the eyes of a Belfast policeman realizing both his own
capacity for violence and television’s ability to evoke outrage and action: “The crowd in

Bonnye Stuart, “From Selma, Alabama, to Derry, Northern Ireland: Media Images and their
Influence on Civil Rights Demonstrations,” Mass Communication and Journalism 4.6 (2014), 6.
157 For an account of the difficulties of implementing the American strategy of non-violence in
Northern Ireland, see Prince, Northern Ireland’s ’68, 114-125.
158 Qtd. in Stuart, “From Selma, Alabama, to Derry, Northern Ireland,” 7.
159 Max Hastings, Barricades in Belfast: The Fight for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland (New York:
Taplinger Publishing Company, 1970), 201.
160 English, “The Interplay of Non-violent and Violent Action in Northern Ireland, 1967-72,” 80.
161 Ó Dochartaigh, Ulster’s White Negroes, 26.
156

49

the bar shouted ‘bastards.’ On the TV the old policeman had found his hat. As he put it
on, he looked round for someone else to hit […] Then, wild-eyed and wielding a baton he
stared remorselessly straight at the lens. Jonathan Adams had become a witness to himself
[…] ‘Bastards,’ said someone.”162
The Unionist perception of televised civil rights activism, political scientist Niall Ó
Dochartaigh writes, was resentment towards “the contribution which the media had made
to the cause of ‘civil rights’ by the simple fact of reporting it. Hostility to the media was
not due to the tone of media coverage alone but to the very fact of media coverage of
Catholic grievances.”163 In a similar vein of research, Queens University sociologist, Mike
Tomlinson, analyzed perceptions of Northern Irish media coverage within England in his
1980 co-written history, Northern Ireland Between Civil Rights and Civil War.
Tomlinson notes how the press had initially only given minimal coverage to the political
turmoil in Northern Ireland, thereby leaving the British public unprepared for the violence
later televised. As public awareness grew, the BBC and British press later manipulated
coverage by shifting their editorial stance from ambiguous “to one which integrated the
‘Irish insurrection’ into ‘a cocktail of dangerous illegitimacy’ threatening the British state
from all sides.”164
Tantalizingly, Devlin’s memoir hints that the diffusion of civil rights strategies
continued after Northern Ireland’s movement, with “Derry suddenly [finding] itself the
center of revolutionary Europe, setting a pattern that revolutionaries the world over will
Dermot Healy, A Goat’s Song (New York: Viking, 1995), 121. Other Northern Irish literature
addressing the Troubles, includes Bernard McLaverty, Cal (London: Jonathan Cape, 1983); Glenn
Patterson, The International (Belfast: Blackstaff Press, 2008); Eoin MacNamee, Resurrection Man
(London: Faber & Faber, 2004); Colum McCann, Everything in this Country Must (New York: Picador,
2000).
163 Ó Dochartaigh, From Civil Rights to Armalites, 74.
164 Mike Tomlinson, “Reforming Repression,” in Liam O’Dowd, Bill Rolston, and Mike Tomlinson, eds.,
Northern Ireland Between Civil Rights and Civil War (London: CSE Books, 1980), 181.
162

50

never forget. It was very interesting to note that in Czechoslovakia in August 1969 they
followed our pattern, perhaps unconsciously.”165 Devlin’s quotation speaks both to the
difficulty of pinpointing instances of diffusion and to the mutability of social movements
particular to a unique region and political context. As Given and her co-editors explain in
the introduction to The Diffusion of Social Movements, “Indeed, diffusion often plays a
central role in shifting the scope and scale of contentious politics. It can transform a local
protest into a national movement, or a national movement into a transnational one.”166 As
I will discuss in later sections, the revolutionary sparks in Johannesburg, Birmingham, and
Derry were neither isolated nor ever extinguished.

II.E. ARCHIVING CIVIL RIGHTS IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH

As early as the 19th century, African American communities began to chronicle their
unique histories and achievements as a means to combat prevalent historical silences and
systemic racism. As Charles Wesley’s 1952 article on “racial historical societies” in The
Journal of Negro History relates, multiple racial groups in America—such as the Jewish
and Irish communities—that had been marginalized by America’s dominant “AngloSaxon” narrative saw the establishment of their own historical societies as an opportunity
“to bring a sense of pride and an appreciative recognition of the historical contributions of
their people to the life of the nation and the American heritage.”167 In regards to the

Devlin, The Price of My Soul, 222.
Givan, Roberts, and Soule, The Diffusion of Social Movements, 13.
167 Charles Wesley, “Racial Historical Societies and the American Heritage,” The Journal of Negro
History 37, no. 1 (Jan., 1952), 32.
165
166

51

African American community, Wesley reveals that the 1873 National Equal Rights
Convention provided an opportunity to create an association for the collection of “all such
facts, historical and statistical, in relation to the Negro race in America.”168 The next
milestone occurred with the organization of the American Negro Historical Society in
1892, wherein, Wesley writes, “the ultimate purpose of the society was to secure ‘a
permanent home for its meetings and the safe deposit of its effects.’”169 Wesley’s account
concludes by summarizing how historical societies have been a boon to the African
American community: “All of these societies have investigated, published and used the
facts and lesson of history to bring a sense of pride and an appreciative recognition of the
historical contributions of their people to the life of the nation and the American
heritage.”170
Wesley’s article exemplifies the Journal of Negro History’s trailblazing
commitment to counter racism and ignorance through historical scholarship.171 This
pioneering journal, founded by Carter Woodson in 1916, represented a more sophisticated,
scientific approach to history.172 Historian Fitzhugh Brundage describes how Woodson

Wesley, “Racial Historical Societies,” 27.
Ibid., 28.
170 Ibid., 33.
171 Writing to commemorate the Journal’s fiftieth anniversary in 1966, editor William M. Brewer
discusses its founding raison d’être: “Reconstruction historians and Southern politicians repudiated
the Civil War Amendments to the U.S. Constitution while segregation and disfranchisement restored
the essence of slavery which was to last for a century! Woodson [the Journal’s founder and longtime
editor] saw more clearly than anyone of record that unless the records of Negroes were found and
published, the Negro would become increasingly, after the ‘nadir-regime,’ a negligible factor in the
history and thought of the world!” William M. Brewer, “The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Journal of
Negro History,” Journal of Negro History 51.2 (April, 1966),:61.
172 Luther P. Jackson’s 1940 retrospective of the Journal’s first twenty-five years offers the following
description of Woodson, “The Journal of Negro History is unique among historical magazines in that it
has had only one editor—Carter G. Woodson. He wrote the first article in the first issue; he financed
the first issues; he is with us today. Efforts were made by certain men to establish a magazine and
promote a history association long before this editor was born […] but Woodson has been the first
man of his race in this country to succeed. The present editor has carried an unusual load because in
the early days he was about the only Negro scholar in history trained to perform this task.” Luther P.
168
169

52

and his contemporaries shifted the way African American historians understood and
portrayed their unique history:
The ‘new’ black history, in contrast, was self-consciously scholarly and its
practitioners had no patience for ‘the spell-binding orator who comes along to
entertain the public.’ Black historians instead adopted a dispassionate academic
tone that reflected their conviction that an accumulation of historical ‘facts’ would
sweep aside historical falsehoods.173
The Journal continued to hone this “‘new’ black history” over the subsequent decades and
into the civil rights movement. Political scientist and educational pioneer, Samuel DuBois
Cook’s 1960 article, for instance, argues that a truer, more tragic telling of black history
might ameliorate the “large measure of slavery in his [the Negro’s] freedom,” since the
emancipation proclamation.174 Furthering “a tragic conception of Negro history,” Cook
explains, will accomplish three things: render the community’s “desolation and misery
more intelligible,” make its struggles “ethically significant,” and give it a place within
“human history in general.”175 Wesley and Cook’s accounts exemplify the Journal’s
commitment to history, though tragic and at times oppressive, as a powerful force that
“should contribute to the liberation of the mind and will.”176
Recent qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies also have affirmed the
social impact of preserving and communicating African American history. Political
scientist Richard Couto’s analysis of narratives passed from generation to generation in
local African American communities shows how “narratives provide deep and lasting
insights into the need and methods of change to individuals who lead social movements or
Jackson, “The First Twenty-Five Volumes of The Journal of Negro History Digested,” The Journal of
Negro History 25.4 (Oct., 1940): 439.
173 Fitzhugh Brundage, Southern Past: A Clash of Race and Memory (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2005), 153.
174 Samuel Du Bois Cook, “A Tragic Conception of Negro History,” The Journal of Negro History 45, No. 4
(Oct., 1960), 224.
175 Cook, “A Tragic Conception of Negro History,” 237-238.
176 Ibid., 239.

53

support them despite risks to themselves.”177 Building on the work of Couto and others,
Frederick Harris, political scientist and Director of the Center on African American
Politics and Society at Columbia University, explores “the links between collective
memory and collective action” in his 2008 study of the civil rights movement.178 In
Harris’s mixed methods analysis, he “specifies a framework to illustrate how events are
transformed into collective memories, how collective memories are then incorporated into
a group’s repertoire of memories, and how collective memories may be later employed for
collective action as time passes from the initial event.”179 Commemorations, artifacts, and
other methods of memorialization preserve these collective memories over time, so that
they might “publicly resurface as political actors re-appropriate it to build lines of
solidarity and/or forge strategies for collective action.”180
Larry J. Griffin and Kenneth A. Bollen’s 2009 article, “What Do These memories
Do? Civil Rights Remembrance and Racial Attitudes,” added another dimension to
scholarship on the intersection of memory and activism.181 Employing quantitative
methods, Griffin and Bollen analyzed interviews from the 1993 General Social Survey to
study how recollecting civil rights both reflected and affected racial opinions and policies.
Though unique in correlating historical memories with present-day perceptions, Griffin
and Bollen draw on earlier memory studies scholarship that shifted conceptions of
memory from “a passive thing people possess to an active force they employ.”182 Griffin

Richard A. Couto, “Narrative, Free Space, and Political leadership in Social Movements,” The Journal
of Politics 55, no. 1 (Feb., 1993), 61.
178 Frederick C. Harris, “It Takes a Tragedy to Arouse Them: Collective Memory and Collective Action
during the Civil Rights Movement,” Social Movement Studies 5, no. 1 (May 2006): 19-43.
179 Harris, “It Takes a Tragedy to Arouse Them,” 21.
180 Ibid., 38.
181 Larry J. Griffin and Kenneth A. Bollen, “What Do These Memories Do? Civil Rights Remembrance
and Racial Attitudes,” American Sociological Review 74, no. 4 (Aug., 2009): 594-614.
182 Griffin and Bollen, “What Do These Memories Do?” 600.
177

54

and Bollen go on to explore the present-day ramifications of mobilizing history,
concluding that it “permits collectivities and individuals to usefully (if not exclusively)
frame the country’s present-day racial rights and wrongs in terms of the black freedom
struggle in the 1950s and 1960s.”183
Statues, parades, and public commemorations also have served to perpetuate
collective memories. Fitzhugh Brundage’s 2005 text, Southern Past: A Clash of Race and
Memory has served as a scholarly touchstone on the subject, wherein, he identifies and
evaluates physical spaces that acted as hubs of collective memory for both the African
American and segregationist communities in the South.184 The book focuses particularly
on the African American colleges, front porches, and even street corners, wherein “blacks
nurtured their sense of community and were in the presence of their shared history.”185 In
fact, Brundage relates, “in one of the most profound ironies of the Jim Crow era, blacks
used state and private resources to turn schools into essential sites of collective memory
that performed a role comparable to that of museum, archives, and other memory theaters
in the white community.”186 These spaces of remembrance countered Southern
institutions that perpetuated a systemic and pernicious “Lost Cause” version of history.
Archives have proven a contested and vital space in relation to civil rights, with the
tragic legacy of perpetuating the myth of the “Lost Cause” within the Jim Crow South. As
Richard Cox describes in relation to state archives: “Trying to direct the archival
enterprise in a period of social unrest is nothing new; the pioneering Southern state
archives were part of an effort to re-establish a Southern white hegemony, requiring the
Ibid.
Fitzhugh Brundage, Southern Past: A Clash of Race and Memory (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2005).
185 Brundage, Southern Past, 229.
186 Ibid., 140.
183
184

55

re-invention of the past among other things.”187 Subsequent archival scholarship has
tended to follow Cox’s lead by focusing, at least in part, on the role of Southern archives
in perpetuating Jim Crow power structures.188 Patricia Galloway’s examination of the
early history of the Mississippi state archive, for instance offers a case study of a southern
state’s propagation of the myth of the “Lost Cause.”189 Acting in the wake of Alabama’s
creation of a state archive as “monument to the lost cause of the Confederacy,”
Mississippi’s state archives, and its first archivist Dunbar Rowland, “gave no thought
whatever to providing assistance to African-American scholars” and sought collections
“that tended to support his own views and that looked determinedly backward to a
romanticized Lost Cause of the Confederacy.”190 Alex H. Poole’s 2014 article, “The
Strange Career of Jim Crow Archives: Race, Space, and History in the Mid-TwentiethCentury American South,” reinforces and expands on many of the points raised earlier by
Cox and Galloway.191 Poole’s article recounts how archivists in the Jim Crow South often
sequestered African American scholars from other users, as well as denied them access to
the building’s facilities while researching materials. As Poole writes, “second-class
citizenship thrived in the archives.”192
Perhaps in reaction to its own historical record, ameliorating racial disparities in
the archive—both in terms of its collections and employment—has recently become a
Richard J. Cox, Closing an Era: Historical Perspectives on Modern Archives & Records Management
(Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press, 2000), 106.
188 See, for instance, Patricia Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History: Dunbar Rowland and the
Beginning of the State Archives of Mississippi (1902-1936),” The American Archivist 69
(Spring/Summer 2006): 79-116 and Rabia Gibbs, “The Heart of the Matter: The Developmental
History of African American Archives,” The American Archivist 75 (Spring/Summer 2012): 195-204.
189 Patricia Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History: Dunbar Rowland and the Beginning of the State
Archives of Mississippi (1902-1936),” The American Archivist 69 (Spring/Summer 2006): 79-116.
190 Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History,” 82, 115.
191 Alex H. Poole, “The Strange Career of Jim Crow Archives: Race, Space, and History in the MidTwentieth-Century American South,” The American Archivist 77, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2014): 23-63.
192 Poole, “The Strange Career of Jim Crow Archives,” 26.
187

56

central focus of the Society of American Archivists (SAA). In her 2008 presidential
address, Elizabeth W. Adkins reminded its members of how the SAA “has been working
to address diversity concerns for more than thirty-five years, sometimes effectively and
sometimes not so effectively.”193 Writing in a 2014 issue of Archival Science, Dominique
Daniel argues that during those “thirty-five years,” archives both shaped and were shaped
by a growing recognition of American diversity.194 Moving beyond what Rudolph Vecoli
termed the “cultural myopia” of archives prior to 1969, Daniel describes the shift in
archival practices:
By contesting the choices made theretofore by libraries and archives, social
historians opened the door to the questioning of those institutions’ power of ‘life
and death’ over the historical record—the power to determine what future
generations will be able to know of the past. More responsibility was therefore
placed on archival institutions and archivists to articulate the rationale for their
collection development strategies and to demonstrate the value of their practices
and collections.195
Rabia Gibbs’s “The Heart of the Matter: The Developmental History of African American
Archives” argues that despite attempts to diversify archival offerings, archivists still tend
to “characterize and assess minority collections based on our profession’s narrow
perspective of diversity objectives, not on the documentation priorities of the originating
community that usually have designated social and political purposes.” 196 Furthermore,
Gibbs’s article draws attention to the complex dynamics within minority communities,
whose potential schisms and biases might lead to silencing dimensions of their own
communities. Overall the literature portrays an archival trend of increased racial
Elizabeth W. Adkins, “One Journey Toward Diversity—and a call to (More) Action,” The American
Archivist 71, no. 1 (Spring-Summer 2008), 22.
194 Dominique Daniel, “Archival Representations of Immigration and Ethnicity in North American
History: From the Ethnicization of Archives to the Archivization of Ethnicity,” Archival Science 14
(2014): 169-203.
195 Daniel, “Archival Representation of Immigration and Ethnicity in North American History,” 178.
196 Gibbs, “The Heart of the Matter” 196.
193

57

sensitivity and inclusiveness while still acknowledging that much work obviously remains
to be done.

II.F. ARCHIVING CIVIL RIGHTS IN NORTHERN IRELAND

Civil rights collections in Northern Ireland are typically found in what could be
categorized as two types of archives: traditional archives—such as Belfast’s Linen Hall
Library or the Public Records Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI)—and what sociologists
Patricia Lundy and Mark McGovern term a ‘patchwork of disparate truth and justice and
oral history projects taking place in many (mostly nationalist) communities through the
North.’197 The patchwork includes community archival projects such as the Ardoyne
Commemoration Project and the Cost of the Troubles Survey—a study where researchers
interviewed a cross-section of the population affected by the Troubles and discovered that
‘people wanted to talk, to tell us about their experiences and the effects their experiences
had on them.’198 Other literature documenting these endeavors focuses on the therapeutic
benefits of archives, theatre, and filmmaking in Northern Ireland. For instance, Cahal
McLaughlin’s Recording Memories from Political Violence recounts his work “describing
and analyzing the use of documentary filmmaking in the recording of trauma memories
from political conflict, with particular emphasis on Northern Ireland.”199 By drawing on
Lundy, Patricia and Mark McGovern. ‘ “You Understand Again.” Testimony and Post-Conflict
Transition in the North of Ireland.’ In The Oral History Reader, 2nd Ed, edited by Robert Perks and
Alistair Thomson, 531-537 (New York: Routledge, 2006), 534.
198 Smyth, Marie and Marie Therese Fay, eds. Personal Accounts from Northern Ireland’s Troubles.
(London: Pluto Press, 2000), 3.
199 McLaughlin, Cahal. Recording Memories from Political Violence: A Film-Maker’s Journey. (Chicago:
Intellect, University of Chicago Press, 2010), 17.
197

58

studies both internal and external to the archives-specific literature, a somewhat
comprehensive view of efforts to understand and archive the civil rights movement—and
the overarching conflict known as the Troubles (1968-1998)—begins to materialize.
In many respects, the historical civil rights movement in Northern Ireland—and its
subsequent archiving—remains entangled within efforts to reconcile and memorialize the
bloody history of the Troubles. Patrick Pinkerton’s “Resisting Memory: The Politics of
Memorialisation in Post-conflict Northern Ireland” provides insightful analysis of the
fraught, political quagmire that is memorialization in post-conflict Northern Ireland.
Using an oft-vandalized memorial to two men killed by the Provisional Irish Republican
Army (PIRA) in 1970 as his case study, Pinkerton argues that the memorial serves as a
“wider cultural movement designed to counter the republican version of history, and as
such plays a role in the cycles of claim and counter-claim that constitute inter-community
debate over the past in Northern Ireland.”200 According to Pinkerton, both those who
memorialize their community’s version of history and those who subsequently vandalize
in opposition simply “replicate patterns of division.”201 In this respect, Pinkerton echoes
Nicholas Allen and Aaron Kelly’s introduction to The Cities of Belfast, which reminds its
readers that both “Irish nationalism and unionism are shared attempts to obscure the full
historical and social complexity of Belfast and this island.”202 Ultimately, Pinkerton
argues for activists to distance themselves from ignorance and partisanship through
commemorations that “deconstruct the assumed links between history and memory,

Patrick Pinkerton, “Resisting Memory: The Politics of Memorialisation in Post-conflict Northern
Ireland,” The British Journal of Politics and International Relations 14 (2012)): 145
201 Pinkerton, “Resisting Memory,” 148.
202 Nicholas Allen and Aaron Kelly, “Introduction,” The Cities of Belfast, eds. Nicholas Allen and Aaron
Kelly (Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2003), 17.
200

59

explode the concept of memory as a reflection of the past, and work to reveal the inherent
undecidability of all assertions of memory in the present.”203
Efforts to memorialize the Troubles have by in large corresponded with a global
imperative to revisit past traumas. Brandon Hamber, University of Ulster professor and
Director of INCORE (International Conflict Research Institute), examines the particular
international phenomenon of what he terms “conflict museums”—“permanent sites of
conservation and exhibition that focus on the legacy of political violence.”204 For Hamber,
the raison dêtre for conflict museums is not the past but the future; the growth of conflict
museums, Hamber argues, “represents a growth in the modernist belief that learning about
past atrocity is an antidote to future violence.”205 Education, therefore, plays a vital role in
these museums, wherein past horrors are exhibited with the hope that “lessons can be
drawn and applied to contemporary problems such as building democracy, or challenging
all forms of xenophobia and racism wherever they may occur.”206 In many respect,
Hamber’s conclusion parallels the archival scholarship that I discuss in later sections by
cautioning that sites of memory are “never a-historical and neutral venues; they are an
active part of the postconflict landscape.”207
In a specifically Northern Irish instance of a conflict museum/community archive,
Elizabeth Crooke focuses on how one site, The Museum of Free Derry: The National Civil
Rights Archive, exhibits the everyday materials of conflict. Crooke’s piece advocates the
importance of material cultural studies by implying a more sanguine view than Hamber of

Pinkerton, “Resisting Memory,” 149.
Brandon Hamber, “Conflict Museums, Nostalgia, and Dreaming of Never Again,” Peace and Conflict:
Journal of Peace Psychology 18.3 (2012): 269.
205 Hamber, “Conflict Museums,” 270.
206 Ibid., 271.
207 Ibid., 279.
203
204

60

the societal importance of exhibiting conflict materials: “By such means, we can better
understand how, at times of trauma, and later as a means of remembrance and
commemoration, we use objects to understand the past, make sense of our present and
create links to the future.”208 Material objects, therefore, play a vital role within societies
such as Northern Ireland that are transitioning from conflict by providing the stuff of
reconciliation.
Records, both as material and informational objects, are fundamental to the
interplay of remembrance and reconciliation. The story of recordkeeping in Northern
Ireland naturally begins with the country’s creation during the partition of 1921, which, as
a result, led to the founding of the Public Records Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) in
Belfast. Like the new country itself, PRONI’s initial challenge lay in navigating the
aftermath of the Irish Civil War. As Kenneth Darwin, Deputy Keeper of the Records of
Northern Ireland, relates, “The destruction of the Irish Public Record Office in 1922
however led the Record Office in Belfast to regard, as prime function, not only the
collection of copies of destroyed public records relating to Northern Ireland but also the
collection of archives which would in some way supplement and substitute for the
destroyed public records.”209 The association between Northern Irish recordkeeping and
armed conflict would continue into the 1970s, even when, as Gerry Slater of PRONI
reminds us, the connection proved erroneous:
Some sensitive material slipped through the net and gained temporary publicity.
Predictably, granted the political circumstances of Northern Ireland, one or two
commentators portrayed the Record Office as involved in some kind of cover up
Crooke, “The Material Culture of Conflict,” 27.
Kenneth Darwin, “The Irish Record Situation,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 2.8 (1960), 364365. PRONI’s Gerry Slater also writes about the origins of Northern Irish recordkeeping in G. Slater,
“The Public Record Office of Northern Ireland and records management in the Northern Ireland Civil
Service,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 11.1-2 (1990): 52-59.
208
209

61

[…] the simple truth was that mistakes, of a kind not unheard-of elsewhere, had
been made.210
Echoing both Hamber and the archival scholarship that will be discussed in later sections,
however, Slater goes on to reflect on his inability as an archivist to disassociate himself
from the rising violence of the Troubles by “hiding behind the release of official archives
as somehow providing the final truth.”211
Writing on the “archiving of contentious material as a ‘political’ activity”, Dirk
Schubotz, Martin Melaugh, and Peter McLoughlin reflect on their collective experience
archiving qualitative data within a Northern Ireland emerging from conflict.212 The article
focused particularly on University of Ulster’s Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN),
which offers a wide range of materials concerning the Troubles, as well as a diverse
collection in partnership with PRONI regarding the civil rights movement.213 As they
write—in an echo of Slater’s prior observations—“the role of the archivist in Northern
Ireland itself is political and therefore contested as it operates in the context of the
Northern Ireland conflict and the segregated Northern Irish society.”214 Archival and
storytelling reconciliation projects recognize a need to overcome impediments in a timely
fashion given both the increasing likelihood of participants passing away and, as Kerstin
Mey points out, the building digital pressures placed on a congenitally “underdevelop[ed]”

Slater, “Public Record Office of Northern Ireland,” 54.
Gerry Slater, “Confessions of an Archivist,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 29.2 (October 2008):
141
212 Dirk Schubotz, Martin Melaugh, and Peter McLoughlin, “Archiving Qualitative Data in the Context of
a Society Coming out of Conflict: Some Lessons from Northern Ireland,” Forum Qualitative
Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 12.3 (2011): 3.
213 CAIN’s full civil rights holdings may be viewed online at, Martin Melaugh and Fionnuala McKenna,
“Civil Rights Campaign—Details of Source Material,” CAIN, last modified July 30, 2014,
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/crights/source.htm
214 Dirk Schubotz, Martin Melaugh, and Peter McLoughlin, “Archiving Qualitative Data,” 3.
210
211

62

and “diasadvantage[d]” memory infrastructure.215 The difficult work of preserving and
repurposing the objects and stories of conflict remains vitally important, so that, to borrow
Crooke’s wording, materials might bring some measure of peace to those “zones of
emptiness where buildings and people should have been.”216

II.G. INFORMATION POWER AND COUNTERPOWER

The interplay of power, counterpower and information has shaped my dissertation’s broad
theoretical foundation. The following section explores these interconnected forces by
surveying relevant seminal and recent scholarship within sociology, communications, and
information studies. By casting a wide net encompassing multiple disciplines, I show
multiple instances of the convergence of information and power, as well as chart their
confluence and circulation within what Manuel Castells terms the “network society.”217
In this section, I define and discuss hegemonic power before proceeding to discuss how
oppositional or counterpower forces coopt or otherwise disrupt hegemonic control of
information. I, thereby, hope to lay the groundwork for the archives-specific section on
social justice that concludes the literature review.
A vast and diverse body of scholarship exists regarding information’s role in the
creation and maintenance of societal power structures. The work of Manuel Castells

Kerstin Mey, “Art, Archives, and the Public Space: Memories of Conflict,” (presentation, ELIA
Teachers’ Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria, July 1-4, 2009).
216 Ibid., 25.
217 Castells defines the “network society” as the social structure that characterizes society in the early
twenty-first century, a social structure constructed around (but not determined by) digital networks
of communication.” Manuel Castells, Communication Power (New York: Oxford UP, 2009), 4.
215

63

offers one logical point of entry since, as Frank Webster notes in his recent edition of
Theories of the Information Society, “anyone attempting to examine the role and character
of information must come to terms with the work of Manuel Castells.”218 Castells’
writings seem particular germane to my dissertation’s focus on transnational, networked
social movements—a major theme in foundational texts of his such as Communication
Power (2009) and Networks of Outrage and Hope (2012). In the former work, Castells
provides a helpful broad definition of power:
Power is the relational capacity that enables a social actor to influence
asymmetrically the decisions of other social actor(s) in ways that favor the
empowered actor’s will, interests, and values. Power is exercised by means of
coercion (or the possibility of it) and/ or by the construction of meaning on the
basis of the discourses through which social actors guide their action. Power
relationships are framed by domination, which is the power that is embedded in the
institutions of society.219
Castells further explains that the sovereign nation state typically associated with such
power has since given way to an “emerging network state” that defines itself in part
through “shared sovereignty and responsibility between different states and levels of
government.”220
Castells’ conceptualization of network power owes much to Max Weber’s early
twentieth-century writings concerning the relationship between capitalism and
bureaucracy. Weber’s seminal writings on bureaucracy’s “very large” and “commanding”
power, for instance, have been foundational for subsequent scholars of governmental
power. Bureaucratic interests, according to Weber, often run counter to those of its
citizens, tending “to always exclude the public and, as far as possible, conceal its

Frank Webster, Theories of the Information Society, 4th edition (New York: Routledge, 2014), 98.
Manuel Castells, Communication Power (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 10.
220 Castells, Communication Power, 40.
218
219

64

knowledge and actions from criticism.”221 As Bruno Latour explained in 1986,
bureaucracy’s “essential power” comes from the networks rendered thinkable by the
materiality of files and records:
The ‘cracy’ of bureaucracy is mysterious and hard to study, but the ‘bureau’ is
something that can be empirically studied, and which explains, because of its
structure, why some power is given to an average mind just by looking at files:
domains which are far apart become literally inches apart; domains which are
convoluted and hidden, become flat; thousands of occurrences can be looked at
synoptically. More importantly, once files start being gathered everywhere to
insure some two-way circulation of immutable mobiles, they can be arrayed in
cascade: files of files can be generated and this process can be continued until a
few men consider millions as if they were in the palms of their hands.222
As Latour’s tone implies, governmental forces have at times wielded its bureaucratic
power perniciously and with the intent to manipulate that population now “in the palms of
their hands.”
Communication—“the sharing of meaning through the exchange of
information”—via media acting as “the space of power-making” provides the engine for
bureaucratic manipulation.223 As Professor James Curran’s extensive survey of media
history from 13th century papal power centers to 1950s British television relates, the
relationship between power and media has deep historical roots with “buildings, pictures,
statues, coins, banners, stained glass, songs, medallions, rituals of all kinds—were
deployed in pre-industrial societies to express sometimes highly complex ideas.”224
According to Castells, present-day nation states such as the U.S., Russia, and China have
adapted these well-honed channels of propaganda and misinformation for today’s
networked world, wherein “state power, in its most traditional manifestation, that is
Max Weber, Sociological Writings, ed. Wolf Heydebrand (New York: Continuum, 1994), 96.
Bruno Latour, “Visualization and Cognition: Thinking with Eyes and Hands,” Knowledge and Society
6 (1986): 28.
223 Castells, Communication Power, 54, 194.
224 James Curran, Media and Power (New York: Routledge, 2002), 54.
221
222

65

manipulation and control, is pervasive in the media and the Internet throughout the
world.”225 Media theorist, Friedrich Kittler had written about the same phenomenon in the
context of the bellicose 20th century, describing how those same communication channels
“that produced mountains of corpses” also dictated their remembrance.226 In this respect,
individual and collective lives have long been subsumed into a bureaucratic information
system that enforces what Castells calls a “monopoly of violence.”227
Akhil Gupta uses a slightly different terminology—“structural violence”—to
highlight the systemic, deeply rooted nature of the same bureaucratic phenomenon of
power circulating within a web of banal government materials.228 Gupta’s Red Tape
analyzes structural violence within the context of modern-day India, wherein he argues,
“that structural violence is enacted through the everyday practices of bureaucracies.”229
The forms, certificates, memos, and reams of other digital and paper objects of every day
government business become potential mechanisms of bureaucratic violence. As Geoffrey
Bowker and Leigh Starr have put it, “the material culture of bureaucracy and empire is not
found in pomp and circumstance, nor even in the first instance at the point of a gun, but
rather at the point of a list.”230
More specifically, records become tangible conduits of structural violence by
enabling bureaucracies to exercise “biopolitical” control over their citizens. In his January
1978 Collège de France lecture, Foucault defines biopower and describes its historical
trajectory:
Castells, Communication Power, 285.
Friedrich Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999), 4-5.
227 Castells, Communication Power, 51.
228 Akhil Gupta, Red Tape: Bureaucracy, Structural Violence, and Poverty in India, (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2012).
229 Ibid., 33.
230 Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1999), 153.
225
226

66

By this [biopower] I mean a number of phenomena that seem to me to be quite
significant, namely, the set of mechanisms through which the basic biological
features of the human species became the object of a political strategy, of a general
strategy of power, or, in other words, how, starting from the eighteenth century,
modern Western societies took on board the fundamental biological fact that
human beings are a species.231
For biopolitical mechanisms to be deployed effectively, biological data must be converted
into manageable information. Examples of how governments employ this biological
information abound, from Diane Nelson’s work in post-war Guatemala to Anne Stoler’s
analysis of the colonial Netherlands Indes.
In a particularly resonant instance of the linkages between biopower and records,
Bowker and Star analyze racial classifications in apartheid South Africa. From the 1950s
onward, South Africa operated under a rigid racial classification structure. Races were
officially marked through a legal requirement to carry passbooks—“a compilation of
documents attesting to birth, education, employment history, marriage, and other life
events.”232 Records were a means to prevent black individuals from entering white areas,
to discourage sexual contact between the races, and to forbid other activities that had been
deemed unacceptable by the eugenics principles guiding the South African state. Bowker
and Star provide an example of the violent intersection of instruments of recordkeeping
and racial classification by recounting a first-hand memory of the police’s “pencil test”:
“They sticks a pencil in your hair and you has to bend down, and if your hair holds the
pencil, that shows it’s too woolly, too thick. You can’t be Coloured with woolly hair like
that. You got to stay black, you see.”233

Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France 1977-1978 (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan 2007), 1.
232 Bowker, Sorting Things Out, 198.
233 Qtd. in Bowker, Sorting things Out, 212.
231

67

As Bowker and Star’s “pencil test” example tragically illustrates, records—and
specifically the archives that hold them—often become the loci of structural violence.
Katherine Burns’s exploration of archives in colonial Peru provides another historical
perspective on how imperial power became centralized within the archive:
Imperial bureaucrats’ desire for control at a distance produced protocols of control
over information: of recording, archiving, and retrieval. The result is the
Foucauldian panopticon writ large, with archives all about knowledge and power,
surveillance, and control. The emphasis is on centripetal movement: bureaucrats’
data-gathering impetus, and their tendency to draw things in toward imperial
institutions.234
Once bureaucrats housed the materials of governance in the archive, those in power could
then more efficiently and effectively wield the recorded information under their control.
Operationalized information might include racial classification statistics such as in the
apartheid South Africa illustrated by Bowker and Star or the Indian biopolitical
recordkeeping that, according to Gupta, “had far-reaching effects in mapping, surveying,
and tabulating the population and, most importantly, in potentially monitoring the lives of
women and children.”235 The government’s co-option of the archive could also assume a
more passive, if equally oppressive, form of control: inaction. As Ann Stoler explains:
“In their densities these documents registered distributions of administrative concern that
gained cumulative and historical weight. Archives could arm the state with evidence and,
in so doing, justify inaction, reduce allocations, and abort policy.”236 In some respects,
willful inertia represents a more insidious form of structural violence because of its
resultant silences and lack of resolution.

Kathryn Burns, Into the Archive: Writing and Power in Colonial Peru (Durham: Duke University
Press, 2010), 2.
235 Gupta, Red Tape, 262.
236 Ann Laura Stoler, Along the Archival Grain: Epistemic Anxieties and Colonial Common Sense
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), 139.
234

68

Unjust access limitations provide yet another instance of how archives become
sites of structural violence. In Jeannette Bastian’s poignant example of Danish colonists
literally “sailing away” with the Virgin Islanders historical record, she notes how “the
logistics of distance have proved insurmountable for many” native Virgin Islanders, thus
giving the colonist’s unfettered access to the Island’s historical record.237 In this case, a
double injustice occurs through records, as active tools of colonization become reshaped
into archival instruments of erasure and biased history making. Cathy Caruth’s reading of
the strange case of Colonel Chabert provides another illustrative example of archival
erasure. In Colonel Chabert’s eponymous novella written by Honoré de Balzac in 1832,
he becomes hideously wounded in battle and recovers only to find his wife remarried and
himself officially dead. Caruth provides an insightful reading of Chabert’s realization that
his attempts to rejoin the living are futile, as his death has been subsumed into an
overarching Napoleonic narrative of heroism: “In this error of death, then, the law of
certificates and declarations has paradoxically helped to write a heroic history that
eliminates the reality of war.”238 Chabert’s story poignantly shows how even the right to
one’s own life can fall victim to the governmental machinery of records.
If, as Weber argues, “bureaucracy’s specific nature, quite welcome to capitalism, is
increasingly perfected the more it becomes objectified or ‘dehumanized,’” then it seems
logical for Castells to identify “outrage” and “hope” as the engines of counterpower. 239
Though lacking in both the physical and theoretical heft of Castells’ earlier work, 2012’s
Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age is a timely book,
Jeannette Bastian, Owning Memory: How a Caribbean Community Lost Its Archives and Found Its
History (Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited, 2003), 39.
238 Cathy Caruth, Literature in the Ashes of History (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013),
23.
239 Weber, Sociological Writings, 79
237

69

which furthers his conceptualization of counterpower. Looking specifically at the “Arab
Spring” and “Occupy” movements” diffusing across the globe at the time, Castells
analyzes how networked social movements harness current communication technologies
to subvert existing power structures. By occupying the autonomous technological spaces
of the Internet, mobile messaging, and social networks, these movements take part in
Castells’ counterpower—a force he defines as “the capacity of social actors to challenge
the power embedded in the institutions of society for the purpose of claiming
representation for their own values and interests.”240
Contemporary counterpower, therefore, relies on challenging new, networked
forms of hegemonic power. Writing in 1986, media theorist Friedrich Kittler provided a
poetic and prescient list of ways the government outpaced its people in harnessing the
future technologies of the then “computer age.” Describing the rise of NSA computation,
or, as he writes—“the laying of cables”—Kittler foresaw how governmental, hegemonic
power would continue into the digital age. Kittler’s “cables” now circulate extensive
amounts of controlled information internally within governmental agencies around the
globe. Forms, files, and memos have, as Alasdair Roberts’s Blacked Out tells us,
“liquefied” into electronic versions easily stored and manipulated through massive
databanks and Electronic Document and Records Management Systems (EDRMS).241
Rather than precipitating an age of increased public knowledge of government, Roberts
relates how the connectivity of the “new global architecture” translates instead into even

Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope, 5.
Alasdair Roberts, Blacked Out: Government Secrecy in the Information Age (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2006), 219.
240
241

70

more jealously guarded secrets: “Transparency within the network is matched by opacity
without.”242
Resistance, therefore, occurs by subverting decentralized power or, as Giles
Deleuze memorably describes it—“the coils of a serpent.” Building on Foucault’s work
concerning 18th and 19th disciplinary structures, Deleuze argues that present-day society is
dominated by a serpentine structure of control mechanisms— “undaltory, in orbit, in a
continuous network.” Writing in 1992, Deleuze explains how every regime’s network
contains “liberating and enslaving forces” struggling within, and, therefore, those who
resist mechanisms of control need not “fear or hope, but only to look for new weapons.”
“Hope” in Castells’ opinion, however, was precisely one of the motivating forces behind
the global movements of 2012, which “reprogramed” the networks controlled by the
“programmers” who created the network agenda and the “switchers” who ensured
internetwork cooperation.243 As Castells summarizes:
If power is exercised by programming and switching networks, then counterpower,
the deliberate attempt to change power relationships, is enacted by reprogramming
networks around alternative interest and values, and/or disrupting the dominant
switches while switching networks of resistance and social change.244
As the computing terminology implies, “reprograming” a network often relies on fluency
with 21st century technologies. For instance, Finn Brunton’s recent book on unsolicited email messages—or “spam” as it is typically called—identifies how Internet “spammers”
“take advantage of existing infrastructures” for mercenary ends.245 Such infrastructural

Roberts, Blacked Out, 139.
Castells, Communication Power, 45.
244 Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope, 9.
245 Finn Brunton, SPAM: A Shadow History of the Internet (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2013), 200.
242
243

71

subversion provides a nefarious, yet illustrative, instance of the “new weapons” that
Deleuze foresaw in the struggle against networked power.
According to Castells, those struggling to subvert hegemonic power operate within
networked, “autonomous” spaces rendered possible by Internet technologies. This third
space of autonomy, as he tells us, is a “hybrid of cyberspace and urban space” that allows
for unfettered communication between individuals both locally and globally who strive to
undue existing power structures.246 For Castells, the Internet as “embodi[ment] of the
culture of freedom” provides counterpower an historically unprecedented potency as it
shifts from reliance on pamphlets and other written or oral materials to the horizontal
“mass self-communication” tools of Twitter, SMS messages, and other “technologies of
freedom.”247 Herein, Castells might be allowing his political enthusiasm to cloud his
analysis of both the social movements and their technological engines. In some respects,
Castells’ portrayal of present-day technologies as innately freeing is simply the inverse of
Sherry Turkle’s contemporaneous text, Alone Together.248 For Turkle, networks enabled
by the Internet are not the stuff of significant social change but rather “the ties that
preoccupy,” paradoxically isolating the people it connects.249 Taken together, however,
Turkle and Castells provide useful insights into the extreme boundaries of the network’s
capacity for isolation and liberation.
Allowing for Castells’ unchecked enthusiasm for perceived technologies of
liberation, recent literature on networked social movements has born out the utility of his
Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope, 222.
Ibid., 15, 231, 233.
248 Sherry Turkle, Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other
(New York: Basic Books, 2011).
249 Turkle, Alone Together, 280. Of course, the recent horrific use of Internet technologies for the
purposes of ISIS and other terrorist groups should also serve as reminders to temper enthusiasm for
the social justice potential of emerging technologies.
246
247

72

theoretical framework. A 2014 article in the International Journal of Communication, for
instance, applies Castells’ theoretical work to the relationship between Twitter and Saudi
Arabian social progress, wherein the author concludes that Twitter played a more limited
but nonetheless important role in Saudi Arabian’s women’s rights. 250 In another recent
study of symbolic power, Melissa Brough and Zhan Li apply Castells and other
communications theorists to the Burmese “Saffron” Revolution.251 Brough and Li’s study
adds credence to Castells’ premise of networked social movements by concluding that
online videos and a web 2.0 presence “increased the political and economic costs of
repression for the military junta and reduced its ability to influence the geopolitical
framing of the Saffron Revolution.”252 Unexpectedly, Castells is called on to provide both
the voice of caution in regards to technological determinism and a theoretical lens for
interpreting new media in a recent study published in Telematics and Informatics. As the
article’s name, “Influences of Media on Social Movements: Problematizing hyperbolic
references about Impacts,” suggests, the article focuses particularly on whether social
media has been overhyped in regards to its affect on the Arab Spring and other recent
African social movements. 253 Such debates regarding the social justice impact of the
Internet and social media will inevitably continue as technology influences, if not
necessarily drives, counterpower across the globe.
Irfan Chaudhry, “#Hashtags for Change: Can Twitter Promote Social Progress in Saudi Arabia.”
International Journal of Communication 8 (2014): 943-961.
251 Melissa Brough and Zhan Li, “Media Systems Dependency, Symbolic Power, and Human Rights
Online Video: Learning from Burma’s ‘Saffron Revolution’ and WITNESS’s Hub.” International Journal
of Communication 7 (2013): 281-304. Brough and Li use the following definition of symbolic power
on page 2: “the capacity to intervene in the course of events and influence the actions of other by
means of the production and transmission of symbolic forms.”
252 Brough and Li, “Media Systems Dependency, Symbolic Power, and Human Rights Online Video,”
287.
253 Anthony A. Olorunnisola and Brandie L. Martin, “Influences of Media on Social Movements:
Problematizing Hyperbolic Inferences about Impacts.” Telematics and Informatics 30 (2013): 275288.
250

73

Shifting technologies and networking opportunities have long been two of the
driving forces behind counterpower. Harold Innis, a political economist writing in 1950,
wrote the seminal work, Empire and Communication, “to outline the significance of
communication in a small number of empires as a means of understanding its role in a
general sense and as a background to an appreciation of its significance to the British
Empire.”254 In his scholarly jaunt through history, Innis encounters ancient Egypt,
Babylonia, Greece, and Rome before pivoting towards an analysis of the communication
mediums themselves: parchment, paper, the printing press, and finally radio and
newsprint. Brendan Dooley’s introduction to the Politics of Information in Early Modern
Europe examines some of these communication mediums in early modern Europe.
According to Dooley, early modern political and social messages spread “unevenly and
with great difficulty beyond the great demographic concentrations” through protonetworks of media and materials.255 As an example of his thesis, Dooley offers an
illustrative instance of printed matter diffusing revolutionary ideas and strategies:
In Naples Masaniello and his followers were reputedly inspired, in their protest
against the Spanish government’s fiscal policies, by the circulation of information
about a previous rebellion in Palermo. Once they achieved mastery of the city,
they turned to news about Holland for examples of a new form of republican
government.256
Herein Dooley provides an early instance of information transcending national boundaries,
language differences, and other barriers to convey a message of counterpower.
Historical antecedents also exist for the types of subversion or reprogramming
previously mentioned in relation to contemporary digital-age social movements. In From

Harold Innis, Empire and Communication (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007).
Brendan Dooley, “Introduction,” The Politics of Information in Early Modern Europe, eds. Brendan
Dooley and Sabrina A. Baron, (New York Routledge, 2001).
256 Dooley, “Introduction,” 4.
254
255

74

Memory to Written Record: England 1066-1307, for example, Clanchy convincingly
argues that the English bureaucratic network flourished due to nascent documentation
practices following the Norman invasion of 1066.257 To the general population, Clanchy
relates, writing signified royal power and often was associated with William the
Conqueror’s audacious construction of the Domesday Book.258 By 1300, however, the
English public had begun to coopt documents for their own purposes. As Clanchy
explains, “if they wished to advance themselves or provide for younger sons or daughters,
they had to imitate their betters and exploit written procedures.”259 Matthew Hull provides
a complimentary instance of a similar process in present-day Pakistan. Hull writes how
city planners created Islamabad to physically mirror the preexisting bureaucratic divide
between the government and its people. In discussing the city’s design, Hull echoes
Clanchy’s medieval subversion of the written word:
But the spatial order of the city has been shaped by the social processes the plan
sought to curtail, partly because documents such as the files of government
apartments, house plans, and site maps work not only as instruments of
bureaucratic control but also as media of dissent and negotiation between the
government and populace.260
Both English peasants of the past and present-day Pakistanis employed the written word to
politically empower its people.
Of course, information not only undoes existing power structures but also, and
perhaps more importantly, facilitates post-conflict reconciliation. Building on the work of
Nelson and others in her dialectical analysis of the recovery of Guatemala’s secret police
archives, historian Kirsten Weld’s Paper Cadavers: The Archives of Dictatorship in
M.T. Clanchy, From Memory to Written Record: England 1066-1307, 2nd edition (Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing, 2003).
258 Clanchy, From Memory to Written Record, 35.
259 Ibid., 49.
260 Hull, Government of Paper, 66.
257

75

Guatemala offers a specifically archival example of the complex and contested interplay
of information and reconciliation. In her full, unflinching look at how archives can
paradoxically both “liberate” and “silence or disappoint,” Weld analyzes the particular
case of the secret police archives, wherein “records once used in the service of state terror
are repurposed by surviving reformers as building blocks for the rule of law and tools of
social reckoning.”261 Given the political instability of a post-conflict country such as
Guatemala, however, Weld reminds us that the act of repurposing often necessitates
navigating a minefield of political, cultural, criminal, and legal pitfalls.
Both Emiko Hastings’s “ ‘No Longer a Silent Victim of History:’ Repurposing the
Documents of Japanese American Internment,” and Michelle Caswell’s Archiving the
Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the Photographic Record in Cambodia likewise uses
the term “repurpose” to describe how historical records further present-day justice.262
Hastings’s article offers the following implicit definition of repurposing archival
documents:
Once records have been archived, it is possible for them to be rediscovered by
historians and other researchers, who draw upon the materials in ways other than
their original purposes. In the second life of the documents, they may be used as
evidence to reevaluate the historical processes they document, leading to new
understandings.263
Caswell’s analysis focuses particularly on the repurposing of DC-Cam archival records
within a post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia: “DC-Cam’s work has ensured that we hear the
voices of the survivors and the victims’ descendants, who repurpose these records of death

Kirsten Weld, Paper Cadavers: The Archives of Dictatorship in Guatemala (Durham: Duke University
Press, 2014), 237.
262 Michelle Caswell, Archiving the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the Photographic Record in
Cambodia (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2014).
263 Emiko Hastings, ‘No Longer a Silent Victim of History:’ Repurposing the Documents of Japanese
American Internment,” Archival Science 11 (2011), 38.
261

76

into legal evidence, touchstones for shaping collective memory, and above all, raw
material for new records of witnessing.”264 As Weld reminds us, the ultimate goal of
repurposing records in a post-conflict or transitional society is for the archive to become
banal, wherein “records would become normalized like any other archival repository, once
justice was done.”265 To better explicate this relationship between archival information and
justice, the next section surveys long-standing archival debates on the subject.

II.H. ARCHIVES AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

In Jacques Derrida’s famous Archive Fever, he concludes, “nothing is less reliable,
nothing is less clear today than the word, ‘archive’.”266 Derrida’s observation seems
prescient given the ever-greater mutability of archives in the digital age, wherein “[t]he
archivist produces more archive, and that is why the archive is never closed. It opens out
of the future.”267 Preceding Derrida’s commentary by several decades, Michel Foucault
made a similar observation regarding the dynamism of the “never completed, never
wholly achieved uncovering of the archive.”268 If, as Derrida and Foucault tell us, the
concept of an archive continues to grow and defy completion, then its unique capacity to
further social justice appears to be expanding as well. The following paragraphs will
further narrow this literature review’s focus by placing the earlier conversations of

Caswell, Archiving the Unspeakable, 160.
Weld, Paper Cadavers, 249.
266 Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1996), 90.
267 Derrida, Archive Fever, 68.
268 Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language (New York: Harper
& Row, 1972), 131.
264
265

77

information power and counterpower within a specifically archival context. In so doing, I
augment the previous sections with a survey of archives-specific historical and
philosophical debates.
In the 1992 Society of American Archivists Code of Ethics, the tenth code reads,
“archivists should use their specialized knowledge and expertise for the benefit of
society.”269 While this ethic might seem self-evident to both archivists and the general
public, it has proven more difficult to turn this principle into professional action. Whereas
Karen Benedict’s Ethics and the Archival Profession offers archivists a series of
illustrative, hypothetical case studies on how to act ethically, Richard J. Cox and David A.
Wallace’s Archives and the Public Good uses real-life case studies to provide professional
guidance.270 Cox and Wallace’s book offers fourteen case studies at the intersection of
archives and accountability, occurring in contexts ranging from Apartheid South African
to the Boston courtroom where ownership of the Martin Luther King, Jr. papers was
decided. Many subsequent archival scholars have built upon the text’s premise that
records are “essential sources of evidence and information providing the glue that holds
together, and sometimes the agent that unravels, organizations, governments,
communities, and societies.”271 In so doing, the perception of archives and archivists as
being pawns caught up in the flows of power has begun to shift towards one of active
agents of change, facilitating power through records.
How archivists become “active agents of change,” however, remains arguable and
somewhat hazily defined. Glenn Dingwall’s 2004 article, “Trusting Archivists: The Role
Qtd. in Karen Benedict, Ethics and the Archival Profession: Introduction and Case Studies (Chicago:
The Society of American Archivists, 2003), 5.
270 Richard J. Cox and David A. Wallace, eds. Archives and the Public Good: Accountability and Records in
Modern Society,” (Westport, CT: Quorum Books, 2002).
271 Cox and Wallace, “Introduction,” 1.
269

78

of Archival Ethics Codes in Establishing Public Faith,” for instance, presents an
archetypal archivist who stands guarding the “democratic rights of individuals and of
society as a whole,” whereas Randall Jimerson’s Archives Power: Memory,
Accountability, and Social Justice—perhaps the most extensive reflection on archivists
and power to date—portrays a more dynamic type of archivist. More specifically,
Jimerson argues that archives are “sites of important power relationships within society”,
which allow archivists to “assume significant degrees of power”.272 As a steward of both
cultural memory and society’s self-conception, the archivist is in a unique position to
serve the public interest. Jimerson, therefore, advocates for an “active” archivist, who
accepts the impossibility of impartiality and instead embraces the archive’s power:
Archivists can thus contribute to a richer human experience of understanding and
compassion. They can help to protect the rights of citizens and to hold public
figures in government and business accountable for their actions. They can
provide resources for people to examine the past, to comprehend the present, and
to prepare for a better future.273
Though their arguments differ in other respects, both Dingwall’s and Jimmerson’s
archivists view the public as both the source and intended recipient of whatever archival
power they might channel.
If, as Jimerson argues, archivists “actively shape society’s knowledge of the past,”
then adherence to ethical standards is vital to maintaining societal trust. In their editorial
note on a 2011 special issue of Archival Science, Andrew Flinn and Elizabeth Shepherd
remark, “it is no longer sufficient [for archivists] to demand trust on the basis of some
abstract claim of professional authority, and that trust must be earned and deserved

Glen Dingwall, “Trusting Archivists: The Role of Archival Ethics Codes in Establishing Public
Faith,” The American Archivist, Vol. 67 (Spring/Summer 2004): 11-30; Jimerson, Archives Power, 20.
273 Randall Jimerson, “Archives for All: Professional Responsibility and Social Justice,” The American
Archivist. 70 (Fall/Winter: 2007): 253.
272

79

through observable practice, effective performance, and ethical behaviour.”274 In their
writings on the latter subject, both Glenn Dingwall and Jason Speck call for ethical codes
to be modified with a mind to increasing the public’s faith in the archive.275 As Dingwall
and Speck argue, archivists who engage in unprofessional or unethical behavior devalue
the archival space by violating the compact between the public and the archivist. Speck
alone offers two examples of archival employees compromising public faith in the
archive, as well as five other instances of explicit “theft and destruction by archivists.”276
He goes on to remind the reader that trust forms the core of a relationship between the
archivist and the public, which, according to Jimerson, transforms the archivist from a
“neutral guardian of historical source materials” into an “active agent” working on the
public’s behalf.277
Wielding some measure of power over historical interpretation also implies an
archival imperative of professional transparency. Terry Cook’s Controlling the Past:
Documenting Society and Institutions provides a seminal collection of essays on the
subject.278 Cook’s introductory essay draws particular attention to archival appraisal’s role
in both intentionally and unintentionally crafting historical narratives, with the previously
mentioned Southern “Lost Cause” archivists serving as a disturbing instance of the

Andrew Flinn and Elizabeth Shepherd, “Questions of Trust (and Distrust),” Archival Science 11
(2011), 171
275 Glen Dingwall, “Trusting Archivists: The Role of Archival Ethics Codes in Establishing Public
Faith,” The American Archivist, 67 (Spring/Summer 2004): 11-30; Jason Speck, “Protecting Public
Trust: An Archival Wake-Up Call,” Journal of Archival Organization, 8 (2010): 31-53.
276 Speck, “Protecting Public Trust,” 42.
277 Ibid., 32; Jimerson, Archives Power, 19.
278 Terry Cook, ed., Controlling the Past: Documenting Society and Institutions; Essays in Honor of Helen
Willa Samuels (Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011).
274

80

former.279 Given their potentially unchecked power, Cook argues that archivists should
strive to become more transparent in their work: “controlling the past is too important to
be done invisibly, behind bureaucratic walls, without collaboration.”280 As Cook’s
quotation implies, the call for transparency extends beyond the archivist to records held
within government bureaucracies. In Frank Upward, Sue McKemmish, and Barbara
Reed’s fascinating examination of archival access through the lens of WikiLeaks and the
records continuum, they envision a new type of archival neutrality that is consonant with
the post-modern turn in archival theory. In Upwards’ words,
In this century, archival neutrality could be reconceptualized to focus on ensuring
that recordkeeping processes have opened themselves up appropriately to the
plural rights that exist in records, have done so in a timely fashion, and have been
maintained by agents that have co-operated with emerging access regimes for
transparency and accountability. 281
As digital technologies continue to revolutionize traditional archival concepts, archival
power remains protean and in need of continual scholarly examination and redefinition.
Over the last few years, the archival literature has hosted a lively debate regarding
the specific question of whether archives and archivists are bound by either a moral or
professional obligation to pursue social justice.282 Perhaps most notably, South African

Terry Cook, “Documenting Society and Institutions: The Influence of Helen Willa Samuels,” in Terry
Cook, ed., Controlling the Past: Documenting Society and Institutions; Essays in Honor of Helen Willa
Samuels (Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011), 1-30.
280 Cook, “Documenting Society and Institutions,” 7.
281 Frank Upward, Sue McKemmish, and Barbara Reed, “Counterpoint: Archivists and Changing Social
and Information Spaces: A Continuum Approach to Recordkeeping and Archiving in Online Cultures,”
Archivaria 72 (Fall 2011): 227. For further reading on the intersection of transparency, public trust,
and archives, see: Elena Danielson, "Secret Sharers: In an Age of Leaks, Forgeries, and Internet
Hoaxes, Archivists Must Guard Information While Keeping Hackers at Bay," The American
Scholar (Autumn 2011): 39-46; Rahul Sagar, Secrets and Leaks: The Dilemma of State Secrecy
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
282 As will be mentioned in a later paragraph, such debates were recently encapsulated in a three-way
debate within the pages of a recent issue of The American Archivist. See: Michelle Caswell, “Not Just
Between Us: A Riposte to Mark Greene,” The American Archivist 76, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2013): 604-606;
Mark Greene, “A Critique of Social Justice as an Archival Imperative: What Is it We’re Doing That’s All
that Important?” The American Archivist 76, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2013): 302-334; Randall C. Jimerson,
279

81

archivist and educator, Verne Harris, has long been a proponent for and personal exemplar
of professional ethics within an unjust governmental or institutional system. From 1990 to
1994, as the prospect of what would become Nelson Mandela’s post-apartheid
government grew, “the state engaged in a large-scale sanitization of its memory resources,
a sanitization designed to keep certain information out of the hands of a future democratic
government.”283 When Harris, as archivist in the South African State Archives Service,
learned of the destruction, he reported the situation to the director of archives. In response
to the director’s continued inaction, Harris leaked the information to the press, the
opposition African National Congress, and Brian Currin of Lawyers for Human Rights.284
In becoming a whistleblower, Harris exemplified what he would describe in his 2007
book, Archives and Justice: A South African Perspective, as an ethic of “hospitality,”
which, in Harris’s terms, “is, at once, to reach for what is not known (for what is, possibly,
unknowable), and to reach out to those excluded or marginalized by prevailing relations of
power.”285
In more recent years, the archival literature has begun to expand and build on the
theoretical foundations established by Harris, Jimerson, Cox, and others. As Wendy Duff
and the coauthors of 2013’s “Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary
Investigation” point out, the focus on social justice remains a relatively recent
phenomenon within the profession with “37 of the 42 articles (88%) that contain ‘social
justice’ being published since 2000” and “18 of these articles [being] published in the last

“Archivists and Social Responsibility: A Response to Mark Greene,” The American Archivist 76, no. 2
(Fall/Winter 2013): 335-345.
283 Harris, “ ‘They Should have Destroyed More’,” 206.
284 Ibid., 215.
285 Verne Harris, Archives and Justice: A South African Perspective (Chicago: Society of American
Archivists, 2007), 5.

82

two and a half years.”286 Even more recently, some archivists have challenged whether
social justice even falls within the archival mandate. The Fall/Winter 2013 issue of The
American Archivist, for instance, featured an unprecedented three-way debate on the
subject between Mark Greene, Rand Jimerson, and Michelle Caswell. Greene’s thesis
“that pursuing ‘social justice,’ as high minded and universal an aspiration as it may sound,
risks overly politicizing and ultimately damaging the archival profession,” sparked retorts
from Jimerson and Caswell. In response to Greene’s claim that he advocated a universal
mandate for archivists to employ social justice, Jimerson wrote, “To argue that this [the
social justice call] is an obligation for all archivists would undermine the entire premise of
my concern for social justice.”287 Jimerson’s earlier argument is more accurately
described as a call for each archivist to follow his or her own conscious and for the
profession as a whole to “support the goals of democratic accountability, inclusiveness,
open government, and social justice.”288
To understand the archives and archivists who answer Jimerson’s call, archival
scholarship has begun to move beyond abstractions to concrete measurements of social
justice impacts. The previously mentioned “Social Justice Impact of Archives,” provides
the first stage of a larger project to understand both positive and negative archival impacts
on social justice. Bemoaning the archival literature’s haphazard application and study of
the phrase “social justice,” Duff and her co-authors provide the frameworkconceptualization that I cited in my introduction as a means to assess, among other things,

Wendy M. Duff et al. “Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary Investigation,” Archival
Science 13, no. 4 (2013): 343.
287 Randall C. Jimerson, “Archivists and Social Responsibility: A Response to Mark Greene,” The
American Archivist 76, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2013): 336.
288 Jimerson, “Archivists and Social Responsibility,” 336.
286

83

the continuum of impacts (multidimensional scales of positives and negatives).289 To
better illustrate their classifications, the authors analyze two case studies where archives
facilitate social justice: a groundbreaking television series drawing on archival materials
to reveal the horrors of the Pinochet dictatorship and court trials relying on archival
documents for reparations to Japanese Americans interred during World War II. The
results exhibit the model’s potential to increase the rigor of future social justice case
studies, which have long been a staple of archival scholarship. 290
David Wallace, one of the co-authors of Duff’s report, provides an example of how
cutting-edge social justice research has become more sophisticated and collaborative in its
methods. Featured in the Fall 2014 issue of Archival Science, Wallace’s research
specifically explores the therapeutic value of archives in relation to the Rwandan
genocide. In analyzing the Stories for Hope-Rwanda (SFH) project, Wallace and his crossdisciplinary co-authors offer the first assessment in the archival literature of the
psychological benefits and risks of storytelling in a post-conflict society.291 The study
concludes that the SFH project allowed voices to fill the lingering silences of the
genocide, benefiting both individual participants and the general reconciliation process.
As Wallace relates, “We view the project’s acts of participant remembering and sharing as
an active process of social engagement that uses both story and archives as part of a

Ibid., 339.
For a few representative examples, see: Michelle Caswell, “Rethinking Inalienability: Trusting
Nongovernmental Archives in Transitional Societies,” The American Archivist 76, no.1
(Spring/Summer 2013): 113-134; Greg Brashear, “Turning History into Justice: The National Archives
and Records Administration and Holocaust-Era Assets, 1996-2001,” in Archives and the Public Good:
Accountability and Records in Modern Society,” eds. Richard J. Cox and David A. Wallace (Westport, CT:
Quorum Books, 2002); David A. Wallace et al., “Stories for Hope-Rwanda: A Psychological-Archival
Collaboration to Promote and Cultural Continuity through Intergenerational Dialogue.” Archival
Science (Fall 2014): 1-32.
291 Wallace et al., “Stories for Hope-Rwanda,” 28.
289
290

84

healing process.”292 Furthermore, by “democratizing the archive” in terms of content,
access, and other archival elements, the SFH project avoids the archival pitfall of what
archivist Rodney G.S. Carter identifies as “speak[ing] for others” and “undermin[ing] the
right of groups to remain silent.”293
In some respects, the call for a “democratized archive” has multiple antecedents
extending as far back as F. Gerald Ham’s 1981 introduction of the “post-custodial”
archive, which was in part predicated on collaboration and expanded access.294 Archivist
Eric Ketelaar more recently expressed a similar sentiment in his redefinition of archives as
a communal “spaces of memory,” serving “as a place of shared custody and trust.”295 Terry
Cook also has argued for a more inclusive, or democratized, archive that moves beyond
the three previous historical conceptions—evidence, memory, and identity—toward a
present-day fourth stage predicated on “community.”296 Cook’s specific conception of
“community” echoes the earlier writings of both Ham and Ketelaar:
In this new digital, political, and pluralistic universe, professional archivists need
to transform themselves from elite experts behind institutional walls to becoming
mentors, facilitators, coaches, who work in the community to encourage archiving
as a participatory process shared with many in society, rather than necessarily
acquiring all the archival products in our established archives.297
Of course, as Michelle Caswell’s DC-CAM research tells us, the recent scholarly
emphasis on community should extend beyond the archive and archivists to include
redefinitions of the very records themselves. More specifically, Caswell argues for

Ibid., 29.
Rodney G.S. Carter, “Of Things Said and Unsaid: Power, Archival Silences, and Power in Silence,”
Archivaria 61 (2006), 226-227.
294 F. Gerald Ham, “Archival Strategies for the Post-Custodial Age,” The American Archivist 44, no. 3
(Summer 1981): 207-216.
295 Eric Ketelaar, “Archives as Spaces of Memory,” Journal of the Society of Archivists 19.1 (April, 2008),
21
296 Cook, “Evidence, Memory, Identity, Community,” 113.
297 Ibid., 114.
292
293

85

expanding archival conceptions of provenance “to include these active participants in the
ongoing and constantly shifting ‘community of records’,” which Caswell defines as the
archivists, the bereaved families, the tourists, and all others whose actions are “adding
narratives of witnessing, memorialization, and protest over the silences of the original
records.”298
Of course, an exploration of archival emphasis on community must also mention
the growing body of research regarding community archives.299 Diana K. Wakimoto and
the co-authors of the 2013 article, “Archivist as Activist: Lessons from three Queer
Community Archive in California,” draw on the extensive work of Andrew Flinn, Mary
Stevens and others to define community archives, as “archives that have been created,
maintained, and controlled by community members within their communities.”300
Furthermore, community archives shape aspects of Anne Gilliland’s conception of digitalage archives and archivists. As she concludes in her 2014 book, Conceptualizing 21st
Century Archives, archivists must “think more strategically and systematically about why,
when, and how they should share professional or intellectual territory with other
communities through collaboration, cooperation, or layering of expertise and other

298Caswell,

Archiving the Unspeakable, 21. Stacy Wood and the co-authors of a recent article in Archival
Science made a similar human rights argument concerning archival description, Stacy Wood, et al.,
“Mobilizing Records: Re-framing Archival Description to Support Human Rights,” Archival Science 14
(2014): 397-419.
299 For a few recent instances of archival literature focusing on community archives, see: Jeanette A.
Bastian and Ben Alexander, Community Archives: The Shaping of Memory (London: Facet, 2009);
Andrew Flinn, “Independent Community Archiving and Community-Generated Content: ‘Writing,
Saving and Sharing Our Histories’,” Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
Technologies, 16, no. 1 (2010): 39-51. Michelle Caswell, “Seeing Yourself in History: Community
Archives and the Fight Against Symbolic Annihilation,” The Public Historian 36, no. 4 (2014): 26-37:
John Erde, “Constructing Archives of the Occupy Movement,” Archives and Records: The Journal of the
Archives and Records Association 35, no. 2 (2014): 77-92.
300 Diana K. Wakimoto, Christine Bruce, Helen Partridge, “Archivist as Activist: Lessons from Three
Queer Community Archives in California,” Archival Science 13 (2013): 295.

86

resources.”301 The archival turn towards issues of community, social justice, and
digitization all intersect to form the type of post-custodial archive envisioned here at the
dawn of the new millennia.

Anne Gilliland, Conceptualizing 21st-Century Archives (Chicago: Society of American Archivist,
2014), 257.
301

87

III. METHODOLOGY

III. A. QUALITATIVE RESEARCH
I answer my research questions through qualitative means. This approach stems from the
study itself being deeply rooted within an overarching qualitative philosophy. As
educational psychologist John Cresswell relates, the philosophy can be encapsulated in
four assumptions: “multiple views of reality (ontological), evidence is subjective,
research is value-laden, and researchers use inductive logic, context, and an emergent
design.”302 These assumptions align perfectly with studying complex movements
composed of and sustained by subjective, multiple views of history and politics.
Furthermore, the qualitative approach to research predicates itself on trying to ascertain
events or phenomena through the unique perspectives of individuals or people groups—
data often gathered, as in this dissertation, through semi-structured interviews, field
observations, and other means.
As G.E. Gorman and Peter Clayton point out in Qualitative Research for the
Information Professional, those studying information have begun to value the
effectiveness of qualitative approaches.303 Yang Wang et. al’s “ ‘I Regretted the Minute I
Pressed Share’: A Qualitative Study of Regrets on Facebook” provides an exemplary
instance of how qualitative approaches may provide the best means for answering certain

John Creswell, Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2013), 21.
303 G.E. Gorman and Peter Clayton, Qualitative Research for the Information Professional: A Practical
Handbook, 2nd Edition (London: Facet Publishing, 2005).
302

88

information science questions.304 More specifically, Wang et. al’s employment of semistructured interviews provided a uniquely effective method for eliciting more subtle forms
of data, such as “the users’ daily, often mundane Facebook experiences which they might
forget or take for granted.”305 This type of nuanced, subjective data often goes to the heart
of the matter and shows how qualitative approaches often provide the most effective
means for answering research questions such as mine. Due to these reasons, as well as the
alignment between qualitative methods and the social movements that form the core
element of the study, the dissertation draws exclusively on a qualitative philosophy and
approach.

III.B. DATA COLLECTION & ANALYSIS
More specifically, the dissertation employs a qualitative case study approach, which
Gorman and Clayton describe as the “application of specific qualitative research methods
in a specific setting.”306 Stephen D. Lapen and the co-authors of Qualitative Research: an
Introduction to Methods and Designs further describe how “case study results offer those
Representative examples of qualitative and mixed methods studies in information science include
Karen E. Fisher, Joan C. Durrance, and Marian Bouch Hinton, “Information Grounds and the Use of
Need-Based Services by Immigrants in Queens, New York: A Context-Based, Outcome Evaluation
Approach,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55, no. 8 (2004):
754-766; Paul Conway, “Modes of Seeing: Digitized Photographic Archives and the Experienced User,”
The American Archivist 73, no. 2(Fall/Winter 2010): 425-462; Karen F. Gracy, “Documenting
Communities of Practice: Making the Case for Archival Ethnography,” Archival Science 4 (2004): 335365; Michéle V. Cloonan and Shelby Sanett, “The Preservation of Digital Content,” Portal: Libraries and
the Academy 5.2 (April 2005): 213-237; Elizabeth Yakel and Deborah A. Torres, “AI: Archival
Intelligence and User Expertise,” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (Spring-Summer 2003): 51-78; Scott
Counts and Karen E. Fisher, “Mobile Social Networking as Information Ground: A Case Study,” Library
& Information Science Research 32 (2010): 98-115.
305 Yang Wang, et. al, “ ‘I Regretted the Minute I Pressed Share’” A Qualitative Study of Regrets on
Facebook,” Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, July 20-22, 2011,
Pittsburgh, PA, 1-13.
306 Gorman and Clayton, Qualitative Research for the Information Professional, 47.
304

89

directly affected by the case (stakeholders) and others interested in the event or program
(audiences) extended awareness by providing rich detail about highlighted aspects of the
case.”307 Case studies have a proven track record within archival studies, with scholars
widely and effectively employing the case study approach to investigate archival issues.
By adopting a multi-site or comparative case study approach, I push archival
scholarship beyond traditional single-site case studies. Although comparative research
sometimes focuses on a primary site that is then supplemented with research data from
additional sites, this dissertation adopts another comparative approach, described by
Gorman and Clayton as “two or more cases of equal value and depth that are compared
and contrasted.”308 I chose the latter approach because I predicate my research questions
on the assumption that both regions are equally significant and merit the same level of
examination. Furthermore, comparing equivalent research sites aligns well with the
constant comparative method of data analysis, wherein, as Lapan and his co-authors relate,
“analysis begins early in the study, is ongoing, and is nearly completed by the end of data
collection.”309
While recognizing the temptation to engage in essentialist, counterproductive
comparisons between cultures, historical events, or political circumstances, I build on preexisting studies of politics and culture in Northern Ireland. Previous comparative studies,
such as Richard Rose’s “On the Priorities of Citizenship in the Deep South and Northern
Ireland,” and Charles A. Reilly’s Peace-Building and Development in Guatemala and

Stephen D. Lapan, MaryLynn T. Quartaroli, and Frances J. Riemer, Research Methods for the Social
Sciences: Qualitative Research: An Introduction to Methods and Designs (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
2012), 244
308
Gorman and Clayton, Qualitative Research for the Information Professional, 51.
309 Lapan, Quartaroli, and Riemer, Research Methods for the Social Sciences, 178.
307

90

Northern Ireland, have provided methodological references for my study.310 For instance,
Rose’s study exemplifies the importance of remembering that in the case of the Deep
South and Northern Ireland, “their differences [are] as potentially as instructive as their
similarities.” Whereas Reilly’s comparison of the “different but parallel settings” of
peace-building in Northern Ireland and Guatemala has helped me understand the “stopand-go process of implementing peace.”311 I also draw on comparative work focusing on
pre-partition Ireland, which includes the peoples and cultures of the countries presently
known as the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. Kieran Quinlin’s comparative
study of Ireland and the American South and Cheryl Temple Herr’s comparison of Ireland
and the Midwest, for instance, served as reminders of the long and complex roots linking
the island of Ireland with North America long before current national and political
boundaries. By following the example of multifaceted comparative studies that eschew
simplistic or essentialist comparisons, I push cross-national comparisons beyond well-trod
historical contexts by instead comparing the ongoing materiality of these movements
within archives.

III. C. DATA SOURCES

Richard Rose, “On the Priorities of Citizenship in the Deep South and Northern Ireland, The Journal
of Politics 38, no. 2 (May, 1976): 247-291 and Charles A. Reilly, Peace-Building and Development in
Guatemala and Northern Ireland (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).
311 Reilly, Peace-Building & Development in Guatemala & Northern Ireland, 4.
310

91

Research locations were selected through a non-random, judgmental sampling, wherein I
relied on my own judgment to select sites best suited for this type of comparative study.312
I based selection on my in-depth knowledge of both the regions and the archival types
being investigated. Most importantly, I weighed each site’s congruence with my research
objectives, asking whether the potential site provided the best means for answering my
stated questions.313 I have applied the same logic to sampling within the selected research
site. Again, I relied on my own judgment in selecting whom to observe and interview
among those involved in the archive’s operation. The selection of interview subjects was
relatively easy, given that only a limited number of individuals engage in the activities
related to the proposed research questions. As noted in the introduction, some of these
individuals self-identify as archivists, while others engage with records in different
professional capacities. The following people participated in the study:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

LAURA ANDERSON: ARCHIVIST (BIRMINGHAM CIVIL RIGHTS INSTITUTE)
AHMAD WARD: HEAD OF EDUCATION AND EXHIBITIONS (BIRMINGHAM
CIVIL RIGHTS INSTITUTE)
JIM BAGGETT: HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES AND
MANUSCRIPTS (BIRMINGHAM PUBLIC LIBRARY)
JULIA MARKS YOUNG: DIRECTOR, ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICES
DIVISION 2005-2016 (MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES & HISTORY)
DAVID PILCHER: DIRECTOR, ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICES DIVISION
2016-PRESENT (MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES &HISTORY)
ADRIAN KERR: MANAGER (MUSEUM OF FREE DERRY)
MONICA CASH: DEPUTY LIBRARIAN (LINEN HALL LIBRARY)

I selected participants based on their unique knowledge of institutional approaches to
archiving civil rights materials.
In keeping with the suggested practice for comparative case studies, I have limited
myself to four research sites. I have built a purposive sample of two archives in Northern
312
313

David M. Fetterman, Ethnography: Step by Step (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2010), 35.
Ibid.

92

Ireland and two in the American South, which has allowed me to explore civil rights
archiving within these two regions. Furthermore, four sites allowed me to analyze a
spectrum of repository types (e.g. governmental, community, independent, etc.) that
archive the civil rights movements. As mentioned in an earlier section, I have visited a
Derry community archive, The Museum of Free Derry: The National Civil Rights
Archive, and a Belfast independent archive, The Linen Hall Library. By visiting sites in
both Derry and Belfast, I have gained a clearer understanding of how the movement is
currently understood regionally as well as nationally. In the American South, I have
visited archives in Alabama and Mississippi—two Deep South states internationally
known as a battleground for 1960s civil rights. Collectively, these sites comprise a limited
yet representative sample of civil rights archiving in these regions from which to collect
and analyze the data needed to answer my research questions.
To investigate each site in its totality, I have drawn on some methods more
typically associated with ethnographic research. For instance, fieldwork has provided an
initial source of data collection, which I undertook by first gaining access to the
individuals and archival spaces fundamental to my research.314 During visits I relied on
traditional methods of field observation as identified by sociologist, John D. Brewer: “It
[field observation] involves data gathering by means of participation in the daily life of
informants in their natural setting: watching, observing and talking to them in order to
discover their interpretations, social meanings and activities.”315 While visiting research
sites, I observed the staff’s activities and interactions with users. I was sensitive to the

John D. Brewer, Ethnography (Philadelphia: Open University Press, 2000); Martyn Hammersley &
Paul Atkinson, Ethnography: Principles in Practice (New York: Routledge, 2007).
315 Brewer, Ethnography, 59.
314

93

privacy of archival users by not collecting any data that might lead to identification
without consent or otherwise prove obtrusive in any way.
My primary source of data collection, however, has been semi-structured
interviews. Since interviews have been in-depth and time intensive, I have only
interviewed archivists and institutional representatives relevant to this study. I spent 1 to 2
hours total with each participant, touring the facility and conducting 60- to 90-minute
interviews in either a long single session or in a few scattered sessions, depending on the
participant’s availability. I have used semi-structured interviews to balance the
naturalness of an open interview with the focus and efficiency of a structured interview.
As Brewer remarks, “semi-structured interviews may have some combination of the two,
with some closed questions in the form of a structured interview schedule recorded on the
schedule itself […], and other open questions written beforehand as guides and recorded
on tape or by notes.”316 Therefore, I have relied on some structured questions (e.g. How
long has your archive been in operation?) and themes to cover during the course of the
interview (e.g. collaborations, user groups, etc.). All interviews have been recorded on an
audio recorder for later analysis. I name all interviewees in the study since they have given
me explicit permission and speak in a professional capacity about their institution.
I have triangulated my interview and field observation data by collecting textual
data at each site. Textual data, according to Martyn Hammersley, are the documents and
artifacts […] that can illuminate the emerging focus of inquiry,” which encompass
relevant primary and secondary textual materials within analog and digital forms. 317
Textual data that I consulted during the course of my research includes institutional

316
317

Ibid., 63.
Martyn Hammersley, What is Qualitative Research? (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 58.

94

histories, museum-like artifacts such as rally posters and buttons, annual reports and other
records foundational to the archive and its mission, and various digital collections. I have
analyzed these materials for any information related to my research questions, as well as
textual data as a point of comparison with my fieldwork and interviews. The table below
provides a more detailed listing of some of the collections and materials that I consulted
during my research.

Table 1. Sources of Textual Data

Institution
Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute

Collections
1. Robert G. Corley Papers

Materials
1. Administrative and
exhibit records

Mississippi Department of
Archives and History

1. Sovereignty Commission
Online
2. Annual and Biannual
Reports

Linen Hall Library

1. NI Political Collection
2. Irish and Reference

Museum of Free Derry

1. Digitized galleries
2. N/A due to move to
new location
1. Richard Arrington
Papers

1. Digitized records of the
“state’s official counter
civil rights agency from
1956-1973”
2. Information related to
the MDAH’s founding
and administration
1. Archive of NI Civil
Rights Association
2. The Linen Hall Library
(institutional records)
1. Free Derry Corner, Civil
Rights, etc.

Birmingham Public
Library
Brown University

1. Brown-Tougaloo
Exchange Records

95

1. Materials about the
creation of BCRI
1. Materials related to the
Tougaloo-Brown
partnership

As previously mentioned, I analyzed all collected data using the constant
comparative method. This approach to data analysis, introduced by sociologist Barney
Glaser in 1965, has proven effective in a variety of information-specific studies.318 One
relatively recent study concerning high school information seeking, for instance, applied
the constant comparative method in a manner similar to my own: data analysis began
after the first observation and continued throughout the field work process, during which
time codes continually fluctuated as patterns and themes emerged.319 I noted a similar
fluctuation in my own coding and memoing, which became more targeted as my project
themes developed.
I standardized codes as specific themes became clear in later interviews. For
instance, I developed some codes with main and sub-categories such as “Human rightsLGBTQ” and “Collaborations-international.” In fact, the dissertation’s title, The Struggle
Continues, only surfaced after I noticed the phrase being used in multiple interviews and
data sources. Moreover, I used in vivo coding when a phrase uniquely captured an
important point about one of my research themes. Specific in vivo codes that I used while
encoding transcriptions include “the power of the moving image” and the evocative
phrases, “automatic empathy” and “we are history.” Aside from instances such as these,
all other codes drew on my own phrasing and were grounded in the data’s significant
Barney G. Glaser, “The Constant Comparative Method of Qualitative Analysis,” Social Problems 12.4
(Spring, 1965): 436-445.
319 Jin Soo Chung and Delia Neuman, “High School Students’ Information Seeking and Use for Class
Projects,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58, no. 10 (2007):
1503-1517. For other instances of constant comparative approaches to data analysis in information
science, see Sara Julibert, “Employee Attitudes to Information Sharing: A Case Study at the European
Central Bank, Records Management Journal 18, no. 3 (2008): 194-204; Ji-Hong Park, “The Effects of
Personalization on User Continuance in Social Networking Sites,” Information Processing and
Management 50 (2014): 462-475; Makiko Miwa and Noriko Kando, “A Naïve Ontology for Concepts of
Time and Space for Searching and Learning,” Information Research 11, no. 2 (January 2007): 380-389;
Isto Huvila, “In Web Search We Trust? Articulation of the Cognitive Authorities of Web Searching,”
Information Research 18, no. 1 (March, 2013).
318

96

themes and patterns. Along with codes, transcriptions also included frequent memos that
reflected on the data and served as pointers to emerging questions and points of
comparison between interviews. A memo from the transcription of an interview with
Adrian Kerr at the Museum of Free Derry, for instance, noted, “Problem with central
museum that tells ‘sanitised’ story. Is this problem with neutrality as well?”320
Since data analysis has been continuous, certain unexpected themes emerged
during the research process. Education, for instance, only became a central dissertation
theme after I encoded early interviews focusing on the educational dimensions of the
archive’s work. Interview coding both revealed education’s role within institutional
missions and provided a tool for comparing and contrasting each archive’s approach to
educating the public. Another example of an unexpected unifying thread among archives
was a recent emphasis on LGBTQ materials. The importance of documenting LGBTQ
issues emerged in my first interview and continued throughout, with—as the BCRI’s
Laura Anderson explained—LGBTQ rights providing an urgent instance of the need for
cultural heritage institutions to support human rights.321 While I expected educational and
LGBTQ issues to arise during data collection, I did not appreciate their significance until I
began coding the transcriptions.
My constant comparative approach to data analysis aided the reevaluation and
refinement of data collection. It clarified, for instance, which themes and questions to
focus on during interviews, as well as helped me formulate better follow-up questions in
future interviews. Moreover, the regular analysis of collected textual data from within
archival collections helped target subsequent research. Knowing what materials yielded
320

Adrian Kerr, Manager, Museum of Free Derry, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author, November 4,
2015.
321

97

helpful information at previous archives helped me to become more efficient with data
collection at later research sites. The Mississippi Department of Archives and History’s
annual reports, for instance, shaped my understanding of the archive’s inner workings and
became the first resource I searched for at subsequent research site. Prior to each site
visit, I sifted through the collected photographs and notes of previous research trips as a
way to refine my research strategy and become more efficient with data collection. Over
time, I learned to allocate enough time to analyze each site in its totality, which, in most
cases, meant walking the neighborhood as well as making observations in the reading
room.
As with any qualitative study, I was reflexive when collecting and analyzing my
data. I asked all participants to review interview transcriptions in order to check for
inaccuracies and biases on my part. Perhaps more importantly, I was willing to act on
these member checks and revise my study accordingly. I tried not to take participant
interviews as “valid in their own terms,” but rather as one perspective among many and,
therefore, a valuable but potentially factually inaccurate source of subjective information
and insights. In order to ensure that my study establishes rigor and trustworthiness, I rely
on thick descriptions that provide the context surrounding my observations and analysis.322
For instance, I describe relevant locational information concerning the archive and the
differing cultural references of participants. I also kept records of my memos, field notes,
interviews, and all other elements of my research, so that there will be an audit trail for
others to follow. Through these means, I hope to ensure that my study is of lasting value
and might encourage further research on these subjects.

322

Ibid., 126.

98

I also accounted for my personal background and cultural context throughout the
research process. Given that my understanding of the American South stems from lived
experience versus my academic interest in Northern Ireland, my interactions with the two
regions inevitably differed to some degree. I have lived in Birmingham and visited
Jackson, MS multiple times before the study, and accordingly felt comfortable navigating
both cities. By comparison, I had never visited Northern Ireland prior to my research and
had to familiarize myself with the cities of Belfast and Derry, as well as the research sites
themselves. My familiarity with the American South gave me a greater comfort level at
those sites, which might have affected how I conducted my interviews and field
observations. I also believe that my personal background affected how I processed the
exhibitions seen and stories heard at sites in the two regions. While the Museum of Free
Derry’s exhibits were universally powerful and moving, I was greatly affected seeing the
historical injustices in my home state. For instance, images of a Freedom Riders bus
burning in a town close to where I grew up were deeply disturbing on a personal level.
While I tried to remain objective in my research, my background undoubtedly had some
effect on how I viewed and approached research sites.
Furthermore, I was sensitive to ongoing political issues in Northern Ireland
throughout my research. The subpoenaed paramilitary oral histories of the Belfast Project
provide a well-known, recent instance of the legal and political pitfalls of academic
research in Northern Ireland.323 In the wake of the case, studies focusing on crimes and
For news articles on the most recent developments in the case, see: “Legal Action Against Suspect
in Jean McConville Murder to Go Ahead,” The Irish Times, last modified September 15, 2017,
https://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/legal-action-against-suspect-in-jean-mcconvillemurder-to-go-ahead-1.3222922 ; Alan Erwin, “Boston College Tapes: Winston Rea’s Interviews to be
Flown Back from US but Police Must not Examine Contents, Belfast Telegraph, last modified February
13, 2015, http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/boston-college-tapes-winstonreas-interviews-to-be-flown-back-from-us-but-police-must-not-examine-contents-30990328.html
323

99

controversial issues have had to make allowances for an understandable hesitancy to
participate in research projects in Northern Ireland.324 However, since I limited interviews
and field observations to record keeping professionals and their institutional environments,
I did not encounter any of the difficulties associated with studies concerning paramilitaries
in Northern Ireland or hate groups in the American South. Therefore, assurances of
anonymity were not necessary, given that my interview questions mostly concerned work
experiences as opposed to personal views. By acting in consultation with both colleagues
and the University of Pittsburgh’s Institutional Review Board (IRB), I worked to ensure a
safe experience for all those who participate and have done my best to allay any concerns.
As mentioned in the introduction, my qualitative training and varied educational
background both informed my undertaking of this type of ambitious, innovative research.
My dual training in Irish Studies and Information Science gave me a unique skill set
aligned with the demands of the study. Furthermore, as a native Southerner, I am familiar
with the area and its lingering racial tensions, which has enabled me both to navigate the
region and to draw on the contacts that I have in Birmingham and Jackson. I also
understand the complex historical and contemporary milieu of Northern Ireland, and yet,
as an outsider, am largely immune to any sectarian issues that might accompany a
researcher native to Northern Ireland. My Information Science training has taught me
how information circulates within power and counterpower networks; this course of study
has also provided me with a thorough understanding of archival practice and its role
within the community.

See Christine George, “Archives Beyond the Pale: Negotiating Legal and Ethical Entanglements
After the Belfast Project.” American Archivist 76 (Spring/Summer 2013): 47-67.
324

100

IV. “WITHOUT FEAR OR FAVOUR”: NEUTRALITY AND
THE LINEN HALL LIBRARY

At 10:00 on a Friday morning in 1796, the British military declared martial law in Belfast.
With “a troop of horse before [her] door,” Mrs. Martha McTier wrote a letter describing
the army’s arrest of the Society of United Irishmen’s leadership. She reports, “Haslett is
taken; Neilson and Russell have been walking the streets till about an hour ago, when, the
Library being broken open, and search being made for them, they delivered themselves up
[…] They are all now at the Library before the Marquis, Castlereagh, Westmeath, Bristow,
Banks, etc., and carriages, guards, etc., to take them off to Dublin.”325 The British had
good reason to search the library, as several of those arrested were its governors and the
soon to be executed Thomas Russell was its librarian.326 Although this hive of revolution
was and remains the Belfast Society for Promoting Knowledge it has more commonly
become known simply as the Linen Hall Library.
Located within the heart of central Belfast, the Linen Hall Library has endured
over two centuries of sectarianism and conflict. In this chapter, I will analyze how the
library has responded to continuing conflict throughout its history, focusing on its origins
in the 1798 rebellion before addressing the more recent history of the Troubles (19681998) and the post-Good Friday Agreement period from 1998 to the present. I argue that
the Library’s philosophy of “engaged neutrality” has been key to its success during the

“Letter from Mrs. Martha McTier to Dr. William Drennan, 16 September 1796” in The Decade of the
United Irishmen: Contemporary Accounts: 1791-1801, John Killen, ed. (Belfast: The Blackstaff Press,
1998), 83.
326 John Gray, “The Library that Almost Died: The Campaign to Save the Linen Hall Library,” Linen Hall
Review 1 no. 1 (Spring 1984): 8.
325

101

Troubles and post-conflict periods. To pinpoint the Library’s unique approach to
archiving, I draw on historian Pierre Nora’s well-known theorization of lieux de mémoire
(sites of memory).327 In so doing, I hope to show how “engaged neutrality” has helped the
Library become a site of balance, safety, and reconciliation.

IV. A. “Engaged Neutrality”

Recent scholarship tends to present neutrality and social justice as opposing archival
approaches to injustice. Some archivists believe it to be their professional and moral duty
to advocate for a social good, while others maintain archivists should never intentionally
adopt a political stance that might compromise the integrity of the archive. As I noted in
the literature review, the former approach has superseded the latter, with most scholarship
now affirming that archives are inescapably political by nature. In the case of the Linen
Hall Library, however, neutrality and social justice have become interwoven into what the
Library terms “engaged neutrality.” By remaining active but unaligned during the
Troubles, the Library collected and presented its materials in a balanced fashion. Its work
continued during the worst of the Troubles, undeterred by paramilitaries, security forces,
the Special Powers Act, and financial strain. Accordingly, the Library earned the trust of
a diverse range of individuals and organizations that patronized the institution with both
their presence and their materials. The “engaged neutrality” approach also shaped the
Library into a communal space sorely lacking in a Belfast long riven by war and political

Pierre Nora, “Preface to the English-Language Edition,” Realms of Memory, trans. Arthur
Goldhammer, vol. 1, Conflicts and Divisions (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), xviii.
327

102

divisions. Although borne of the Troubles, “engaged neutrality” grew organically out of
the institution’s longstanding commitment to openness and inclusivity, which continues to
inform its work in post-Good Friday Northern Ireland.
As the name implies, “engaged neutrality” does not denote silence or an abdication
of social responsibility but rather an attempt to create a safe space in an extremely
politicized environment—an act that requires commitment, maintenance, and negotiation.
The Library, of course, is not and never can be a de-politicized space but is rather what
Monica Cash, the Library’s deputy librarian, describes as a safe and judgment-free zone:
It’s a safe environment for people to come in and they’re not judged on their
politics. We have no judgment—if somebody wants to come in and research
controversial issues that they would have been involved in, we’re not judge or jury.
Our job as librarians is to provide the information […].
“Engaged neutrality” focuses on creating a space that can accommodate the spectrum of
Northern Ireland’s political views in a tolerant and balanced fashion. The Library does
not hide or deny the political connotations of its holdings, exhibits, and overall work but
rather strives to approach the conflict in a “neutral” or unbiased way.
In many respects, “engaged neutrality” is about breaking the silences caused by
decades of trauma, fear, and intimidation. As John Gray wrote regarding the Library’s
response to the 40th anniversary of both the beginning of the Troubles and the creation of
the NIPC, “silence is hardly an option in Northern Ireland.” Therefore, as Gray explains,
the Library must decide the most appropriate way to take part:
In doing so [marking the anniversary] we could be positive and focus on the Peace
Process, but to do that alone would be to side-step what has gone before. We could
cater for a new generation of young voyeurs who have never actually known ‘The
Troubles’, by exhibiting our most ghoulish relics, but that would be to evade any
attempt at understanding.328

328

John Gray, “A View from the Linen Hall,” Library Newsletter (Spring 2008): 2.

103

Ultimately, Gray argues that it is the responsibility of cultural institutions to make possible
a “climate of maximum openness,” which means not shying away from Northern Ireland’s
thorny history.
In practice, “engaged neutrality” entails actively seeking conflicting viewpoints.
Both the collections and the staff who develop them are disparate in backgrounds and
beliefs. As Cash relates, the Library’s ability to gather and make available a myriad of
contrasting political messages is foundational to the concept of “engaged neutrality”: “I
[Cash] always start off with a quote that came from one of my predecessors and it said that
in the Political Collection we have something to offend everybody.”329 Its collections
“cover all of the political spectrum” and its exhibits focus on a “shared history idea” that
complicates traditional, one-sided historical narratives.330 In a similar vein, the preface to
Troubled Images: Posters and Images of the Northern Ireland Conflict from the Linen
Hall Library, stresses that the Library’s neutrality is an engaged one, meaning that “we
[the authors], no less than the community in which we live and serve, have widely
differing opinions.”331 Political diversity in both staff and materials has helped create an
inclusive archival space within a community still rife with divisions.332
The Library is well known for its inclusiveness and uses cultural programing and
other forms of outreach to “promote that everybody is welcome to come through our [the
Library’s] doors.”333 Researchers in the NIPC may sit next to local students doing
homework or a casual visitor enjoying a book from the reading room’s open shelves. The
Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Ibid.
331 Yvonne Murphy, Allan Leonard, Gordon Gillespie, and Kris Brown, eds., Troubled Images: Posters
and Images of the Northern Ireland Conflict from the Linen Hall Library, Belfast (Belfast: Linen Hall
Library, 2001), 10.
332 Gender diversity in management positions, however, only arrived recently to the Linen Hall
Library, with its first female librarian and deputy librarian both being appointed in the last decade.
333 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
329
330

104

windows are often open on nice days, letting in sounds from the bustling Belfast City Hall
just across the street from the reading room. In other words, it is a spot whose welcome
extends to more than the serious researcher to include patrons of various ages,
backgrounds, and informational needs. This might be somewhat surprising given that the
Library is famously the last subscribing library in Ireland, but members and nonmembers
alike are welcome to access collections, view exhibits, browse the shelves, or visit with a
friend in the coffee shop.
Thanks in part to the Library’s connection with a broad spectrum of Belfast’s
organization and individuals, its collections have been built primarily through donations.
According to Cash, the librarian purchases materials much less frequently now and only
rarely attends auctions or purchases antiquarian items.334 Even though a dependence on
donations invites the possibility of unintended biases and gaps in the collection, the
Library’s politically diverse collection is a testament to its broad network of patrons.
Unsolicited donations have remained a constant, spanning the worst of the Troubles to
today’s post-conflict country: As Cash explains, “people are a lot more comfortable
donating their material now. As I said, years ago we would have gotten material from
paramilitary groups and people who wouldn’t have wanted to be known that they’d have
left material at the door. A bit dodgy like in the 1970s! [laughs]. You know parcels being
left!”335
As Northern Ireland continues the post-conflict transition, “engaged neutrality” has
positioned the Library to play a critical role within Belfast and Northern Ireland.
Nationally revered sites such as the Linen Hall Library offer continuity between the past

334
335

Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Ibid.

105

and present within the context of peacemaking—a critical role within post-conflict
nations. As Nora tells us, memory “fastens upon sites,” because that is where the past
becomes linked to the present. 336 Writing in celebration of the Library’s new extension in
2000, Nobel Laureate Seamus Heaney spoke of its vital role within Northern Ireland:
[…]the Linen Hall is not just a link with the past, though it is valuably and forever
cherished as that, but a threshold to the future. A threshold for all to cross. That
everybody is welcome in the building is one of the glories of the place and its
tradition. In our cultural and our historical understanding the very words ‘the
Linen Hall Library’ represent not just books, but better hopes for the way we live.
For a just, civilised and inclusive society.337
It is a sentiment echoed by Northern Ireland First Minister Arlene Foster in her comments
regarding the ‘Divided Society’ digitization project: “It [‘Divided Society’] shows there is
so much in our history that continues to impact on our present, but it can also provide
important lessons and insights to help shape our future.”338 In this respect, the Library
provides a unique instance of what Nora calls “a will to remember,” wherein national
veneration of the institution also helps reconcile the past and build a more peaceful
future.339

IV. B. Roots in the Rebellion
Despite the Library’s longstanding approach of “engaged neutrality,” centuries of conflict
and political division have shaped its present form. As shown in the opening anecdote, the
political ramifications of the Library’s work have long proven inescapable. “Engaged

Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 19.
Seamus Heaney, Linen Hall Library NEWSLETTER (Autumn/Winter 2000).
338 Linen Hall Library Facebook post, 2 September 2016.
339 Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 15.
336
337

106

neutrality” has provided a means for the institution to remain true to its social conscience
and guiding principles during periods of conflict. Furthermore, its core tenants of balance,
inclusivity, and community-building have remained constant throughout years of political
turbulence. The following historical sections will help to clarify how the Library’s
approach of “engaged neutrality” was born out of both the institution’s enlightenment
origins and its adaptation to centuries of political turmoil. The Library has had to weather
both the pull of politics and extensive periods of violence and destruction in order to keep
its doors open and serve the community. Its history has been one of navigating the
political in a practical and productive fashion, so that it could become the present
“threshold to the future” that Heaney describes.
In writing the History of the Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge,
Commonly Known as the Linen Hall Library in 1888, John Anderson points out how the
Library’s originating ideology was a product of the city’s political spirit at the time.340 The
“series of remarkable resolutions,” as Anderson describes them, “passed on the 27th
January, 1792, in favour of Catholic Emancipation, and extending the sympathy of the
Members to the revolutionary movement at the time exercising so powerful an influence
throughout Europe.”341 The resolution itself uses the kind of politically charged language
one might expect from governors arrested a few short years later as revolutionaries:
That Ireland can never deserve the name of a free State while a great majority of
her Inhabitants enjoy the rights of citizens in so partial a manner; while they are
totally Governed by the will of others; in a word, while they are unjustly excluded
from all share in the making and the administration of the laws under which they
live.342
John Anderson, History of the Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, commonly
known as the Linen Hall Library, chiefly taken from the minutes of the Society, and published in
connection with the centenary celebration in 1888 (Belfast: M’Caw, Stevenson and Orr, 1888).
341 Anderson, History of the Belfast Library, 18.
342 Qtd. in Anderson, History of the Belfast Library, 91-92.
340

107

The library society’s resolution exhibits both the political nature of the Linen Hall
Library’s formation and the “keen political excitement” occurring in Belfast at the time.
Like the United Irishmen, the Library’s ideological foundation stemmed from
revolutionary France and America. Enlightenment principles, such as unfettered thought
and equality, infused its original work. As explained by the Linen Hall Library’s presentday deputy librarian, “It [the Library’s reputation] really goes back to the Enlightenment
roots. An institution that really came about by the Enlightenment […] it’s always been a
place where writers have met, where free-thinkers have met.”343 Even though the Library
purchased books “on political and theological subjects”---and, as mentioned earlier, many
of its members and governors were themselves fomenting rebellion---the Society itself
chose to “prevent discussion of them in the society.”344 This curious decision might be
seen as a foreshadowing of its later reputation as a neutral space within a very political
city, wherein the radical politics of its governors might have otherwise precluded
moderate or even conservative points of view from being aired in meetings. It also might
have been born of political necessity, given the precariousness of the Library’s survival
post-rebellion. Whatever the cause, the resolution is indicative of both the power and
danger of the politically incendiary materials the Library housed.
The Library strove to remain apolitical following the traumatic British crackdown
on United Irishmen. As Cash relates, “after that [the hanging of librarian Thomas Russell]
politics was banned for a long time in the library. So the subject of books on politics

Monica Cash, Deputy Librarian of Linen Hall Library, interview with author, June 1, 2016, Linen
Hall Library, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
344 Qtd. in “History: A Radical Foundation 1788-1802,” Linen Hall Library, accessed June 18, 2016,
https://www.linenhall.com/pages/history.
343

108

would have been banned.”345 It was a pragmatic move, given the government’s draconian
response to anything resembling sedition. In describing the “collective amnesia” that
followed 1798, historian Peter Collins writes,
Even before the Rising, the ruthless, ‘Dragooning of Ulster’ by General Lake, a
whirlwind of arms seizures, hangings, pitch-cappings and other tortures, had
seared the collective psyche of many Presbyterians and others in the province.
This was so extensive that many who sympathized failed to turn out in 1798. In
the immediate aftermath of ’98, there was a collective recoil from the shock of the
disastrous events which, in only a few months, had led to some 30,000 deaths and
the maiming, gaoling and exile of many thousands more. Hardly a family in
certain areas in Ireland was left untouched.346
Undoubtedly, the Library’s known association with revolutionaries would have made it
particularly vulnerable to British forces policing the city. In this light, the Library
governors’ attempt to avoid any overt political materials or gestures was both an
understandable response to the trauma of the conflict and a pragmatic form of selfpreservation.
Despite the Library’s efforts to remain apolitical throughout much of the 19th
century, there is an indication that nationalists coopted the Library’s reputation for the
centenary of the 1798 rebellion. In 1892, the Library had to cede its first permanent home
beneath the clock tower of the White Linen Hall to the construction of the present-day city
hall in Belfast’s center. As Alice Milligan and Anna Johnston’s nationalist publication,
the Shan Van Vocht reported in 1896, workers tearing down the “Old Linen Hall”
discovered a “strongly worded declaration in favour of Ireland’s independence sealed up
in its foundation stone.”347 Milligan and Johnston would go on to note, “There is

Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Peter Collins, Who Fears to Speak of ’98?: Commemoration and the continuing impact of the United
Irishmen (Belfast: Ulster Historical Foundation, 2004), 3.
347 Alice Milligan, “Our Notebook,” The Shan Van Vocht: 1896-1899 (J.W. Boyd: Belfast, 1899) 1.2
(February 7, 1896): 34.
345
346

109

something solemn and almost eerie in the thought that the foundation stone of the building
held this strange prophetic warning of after times, when an attempt might be made to
encroach on the liberties of the country.”348 Real or imagined, the late nineteenth-century
conjuring of the Library’s rebellious history showed the impossibility of ever truly
exorcising its political origins.
The political coopting of symbolic places and people in Northern Ireland continued
into the late 20th century and beyond. Social anthropologist Elisabetta Viggiani observes
how physical memorials in Northern Ireland produce a “temporal continuum between past
and current phases of struggle.” 349 As she explains, both republican and loyalists
paramilitary groups drew on historical memory to validate their violent campaigns. The
loyalist paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), for instance, named itself after the
famous 1913 unit of the same name decimated at the Battle of Somme.350 Furthermore, as
historian Alvin Jackson explains, the “political melt-down of the 1970s and 1980s the
militants of 1912-14 were not merely rhetorical tropes, but important exemplars […]
[James] Craig and [Ian] Paisley resurrected the militants’ brinkmanship; the loyalist
paramilitaries [found inspiration in] the apocalypse of the Somme battlefield.”351 It was
during this period, euphemistically known as the Troubles, that historical memory would
help usher in an unparalleled period of violence and suffering in Northern Ireland.

Milligan, “Our Notebook,” 34.
Elisabetta Viggiani, Talking Stones: The Politics of Memorialization in Post-Conflict Northern Ireland
(Oxford: Bergahn, 2014), 75
350 Ibid., 129.
351 Alvin Jackson, “Militant opposition to Home Rule: the after-life” in From the United Irishmen to
twentieth-century Unionism: A Festschrift for A.T.Q. Stewart, edited by Sabine Wichert (Dublin: Four
Courts Press, 2004), 186.
348
349

110

IV. C. “Carrying on” during the Troubles

As a well-known institution in the heart of Belfast during the Troubles, the Linen Hall
Library once again found itself in the midst of conflict. It had to grapple with both the
paramilitary violence happening in the city center and political pressure from the British
government to shut down its Northern Ireland Political Collection. In annual reports from
1972 to 1977, Vitty describes both the physical toll taken on the structure and the
professionalism of the staff that kept the library operating. The following entry from a
1974 annual report provides a window into the Library at the time:
The Library was damaged on March 2nd when a bomb exploded in Fountain Street,
shattering all the windows and doors and many window frames on that side of the
building as well as some on the front […] Some glass was also broken by a bomb
in Wellington Place on 25th July. The debris caused by these bombs was quickly
cleared up by the Staff and my thanks are due once more to them for carrying on
the work of the Library during yet another troubled year.352
Given the Library’s vulnerability to bombings in the city center, Vitty ultimately decided
to store “rare and valuable Irish material” in the Public Record Office of Northern
Ireland.353 Library staff and patrons would spend years enduring collateral violence from
all sides of the conflict. The period would serve as a reminder to the Library of the
inescapability of conflict and politics in Northern Ireland.
The damage, of course, went beyond falling plaster and broken windows, as the
Library struggled to maintain some kind of normalcy amidst the armed conflict.
Beginning in 1972, book circulation begins to drop—particularly within fiction and
children’s books—which Vitty attributes to “the fear of many people of visiting the centre

352
353

Vitty, Report of the Governors-Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, 1974, 7.
Vitty, Report of the Governors-Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, 1975, 7.

111

of Belfast in the present situation.”354 In this respect, the library’s administration and staff
faced both the obvious fear of working under the constant threat of violence and the stress
of keeping the Library open and fiscally viable. In the 1975 report, the Library’s treasurer
notes, “[m]aintenance and repairs are also strictly watched and any job not urgent is being
delayed but this will have to be paid for some day. ‘Bomb Damage’ does not of course
come under this heading but is kept separate and claimed direct from the appropriate
authority.”355 The reports also show how the upheaval stretched staff thin during this
period, as a member had to be present at all times to examine visitors upon entering the
library. These additional duties, coupled with having to clean up debris and search the
building during bomb scares, placed the staff under a great deal of “nervous strain,” with
Vitty paying tribute to the “exemplary” work of library staff who were untiring in
“carrying on the business of the Library.”
A draconian governmental response to the violence added a political dimension to
the Library’s struggle, wherein it would have to navigate emergency measures counter to
its mission and mandate. Despite such external pressures, the Library never deviated from
“engaged neutrality,” but rather continued to document the conflict through its Northern
Ireland Political Collection. Following Ireland’s partition in 1921, the Unionist
government of Northern Ireland enacted legislation “to empower certain authorities of the
Government of Northern Ireland to take steps for preserving the peace and maintaining
order in Northern Ireland, and for purposes connected therewith.”356 The Civil Authorities
(Special Powers) Act provided special powers for “His Majesty’s forces” in regard to a
Vitty, Report of the Governors-Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, 1972, 7.
David Montgomery, Report of the Governors-Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge,
1972, 7.
356 Great Britain, Parliament, Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act (Northern Ireland), 1922, accessed
4 August 2016, http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/hmso/spa1922.htm
354
355

112

wide range of issues ranging from curfews and internment without trial to spreading
rumors and public assemblies. Section 23 provides an example of both the law’s reach and
byzantine language:
Any person authorized for the purpose by the civil authority, or any police
constable, or member of any of His Majesty’s forces on duty when the occasion for
the arrest arises, may arrest without warrant any person whose behavior is of such
a nature as to give reasonable grounds for suspecting that he has acted or is acting
or is about to act in a manner prejudicial to the preservation of the peace or
maintenance of order, or upon whom may be found any article, book, letter, or
other document, the possession of which gives ground for such a suspicion, or who
is suspected of having committed an offence against these regulations, or of being
in possession of any article or document which is being used or intended to be used
for any purpose or in any way prejudicial to the preservation of the peace or
maintenance of order, […]357
As the section suggests, the act—originally meant to last “for one year and no longer,
unless Parliament otherwise determines”—left much to the discretion of security forces
and, therefore, was open to misuse and abuse. Though meant to be a temporary measure,
the Special Powers Act would last more than five decades before its repeal in 1973.
The British military and Royal Ulster Constabulary used the Act as a tool against
the minority Catholic community. As Security Studies professor at King’s College, Peter
Neumann, points out, the Special Powers Act provided the “principal piece of legislation
under which the security forces operated,” and as such was too “abstract” to be useful in
the field.358 Neumann provides an example of the ambiguity of army declarations at the
time: “ ‘[W]e are not going to shoot at stone-throwers on sight, but the situation could
arise in which someone…in a crowd throwing stones…would face the risk of being
shot.”359 Failing to provide soldiers with clear guidelines, the Act led to instances of

Great Britain, Parliament, Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act (Northern Ireland), 1922
Peter Neumann, Britain’s Long War: British Strategy in the Northern Ireland Conflict 1969-98
(Gordonsville, GB: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003), 55.
359 Neumann, Britain’s Long War, 56.
357
358

113

excessive force against Catholics, wherein innocent people were killed. Accordingly, its
repeal became a core objective of the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA)
upon its formation in January 1967. A NICRA flyer summarizing the powers given to
authorities by the Act states, “It is clear that under the shadow of these powers normal
political life is impossible. That for nearly half a century they has [sic] been administered
by a sectarian police force sent their effect like a poison through the whole social
structure.”360
Even the Linen Hall Library’s collection of political ephemera ran afoul of a
Special Powers Act amendment prohibiting anyone “to print, publish, circulate, distribute,
sell or offer or expose for sale, or have in possession for purposes of publication,
circulation, distribution, or sale” materials advocating paramilitaries or other groups
undermining law and order.361 As Cash explains, “the Special Powers Act—part of it
prohibited you from collecting anything anti-state or pro-paramilitary and at that time it
looked like the Political Collection would have to close down because that was a lot of the
material in it.”362 Librarian, John Gray provides more detail in his reflection on the events
for the Library’s newsletter:
There was an occasion in 1971 when the police arrived at the Linen Hall Library
one morning and announced that they would be back in the afternoon to seize the
Northern Ireland Political Collection and to arrest the Librarian. The Library and
the Librarian were fortunate that the Linen Hall’s connections stretched from
producers of the suspect material to the top echelons of the Unionist government.
Suffice it to say that the promised afternoon raid did not take place, and the
Library ended up with a letter specifically permitting it to collect contentious
political material.363

NICRA, “The Special Powers Act,” Box 2, Folder 27, Northern Ireland Civil Rights Archive, Northern
Ireland Political Collection, Linen Hall Library.
361 Donohue, Regulating Northern Ireland, 1102.
362 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
363 John Gray, “A View from the Linen Hall,” Linen Hall Library NEWSLETTER, (November, 2005): 2.
360

114

As Gray’s quotation reveals, the Library’s unique network provided both the “contentious
political material” and the political clout to shield it from governmental attempts to end its
“engaged neutrality.” Its reputation as a trusted repository among political figures of all
stripes, coupled with its historical standing within the community, made this a truly unique
archival space within Northern Ireland.

IV.D. Pierre Nora and lieux de mémoire

From 1984 to 1992, French historian Pierre Nora directed a groundbreaking multi-volume
project entitled Les Lieux de mémoire (Realms of Memory). Under Nora’s guidance, the
project drew on the collective efforts of nearly 120 contributors to produce “a history of
France through memory.”364 Nora argued that modern France is living in a time of the
“acceleration of history,” wherein the past has become “irretrievable” and memory no
longer part of our lived experience. The opposition of “history” and “memory is central to
Nora’s work, with the former superseding the latter in modern society:
Memory is life, always embodied in living societies and as such in permanent
evolution […]. History, on the other hand, is the reconstruction, always
problematic and incomplete, of what is no longer. Memory is always a
phenomenon of the present, a bond tying us to the eternal present; history is a
representation of the past.365

Nora, “Preface to the English-Language Edition,” Realms of Memory, xviii.
Pierre Nora, “Between Memory and History: Les Lieux de Mémoire,” Representations 26 (Spring,
1989): 8.
364
365

115

Nora bemoans society’s willing disconnection from memory in favor of a cold, analytical
and contained history. In fact, Nora views history as a destructive force “whose true
mission is to demolish it [memory], to repress it [memory].”366
The traces of memory that remain can be found in what Nora calls lieux de
mémoire. He defines lieux de Mémoire as “any significant entity, whether material or
non-material in nature, which by dint of human will or the work of time has become a
symbolic element of the memorial heritage of any community.”367 Therefore, such
seemingly disparate things as France’s revolutionary calendar, the funeral of French poet
Paul Valéry, and the Archives Nationales all constitute lieux de mémoire. In the three
volume English translation of Nora’s work, he and his contributors explore selected
instances of a lieu de mémoire categorized by type: “conflicts and divisions,” “traditions,”
and “symbols.” In the preface to the final volume, Nora explains that every lieu de
mémoire “is symbolic by definition,” and can be further categorized as either “imposed”
or “constructed” symbols. While “official state symbols” provide the “purest” example of
the former, constructed symbols are instances where “unforeseen mechanisms,
combinations of circumstances, the passage of time, human effort, and history itself”
transform seemingly common things into "durable symbols of Frenchness.”368 Ultimately,
the concept of lieux de mémoire would itself become symbolic upon publication within
what he terms France’s “era of commemoration.”369
Long regarded as a seminal figure in memory studies, information scholars have
begun tapping into Nora’s work to understand and interpret the archive. Archival theorists
Ibid.
Nora, “Preface to the English-Language Edition,” Realms of Memory, xvii.
368 Nora, “Introduction,” Realms of Memory, vol. 3, X.
369 Pierre Nora, “The Era of Commemoration” Realms of Memory, trans. Arthur Goldhammer, vol. 3,
Symbols (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 614.
366
367

116

Eric Ketelaar and Terry Cook, for instance, both reference him in separate articles
discussing the interplay of memory and archival repositories, while Hermann Rumschöttel
refers to Nora in his article concerning the development of archival science as an academic
discipline.370 Additionally, Jeannette Bastian’s “Flowers for Homestead: A Case Study in
Archives and Collective Memory,” looks to Nora and memory studies pioneer, Maurice
Halbwachs, to analyze the relationship between collective memory and history.371 Such
archival interest in Nora is unsurprising given that his work often dwells specifically on
archives. He writes:
Modern memory is first of all archival. It relies entirely on the specificity of the
trace, the materiality of the vestige, the concreteness of the recording, the visibility
of the image […] The less memory is experienced from within, the greater its
need for external props and tangible reminders of that which no longer exists
except qua memory—hence the obsession with the archive that marks an age and
in which we attempt to preserve not only all of the past but all of the present as
well.372
Nora’s antipathy towards today’s archival impulse to collect everything mirrors the
concerns of many within the profession. Richard J. Cox’s “The End of Collecting:
Towards a New Purpose for Archival Appraisal,” for instance, concurs with Nora when
describing how archivists often engage in “a sort of feeding frenzy in collecting.”373
Nora does allow, however, that individual archives may be one of the “places,
sites, [or] causes” that constitute a lieu de mémoire. In fact, Nora directly references how
an archive is a purely material site that becomes a lieu de mémoire only if imagination
Terry Cook, “Evidence, Memory, Identity, and Community: Four Shifting Archival Paradigms,”
Archival Science 13 (2013): 95-120; Eric Ketelaar, “Archivistics Research Saving the Profession,” The
American Archivist 63, no.2 (Fall-Winter 2002): 322-340; Hermann Rumschöttel, “The Development of
Archival Science as a Scholarly Discipline,” Archival Science 1 (2001): 143-155.
371 Jeannette A. Bastian, “Flowers for Homestead: A Case Study in Archives and Collective Memory,”
The American Archivist 72, no. 1 (Spring-Summer 2009): 113-132.
372 Nora does acknowledge, however, that “older archivists knew that controlled destruction was the
trick of the trade.” Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 8-9.
373 Richard J. Cox, “The End of Collecting: Towards a New Purpose for Archival Appraisal,” Archival
Science 2 (2002): 293.
370

117

invests it with symbolic aura.”374 In other words, an archive serves as a lieu de mémoire
when it signifies to society something more than the sum of its materials. Such an archive
is paradoxically both the remains of an “affective and magical” age of memory and the
“clearest expression of the terrorism” that displaced it.375 Nora’s work, therefore, offers a
means for analyzing archives as symbolic sites as well as functioning institutions, and it
helps to clarify the archive’s complex relationship with its users and the general
community.

IV.E. Linen Hall Library: a lieu de mémoire

Nora’s lieu de mémoire thus provides a framework for interpreting the Linen Hall
Library’s overlapping practical and symbolic value to both Belfast, Northern Ireland and
the wider world. The Northern Ireland Political Collection [NIPC], in particular, provides
a unique and superlative window into the Library’s local and global significance. By
examining its political origins and continuing importance within post-conflict Northern
Ireland, I intend to show how the NIPC exemplifies “engaged neutrality” wherein, as Nora
describes, “memory is always a phenomenon of the present, a bond tying us to the eternal
present […].”376 Or, to put it in slightly different terms, I explore how the Library’s

Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 14.
Ibid., 8, 14.
376 Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 3.
374
375

118

approach goes beyond collecting the records of the past in order to document the “past
within the present” happening outside its door.377
My analysis begins in 1968, when librarian Jimmy Vitty went to a local pub to
have a lunchtime pint. While there, someone handed Vitty a civil rights leaflet. As Ms.
Cash recalls,
[H]e just thought that—he was going to throw away—a bit of ephemera, no use to
me—and he looked at it and he thought, well, there was a certain sense to this and
vibe in the city—well legend has it that he came back and he said to the rest of his
staff and he said that if you come across anything like or in a similar vein, we’ll
get a box together and we’ll throw the material into it.378
That box, of course, turned into the 350,000 items that now constitute the NIPC—“one of
the most important on-going collections in any Irish library today.”379 Perhaps most
important to the success of the burgeoning collection was that Vitty’s “box” welcomed
printed ephemera from all organizations regardless of their political views or ideologies.
As former librarian John Killen tells it in his history of the Library, Vitty “realized that
here was history in the making; and he was determined to collect all such material, from
all sources and all sides.”380 In this respect, the collection itself would exemplify the
Library’s own commitment to balance and neutrality within an extremely political
environment.
Vitty’s development of the NIPC became the stuff of legends, with the story often
told of library staff “actually climb[ing] over the barricades” to retrieve items for the
collection.381 While staff had to actively brave conflict zones to seek some materials, the
The full quotation comes from Nora’s explanation of “rememoration”, “a history that is interested
in memory not as remembrance but as the overall structure of the past within the present: history of
the second degree.” Nora, “Preface to the English-Language Edition,” xxiii.
378 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
379 John Killen, A History of the Linen Hall Library (Belfast: The Linen Hall Library, 1990), 227.
380 Killen, A History of the Linen Hall Library, 227.
381 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
377

119

record creators themselves—be they paramilitary, civic, or police groups—often droppedoff or otherwise donated the bulk of the collection. Over 14,000 books, pamphlets and
reports form the collection’s core, with an additional 75,000 items of ephemera,
paramilitary periodicals, political fiction, graphic material, press cuttings, and the archives
of various political parties and activist groups.382 Furthermore, the types of materials
within the collection are as varied as the political perspectives represented. For example,
Cash provides a description of the NIPC’s unique physical artifacts:
We have maps from the escape from the Maze [Long Kesh/Maze prison]383 and we
also have another map that was a loyalist escape that didn’t take place and, now
these are just examples, we would have combs—you know the communications
that came out from the prisons.384
These artifacts have been lent for exhibits in other cultural heritage institutions such as the
Ulster Museum, which has served as “a great advertisement” for the Library and its work.
In this instance, the sharing of NIPC artifacts serves both to strengthen the bonds between
local institutions and to act as a kind of outreach—raising public awareness of the
Library’s materials and work.
Particular collections within the NIPC, such as the Northern Ireland Civil Rights
Archives, are indicative of what might have been lost if Vitty and his staff had not chosen
to actively document the conflict. Covering the full period of the Northern Ireland Civil
Rights Association’s (NICRA) existence from its founding in the 1960s to its conclusion
in 1989, the archive consists of 31 boxes of ephemera, correspondence, photographs,
newspapers, and various other materials. Madge Davidson, a NICRA employee, donated
the sizeable archive, which includes a vast number of original documents. The
Visit the Linen Hall Library website for a much more detailed overview of the Northern Ireland
Political Collection holdings at https://www.linenhall.com/pages/ni-political-collection
383 A notorious prison during the Troubles that housed paramilitary prisoners.
384 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
382

120

correspondence portion of the collection provides a glimpse into the inner workings of the
organization while its publications, press releases, and newspaper pieces reveal its public
image and objectives. Publications such as “What is NICRA?” and “How to discredit the
Police-June 1969” are illustrative of the types of informational materials the organization
produced. Press releases and informational leaflets are particularly valuable given their
ephemeral nature and ability to provide a snapshot of the time. Such ephemera are
indicative of Vitty’s foresight when he plucked the civil rights leaflet from the pub and
began the NIPC.
The NIPC’s civil rights holdings are representative of the staff’s commitment to
developing, expanding, and even redefining the collection. As an “engaged” library, the
Linen Hall has had to evolve along with the community it supports. “Obviously,” as Cash
points out, civil rights didn’t stop when the civil rights organization stopped,” and the
Library continues to collect civil and human rights materials beyond the particular context
of the Northern Irish Troubles. Tantalizingly, even within the NICRA collection itself
there are files concerning Gay Rights and sexual discrimination, which is indicative of the
organization’s solidarity with other local and international human rights contexts.385 Cash
relates, for instance, how the Library collects records regarding the growing population of
immigrants within Belfast, as well as material about the discrimination that accompanied
their arrival.386 In this respect, the NIPC’s dynamism has taken the collection in directions
unforeseeable from its original vantage point of sectarian violence between Catholics and
Protestants.

According to the finding aid, Box 24 of the NICRA archive houses “Gay Rights material” and Box 21
holds materials concerning “Womens Issues-sex discrimination.”
386 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
385

121

As a site of both symbolic significance and practical relevance to the community
as a whole, a diverse range of patrons has drawn on the NIPC over the years. Historians
and other academics represent only one of its many categories of users, as evidenced by an
NIPC folder entitled, “A Selection of Quotations from leading academics, journalists,
politicians, personalities and churchmen in praise of Northern Ireland Political Collection
at Linen Hall Library.” Within the folder, public figures as oppositional as Sinn Féin’s
Gerry Adams and Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party come together to praise
the NIPC. Bishop Cahal B. Daly calls it a boon to the community, while James
Molyneux, M.P., Leader of the Ulster Unionist Party relates how those engaged in current
politics find the collection “of great benefit to our [politicians in Northern Ireland]
everyday activities.”387 Alongside its social and political value to society, others comment
on the edifying experience of visiting the NIPC on a personal level. For instance,
Reverend Eric Gallagher notes that it forces one to see all sides of the conflict from each
other’s perspective. Sam Duddy of the loyalist paramilitary group, Ulster Defense
Association, makes a similar observation when discussing “the meeting together—mostly
by chance—of people of totally different persuasions who come down to browse and end
up discussing the ongoing Ulster crisis.”388 The Library’s physical space, therefore,
mirrors its materials by creating opportunities to forge new connections—an important
first step away from insularity, division, and conflict.

James Molyneaux, “A Selection of Quotations from leading academics, journalists, politicians,
personalities and churchmen in praise of Northern Ireland Political Collection at Linen Hall Library,”
Northern Ireland Political Collection, Linen Hall Library.
388 Sam Duddy, “A Selection of Quotations from leading academics, journalists, politicians,
personalities and churchmen in praise of Northern Ireland Political Collection at Linen Hall Library,”
Northern Ireland Political Collection, Linen Hall Library.
387

122

As a lieu de mémoire, then, the influence of the Library and its NIPC has an
extensive reach. Alongside the politicians and public personalities, “you might get,” as
Cash relates, “a school group in or you might get a pensioner’s group in, [or] you might
get a group of international students who are on a study trip.”389 The unique historical
window offered by the NIPC resonates just as much, if not more, with everyday citizens.
It’s wide-ranging appeal and impact was on view at the 2001 “Troubled Images”
exhibition, which I will discuss in greater depth in a later section. Remarking on the
exhibit’s success, then librarian John Gray noted the presence of “many casual visitors”
alongside the relatives of “RUC widows, or relatives of Loyalist and Republican dead, or
of other victims of the Troubles” —a group that tragically spans a large cross-section of
both Belfast and the nation of Northern Ireland.390
Mirroring the country, the NIPC has undergone a fundamental change over the last
two decades. Beginning in the late 1990s, library administration began to emphasize
collecting conflict resolution material, as opposed to its originating focus on political
conflict itself. The move was prescient given that more patrons today, particularly
international visitors, come to learn about the peace process rather than the conflict
itself.391 As Cash observes, “It was always seen as the definitive archive of the Troubles
but it is now the definitive archive of the Troubles AND [speaker places emphasis] the
peace process.”392 Such sea changes are inherent to lieux de mémoire, which are nothing
if not dynamic and bound up in the quotidian present:
For although it is true that the fundamental purpose of a lieu de mémoire is to stop
time, to inhibit forgetting, to fix a state of things, to immortalize death, and to
Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
John Gray, “Introduction,” Linen Hall Library Newsletter (Winter 2001), 2.
391 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
392 Ibid.
389
390

123

materialize the immaterial […] it is also clear that lieu de mémoire thrive only
because of their capacity for change, their ability to resurrect old meanings and
generate new ones along with new and unforeseeable connections (that is what
makes them exciting).393
By remaining attuned to shifts in Northern Ireland’s political situation, the Library
therefore continues to foster connections between its political past, present, and future.
In addition, a second major instance of the NIPC’s “capacity for change” has only
recently begun. In 2014, the Heritage Lottery Fund awarded the Library 400,000 Euro to
digitize large portions of the NIPC. The project, entitled “‘Divided Society’: the Political
posters and periodicals of Northern Ireland 1966-2016,” will digitize over 6,000 political
posters and periodicals from the beginning of the Troubles to today’s post-conflict
Northern Ireland. The undertaking places particular emphasis on “the period between the
Downing Street Declaration and the signing of the Good Friday Agreement,” which was
when the peace process began to gain momentum and become a reality.394 Along with
making the collection more accessible, the Library also sees digitization as a means to
“help protect its more fragile items, ensuring all content is conserved indefinitely.”395 This
symbiosis between physical and digital objects parallels the Library’s own ability to
remain a venerated, fixed presence while acting as a fluid, agent of change.
Just as Nora’s lieux de mémoire is fundamentally collective and social, “Divided
Society” makes visible the bonds between the Library and its community. During the
project’s early stages, organizers sought out the city’s various populations to hear their
thoughts on its development:

Nora, “Between Memory and History,” Realms of Memory, 15
Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016
395 “HLF Announcement of grant for Linen Hall Library ‘Troubles’ history collection,” Linen Hall
Library, accessed August 30, 2016, https://www.linenhall.com/news/79.
393
394

124

we did a lot of focus groups and we went back to different community
organizations, I think about 12, so we went to organizations in North Belfast, West
Belfast, we covered the political spectrum. We engaged with—for instance I
think, up in Derry we spoke with a group of people, we also spoke to an Irish
language group, just to get everybody’s opinion and the one thing that did come
out: everybody was interested to know what was happening.396
Community input and participation continue to be vital to the project’s success. Part of its
funding goes towards exhibitions and outreach with “an intergenerational reminiscence
project asking members of local community groups to record their memories of significant
events during the ‘Troubles’ stimulated by material from NIPC.”397 The project launched
September 1, 2016 with the intent to provide “a different take on the subject of the
Troubles and illustrate how images and slogans were used by all sides to grab attention,
frighten, soothe, threaten, cajole and inform.”398
Along with presenting a balanced view of the conflict, the Project also has worked
to humanize the Troubles. As part of the “Divided Society” project, the Library hosted an
exhibit in August 2007 entitled, “We Lived It—the Social Impact of the Troubles.” The
exhibit drew on artifacts from the NIPC to provide insight into what daily life was like
during the Troubles. It includes such everyday items as key rings and t-shirts, as well as “
‘Troubles-themed artwork” and a satiric “Northern Ireland political chess set” composed
of caricatures of well-known figures.399 MP3 players complement the exhibit’s artifacts by
playing oral histories from “people from all walks of life in Northern Ireland relaying their
memories of difficult—and sometimes even humorous—time navigating through this very

Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Ibid.
398 “Northern Ireland History Digitistion Project Commences at the Linen Hall Library,” last modified
September 1, 2016, https://www.linenhall.com/news/194
399 “Linen Hall Launches New ‘Troubles’ Exhibition ‘We Lived It,” last modified August 7, 2017,
https://www.linenhall.com/news/236
396
397

125

abnormal situation.”400 Along with providing insight into people’s lives during the
conflict, the Project also hosted the “‘Divided Society’—Reminiscence” workshop, which
offered the community a chance to gather in the Library “to discuss the project, listen to
the oral archives and have an opportunity to put forward their own memories.”401 Both the
exhibit and workshop offered a therapeutic opportunity for the community as a whole to
gather and discuss their memories in an open and safe environment. In creating this
opportunity, the Library both fostered a measure of present-day reconciliation and helped
to preserve the story of the Troubles in all of its complexity.

IV. F. “Troubled Images”

An examination of the Library’s “Troubled Images” exhibit provides a specific instance of
“engaged neutrality” in practice, as well as highlights its potential to further social justice.
The exhibit, which focused on political posters within the NIPC, traveled beyond Belfast
to several international locations including past and present conflict zones. In librarian
John Gray’s opinion, the exhibit “has quite simply made the greatest impact of any Linen
Hall exhibition, whether measured by the constant flow of visitors, or by extensive media
coverage and well beyond these shores.”402 “Troubled Images” demonstrates how the
Linen Hall Library’s approach of “engaged neutrality” contributes both to the ongoing
reconciliation effort in Northern Ireland and the global project of helping those nations
transitioning from armed conflicts.
Ibid.
Ibid.
402 Gray, “Introduction,” Linen Hall Library Newsletter (Winter 2001), 2.
400
401

126

Opening in 2001 with funding in part from Proteus (a checkpoint for European
Union funding for Peace II initiative) and the United States Institute for Peace, the
exhibition featured seventy posters culled from the almost 3,500 posters and artifacts in
the collection. Beyond the exhibit itself, the project features the creation of a CD-ROM
that “collates the most significant, memorable, and most provocative posters and other
graphic images” from the exhibit, as well as the publication of a book featuring
photographs of selected posters with annotations and essays. Yvonne Murphy, Librarian
of the NIPC at the time, spearheaded both the exhibit and its global tour. Murphy’s
rationale behind the poster exhibit is grounded in the individual lives of those who made
them: “We were acutely aware that the earliest posters in the political collection were
nearly 40 years-old. It was important to tell the story of the posters, while those who
produced them were still alive.”403 Telling the story of the Troubles, as Murphy puts it,
relied on participation from each segment of society during the conflict. In the Belfast
News Letter’s coverage of the exhibition’s opening, Ms. Murphy relates how “[t]he
project would not have been possible without the assistance and support of individuals
right across the political spectrum.”404
The funding and support were critical to the exhibit’s success, especially given the
Library’s past financial hardships. While the NIPC evaded the Special Powers Act
mentioned in an earlier section, it has been less successful in dodging the economic
hardships within the country. By 1979, the library “had a crumbling and dangerous
building, underpaid staff, a literally dying membership, and a minimal budget which still

Qtd. in Kieran McDaid, “Historic Images Tell Story of Troubles,” Irish News (Belfast, Northern
Ireland), October 10, 2001.
404 Qtd. in Sinead McCavana, “A Trip Down a Troubled Memory Lane,” Belfast News Letter (Belfast,
Northern Ireland), October 10, 2001.
403

127

would not add up.”405 With the government threatening to remove the grant sustaining the
institution, the Library was only spared by a last-ditch effort, the “Save the Linen Hall”
campaign.406 Even though the Library found itself in a much better financial footing for the
next two decades, the NIPC in particular remained in the crosshairs of a turbulent
economy. In a 2004 newsletter, Gray writes,
These are difficult times for libraries. We struggle with our own bad news: we have
now had to close the Northern Ireland Political Collection reading room and while a
limited NIPC service will be available from the Irish and reference counter, there is no
escaping the fact that for the moment we have had to partially mothball a unique part
of our operation […] the damage is being done in an area that represents the Library’s
most serious purpose.407
Even though the NIPC would re-open on a part-time basis in April 2005, concerns over
funding remain, like with most cultural heritage institutions, a perennial worry.
At the time of the exhibit, however, the staff’s primary focus was balancing the
various political and organizational viewpoints within the exhibit itself. Ms. Cash recalls
the stress of hanging the exhibit so that posters were not juxtaposed in a fashion that could
inadvertently offend. She cites “Troubled Images” as an example of an “equally
balanced” exhibition:
So you have your orange [color associated with unionism and loyalism], your
green [color associated with nationalism and republicanism], your security forces,
your paramilitary groups, your neutral, your peace process, and there was a lot of
thought went into that, it wasn’t just random because you have to be so important
everybody is represented.408

405

Ibid.
“About Us: History,” Linen Hall Library, accessed September 4, 2016,
https://www.linenhall.com/pages/history.
407 John Gray, “View from the Linen Hall,” Linen Hall Library Newsletter (November 2004): 2.
408 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
406

128

For instance, a poster featuring a masked IRA gunman with the warning, “Whatever You
Say, Say Nothing,” might share wall space with a poster of Ian Paisley, fist raised before a
Union Jack flag, with the title “For God and Ulster.”
The press praised the exhibit for tackling the country’s most divisive historical
chapter in such a balanced fashion. As Kieran McDaid of Irish News reported on October
10, 2001, “[t]he 70 posters on display illustrate differing experiences since the beginning
of the troubles, and reflect all sides in the conflict.” Other Belfast news outlets similarly
complimented the exhibit, with the Belfast News Letter calling it “a unique exhibition.”
Perhaps most tellingly, the exhibit won the biannual Christopher Ewart-Biggs Literary
Prize—named for the British ambassador to Ireland who was murdered by the IRA in
1976. One of the prize’s objectives is “to recognize work that promotes and encourages
peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland.”409 Speaking on behalf of the other judges,
Professor Roy Carroll remarked, “Like the Library as a whole, this enterprise illuminates
the complex web of attitudes and allegiances governing Northern Ireland’s cultural and
political inheritance. There could be no more worthy recipient of a prize promoting peace
through understanding.”410
The exhibit’s long-term impact was global in reach. In 2002, the exhibit traveled
to San Sebastian in Basque country, another region riven by political violence. During the
visit, librarian John Gray visited the Basque equivalent of the NIPC and found similarities
and differences between both the conflicts and their political materials.411 Alongside the

“About the Prize,” Christopher Ewart-Biggs Memorial Prize, Accessed September 12, 2016,
http://www.ewartbiggsprize.org.uk/about-the-prize
410 Qtd. in Joanne Mace, “Prestigious award for Linen Hall,” Irish News (Belfast, Northern Ireland),
March 29, 2003.
411 For instance, Gray notes how the Basque posters “are more sophisticated and complex” than the
ones in Northern Ireland.
409

129

“extraordinary attention” the Basque press gave the exhibit, Gray notes that “[t]hose
newspapers which report our exhibition also report fresh killings and peace
demonstrations. Their peace process has broken down.” 412 In 2004, the president of the
Library also noted the overlap between the exhibit’s content and current political violence
when speaking at the exhibit’s opening in New York City. More specifically, he dwelled
on the similarities between the just-released Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse photographs from
the Iraq war and the horrific images broadcast from Northern Ireland in the past, adding,
“[m]aybe other places in the world can learn from our experience.”413 Before its return to
Northern Ireland, ‘Troubled Images’ would go to several more venues in the United
States, as well as conflict zones such as Lebanon and the West Bank.
Overall, the exhibit, like the Library from which it sprung, succeeded in multiple
respects. At the local level, it balanced the web of contentious perspectives on the
conflict, as well as physically brought together diverse groups of people to view their
shared history. At the global level, the exhibit’s international tour both educated others
about Northern Ireland’s political history and invited parallels and lessons for other
nations struggling to move beyond armed conflicts. In remarking on the success of the
exhibit, Gray dwells on how “parties and groups right across the political spectrum
broadly felt that what we had done in a potentially deeply controversial sphere was fair,
and this in a context where we had insisted on providing some critical commentary.” 414
He concludes with an observation that encapsulates the simplicity of how the Library

John Gray, Linen Hall Newsletter (August 2002), 3.
Sean O’Driscoll, “Iraqi Photos ‘Similar to Ulster Images,” Belfast Telegraph (Belfast, Northern
Ireland), May 24, 2004.
414 John Gray, “Introduction,” Linen Hall Library Newsletter (Winter 2001): 2.
412
413

130

shapes and supports its city and nation: “Some found the exhibition space a space in
which to talk, and to talk to others of very different backgrounds.”415

IV. G. Summary
The Library signifies interconnectedness both within the city itself and the world at large.
Writing in a 1984 issue of the Linen Hall Review, Gray observes, “We [the Linen Hall
Library] are therefore, by the very fact of our existence a bulwark against those who
would seek to impose on us, or on either community in the North, a tunnel vision view of
the world.”416 Rejecting cultural insularity, the Library has constructed its collections to
model a progressive Northern Ireland moving beyond sectarianism. Its symbolism as a
site of peace and reconciliation extends internationally, as conveyed in the words of the
United States Consul General Barbara Stephenson, on the first anniversary of the
September 11th terrorist attacks: “I am grateful on this difficult day to be here, in the Linen
Hall Library, among good people…I can think of no more comforting place to be on this
first anniversary than right here, in this healing space, where everyone feels safe.”417 More
recently, in the previously mentioned Arlene Foster commentary on “Divided Society”,
she mentioned how the digital project “is a useful reference point for others seeking to
create conditions to explore divisive issues through peaceful means and to promote

Ibid.
Gray, “View from the Linen Hall,” Linen Hall Review, 1 no. 4 (Winter 1984): 3.
417 Barbara Stephenson, “Extracts of remarks by United States Consul General, Barbara Stephenson,
launching ‘Headlines of History’ on 11th September, 2002, Linen Hall Library,” Linen Hall Library
Newsletter (November 2002): 2
415
416

131

reconciliation.”418 Through a willingness to engage the thorny political dimensions of
history, the Library serves as sanctuary and guide to both its own community and other
nations embroiled in conflicts past and present.
As an exemplar of the Library’s approach to archiving, the NIPC provides a point
of comparison to the institutions I discuss in subsequent chapters. One obvious way the
Library differs from other case studies is that its civil rights materials form part of a larger
collection that is best known for materials related to political violence and peacemaking.
The lack of a stand-alone civil rights collection differs from research sites in the American
South, wherein multiple collections coalesce around the issue of civil rights and often
serve as a focal point of the institution. The Linen Hall Library’s decision is entirely
understandable, given how the movement became subsumed into the tragic, decades-long
narrative of the Troubles. Even though civil rights falls under this “broad brush of
Northern Irish politics,” Ms. Cash points out that it remains well represented in the NIPC
in both volume and quality.419
There are also commonalities between the Library’s work and other archival
approaches to civil rights materials. While the policy of “engaged neutrality” is unique to
the Library, it springs from the same rationale as the Mississippi Department of Archives
and History’s (MDAH) active and balanced approached to archiving. As a governmental
institution, the MDAH engages political and social justice issues in as much as they fall
within its state mandate. The indexing and digitization of the Sovereignty Commission
records, which I will discuss in a later chapter, provides a well-known instance of the
crucial social and civic part it plays within the state. Moreover, NIPC exhibits such as
Linen Hall Library, Facebook post, September 2, 2016,
https://www.facebook.com/search/str/linen+hall+library/stories-keyword/stories-public
419 Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
418

132

“Troubled Images” share aspects of the advocacy work done at the Museum of Free Derry
and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. For instance, the BCRI’s 2015 exhibit, “A
Voteless People is a Hopeless People,” mirrors the timeliness of “Troubled Images,” in
that it drew on the archival materials of an Alabama voting rights pioneer “as a means of
examining the ongoing struggle for voting rights in the United States.”420
In the specific case of the Linen Hall Library, “engaged neutrality” has provided a
meaningful and productive way to engage Belfast’s diverse communities under the most
trying circumstances. The approach has allowed the Library to build a world-renowned
collection of politically fraught material in Northern Ireland’s ever-contentious political
landscape. “Engaged neutrality,” in its present form, developed as a natural outgrowth of
the enlightenment principles upon which the Library was founded. As far back as 1792,
the Society declared, “that civil and religious liberty is the birthright of every human
being”421—a radical declaration of equality at the time that continues to guide the Library
through the country’s tumultuous history. As evidenced by the growth of the NIPC and the
“Divided Society” digital project, the Library remains engaged in the social and political
issues of the day without “fear or favour.”

Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, “The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Presents ‘A Voteless
People is a Hopeless People: Alabama’s W.C. Patton and the Struggle for voting Rights’ June 16September 20,” accessed on December 12, 2016, https://birminghambusinessalliance.com/wpcontent/uploads/2015/03/pattonformat.pdf.
421 Qtd. in Anderson, History of the Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, Commonly
known as the Linen Hall Library, 91-92.
420

133

V. “A LIVING THING”: ACTIVISM AND THE MUSEUM OF FREE DERRY

Upon entering the Museum of Free Derry’s new facility, visitors soon encounter the
English forces of Sir Henry Dowcra marching from their base of operations along Loch
Foyle. It was here, that Dowcra discovered the ideal spot to begin a military colony
amidst the hostile Gaelic chieftains and tribes of Ulster. Writing of the first time he saw
Derry in 1600, Dowcra describes,
A place in the manner of an Iland comprehending within its 40 acres of ground,
wherein were the ruines of an old Abbay, of a bishopps house, of two churches,
and at one side of an old castle; the river Foyle encompassing it all at one side, and
a bogg, most comonlie wett, and not easily passable, except in two or three places,
dividing it from the maine land.422
That “bogg, most comonlie wett” rested below what would become Derry’s imposing city
walls a little over a decade later. The walls were built to protect the ruling protestant
community; the indigenous Irish community lived below the walls in the “Catholic
ghetto” later known as the Bogside. As historian and archaeologist Brian Lacey relates,
Derry/Londonderry in the early 18th century was “a colonial—indeed an ‘apartheid’—
society, governed either directly or indirectly by the Penal Laws which placed Catholics,
and to a lesser extent non-conforming (ie, non-Anglican) Protestants, under severe legal
pressures and discriminations.” 423 By the mid-19th century, however, enough Catholics

Qtd. in Arthur Gerald Geoghegan, “A Notice of the Early Settlement, in A.D. 1596, of the City of
Derry by the English, to Its Burning by Sir Cahir O’Doherty, in A.D. 1608,” The Journal of the Kilkenny
and South-East of Ireland Archaeological Society, 4, no. 2 (1863), 393.
423 Brian Lacey, Discover Derry (Dublin, The O’Brien Press, 1999), 39.
422

134

had moved to Derry to form a “clear but largely unenfranchised majority in the city”424—a
population still oppressed when the civil rights campaign began in the 1960s.
The period commonly accepted as the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland—
1964 to 1972—exists as just one chapter within the contentious and ongoing sectarian
struggle in the country. To understand the movement, one must grapple with both the
volumes of history before 1964 and the extensive, ever-unfolding epilogue to 1972.
Untangling the years between necessitates a visit to the Museum of Free Derry in
Glenfada Park, the Bogside area where British soldiers shot and killed four of Bloody
Sunday’s thirteen victims. I begin my analysis of the Museum by surveying its deep
historical roots, which were integral to the formation of Free Derry and remain everpresent even in a post-Good Friday Agreement Northern Ireland. I then go on to examine
how the Museum has repurposed archival materials for social justice through its
foundational Bloody Sunday campaign and its permanent and temporary exhibits. Field
research, an interview with the Museum’s director, Adrian Kerr, and numerous primary
and secondary sources inform my research. Michelle Caswell’s Archiving the
Unspeakable and Andrew Flinn’s work regarding community archives and activism also
shape my analysis.425 Caswell’s examination of how Cambodia’s Documentation Center
of Cambodia (DC-CAM) repurposed Khmer Rouge records for social justice provides a
point of comparison for my research, while Flinn’s analysis of community archives gives
me a theoretical understanding of the archive’s role within diverse types of people groups.
Ultimately, I hope to show how the Museum of Free Derry has worked to further social
Lacey, Discover Derry, 42.
Andrew Flinn, “Community Histories, Community Archives: Some Opportunities and Challenges,
Journal of the Society of Archivists, 28, no. 2 (October 2007): 151-176 and Michelle Caswell, Archiving
the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the Photographic Record in Cambodia (Madison, WI: University
of Wisconsin Press, 2014).
424
425

135

justice both within Derry and around the world through its active repurposing of archival
records.

V.A. The Bogside

According to Pauline Swords’s study of community archives in Northern Ireland, “in no
other region of the UK is the politicization of heritage and identity so consistently
manifest at both an individual and a community level.”426 Understanding why, in
Swords’s words, “Ireland’s communities have more impetus than most to define, redefine,
and celebrate their heritage and identities” necessitates a long look back to 1607 with the
defeat of Ireland’s chieftains and the opening of Ulster for extensive English colonization.
To facilitate its settlement, King James I had ordered the companies of London to develop
the conquered territories. As Sean McMahon’s A History of County Derry relates, “the
idea was that, as part of their [the London companies] patriotic duty, they should provide
enterprise capital for the development of a region that showed the greatest potential for
profit.”427 The actual planters who built and worked the plantations with London capital,
however, were from Scotland. Historian Tom Bartlett reminds us that Ulster plantations
were unique from others in Ireland due to “a very strong Scottish involvement […] with
just over half the main undertakers listed as being of Scottish origin.”428 The uniquely

Pauline Swords, “Politics, Heritage, and Identity: Northern Ireland’s Community Archives,” in
Archives and Archivists 2: Current Trends, New Voices, eds. Alisa C. Holland and Elizabeth Mullins
(Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2013), 112.
427 Sean McMahon, A History of County Derry (Dublin: Gill & Macmillan, 2004), 40.
428 Tom Bartlett, “Politics and Society, 1600-1800,” in Ulster since 1600: Politics, Economy, and Society,
eds. Liam Kennedy & Philip Ollerenshaw (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2013), 39.
426

136

Scottish character of the Ulster plantation would have repercussions from the 17th century
to present-day.
As Presbyterian dissenters, the Scotts brought with them a faith central to their
identity. Isolated on an island of English Anglican planters and native Irish Catholics, the
Ulster Scotts developed what historian A.T.Q. Stewart called a “siege mentality.”429 As
his groundbreaking examination of the historical roots and cycles of the Troubles reveals,
“Since the settlers of the new plantation were at great pains to distinguish themselves, in
religion and nationality if not in race from the Irish, they found themselves from the very
beginning in a state of siege which has continued in one form or another ever since.”430 In
truth, however, Stewart reminds us that the Scottish and Irish populations had an ancient
history of migration, exchange, and invasion, with some of the planters being the “direct
descendants of earlier Ulster invaders of Scotland.”431 Stewart’s work shows how both
historical and contemporary examinations of Northern Ireland should resist simple
classifications of native, Irish Catholics and colonizing Scottish Protestants.
Colonizing the province also entailed the building of the new city of Londonderry,
which was erected upon what remained of the Irish settlement of Derry—a name from the
Irish word for “a place of oaks.”432 The King gave Londonderry “4,000 acres on the
Donegal side of the river [Foyle],” wherein to develop the city. Its famous defensive walls
were built around the city in the early 17th century and by 1641, “Derry became the largest
town in the province and the showpiece with a population of 1,000.”433 McMahon goes on
A.T.Q. Stewart, The Narrow Ground: The Roots of Conflict in Ulster (London: Faber and Faber, 1989),
46.
430 Ibid.
431 Ibid., 34.
432 See, for instance, Geoghegan, “A Notice of the Early Settlement,” for more information on both the
etymology and ancient history of Derry.
433 McMahon, A History of County Derry, 43.
429

137

to describe Derry as “shaped like a crushed diamond [with] four gates at the ends of the
cross streets that intersected a square round the market house” with the Church of Ireland
cathedral of St Columb situated at the highest point to serve as the “ultimate sign of
London investment.”434 Its walls would protect Protestant refugees during Sir Phelim
O’Neill’s Irish rebellion in 1641 and keep King James II and his Catholic forces waiting
out in the rain during the 1688 Siege of Derry—a victory that lives on in Protestant
collective memory through their annual march around the walls to commemorate the
“Apprentice Boys” shutting of the city’s gates.
The “weak point in the city’s defences,” as Stewart points out, was always the
Bogside.435 From this Catholic section of the city just outside of the walls, any Irish force
could launch an attack. In this respect, Stewart argues, the Protestants within were always
under siege from the Catholics without. This made Derry unique in that it was unlike
Belfast where “the Irish were eventually permitted to enter the city because they were at
first a tiny minority in a Protestant hinterland, in Derry they were kept out just because the
city dwellers were a minority in a predominantly Catholic population.”436 While the
situation had a profound psychological effect on the planters within, life outside the walls
had its own host of threats and deprivations. Bartlett writes of the toll taken upon the
vulnerable population after failed Irish uprisings:
As with the wars of the 1640s, Catholics everywhere in Ireland were the principal
losers in the conflict […] New and stringent Penal Laws were enacted against
those who remained. The Catholics of Ulster, already the least prosperous on the
island, were completely cast down after 1690 […] It would be many decades
before Catholics would exhibit signs of progress, or assertiveness. In the

Ibid.
Stewart, The Narrow Ground, 58.
436 Ibid.
434
435

138

meantime, Catholics avoided drawing attention to themselves, shunned
controversy, and brooded over the wrongs inflicted upon them.437
Even though the Catholic Relief Acts of 1778 and 1791 eased penal legislation and
allowed Catholics back into public life to some degree, economic hardships remained.
Centuries later, the Catholic population in Ulster remained an underclass with the
Bogside, in particular, continuously mired in poverty and lack of opportunity. An 1833
Poor Law Commission Report describes conditions in the community:
The lanes and streets are filled with filth; there are no sewers; no attention is paid
to the ventilation of the houses, and the poor are obliged to buy even the water
which they drink; […] many perish and those who survive are, in many instances,
so debilitated as to become sickly and infirm at an early period of life.438
In this respect, life outside the walls was synonymous with squalor, poverty, illness, and
exploitation—a situation that would continue and be exacerbated by the partition of
Ireland. In the years following partition, Derry underwent an extended period of “rapidly
accelerating underdevelopment,” most acutely felt within the Bogside.439 Poverty, blatant
housing discrimination, and other grievances contributed to the violence that returned to
the surface in the 1960s. In the eyes of Stewart and other historians, the Troubles were
part of a “far older war” re-erupting from centuries of pressure on both of Derry’s
populations: “So the Bogside became Protestant Derry’s bad dream […] Beneath the
maze of streets the subterranean fire eternally smouldered, because the course of Irish
history never created the circumstances in which it could die out.”440 1969 would be the
date that those fires became visible around the world in a shocking incident with profound
effects for both Derry and Northern Ireland.
Bartlett, Politics and Society 1600-1800, 39.
Qtd. in McMahon, A History of County Derry, 79.
439 Russell Stettler, The Battle of the Bogside: The Politics of Violence in Northern Ireland (London:
Sheed and Ward, 1970), 9.
440 Stewart, The Narrow Ground, 59.
437
438

139

V.B. The Battle of the Bogside and the Creation of Free Derry

A community, according to Andrew Flinn is “a group who define themselves on the basis
of locality, culture, faith, background, or other shared identity or interest.”441 The
Catholic/Nationalist population of Derry—located predominantly in the Bogside,
Creggan, and Brandywell neighborhoods—has long been a coherent community joined by
each of Flinn’s criteria. The 20th century story of that community is intertwined with that
of Northern Ireland’s civil rights struggle. The movement came to maturity in Derry due
to the city’s flagrant discrimination against Catholics, and it was within Derry that the
world first caught a glimpse of the escalating violence in Northern Ireland. Even though
67 percent of Derry’s population was Catholic, gerrymandering kept the Protestant power
structures in place, allowing for discrimination in housing, employment, and voting.
More assertive and better educated than previous generations of Derry Catholics, its
citizens began to demand recognition of their rights to housing and representation. The
first stirrings had begun in Dungannon in 1963 with the work of Dr. Conn McClusky and
his wife Patricia. Noting the correlation between the poor health of patients and their
inadequate housing, the McCluskys founded the Campaign for Social Justice in Northern
Ireland (CSJ) and began keeping statistics of discrimination. As civil rights campaigner,
Austin Currie, would later right, “By recording statistics such as this, the McCluskeys

441

Flinn, “Community Histories, Community Archives,” 153.

140

became the parents of the civil rights struggle in Northern Ireland; John Hume and I, and
the other civil rights leaders, were their children.”442
Inspired by Martin Luther King’s march from Selma to Montgomery, a civil rights
group called the People’s Democracy led a march from Belfast to Derry in January, 1969.
According to Munck, the People’s Democracy “played a crucial role in radicalizing the
civil rights movement but also shared much of its ideology,” as opposed to the republicans
and communists.443 The arduous march underwent three days and 70 miles of assault by
loyalists and security forces before arriving at Burntollet bridge with a police escort.
Russel Stettler’s 1969 The Battle of the Bogside offers a description of the violence
awaiting them:
The attackers [Paisleyites and security forces] carried heavy clubs and planks with
protruding nails. Some threw huge rocks down from the hilltop. They completely
disrupted the march, which was unarmed and outnumbered, pursued the marchers
long distances, threw some into a nearby stream, and left others lying injured in the
fields. Throughout the attack, the police either stayed in their tenders […] stood
by and watched, or actively joined in the attack. 444
The brutality sparked outrage in the Bogside, leading to rioting and the erection of
barricades.
The area behind the barricades became known as Free Derry—a name inspired
from the Berkeley sit-in protests and immortalized on a gable wall at the corner of Lecky
Road and Fahan Street. Political activist, Paddy ‘Bogside’ Doherty, explains Free Derry’s
geographical boundaries:
Free Derry encompassed the Bogside, the sprawling Creggan housing estate, the
more compact Brandywell and a small middle-class area. The territory held by the
Austin Currie, “Civil Rights Movement,” in John Hume: Irish Peacemaker, eds. Seán Farren and Denis
Haughey (Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2016), 59.
443 Ronnie Munck, “The Making of the Troubles in Northern Ireland,” Journal of Contemporary History
27.2 (Apr., 1992), 218.
444 Stettler, The Battle of the Bogside, 47
442

141

rebels roughly corresponded to the South Ward, which had been set up by the
Unionist administration to contain the Catholic population of the city. The newly
liberated territory measured 888 acres and two roods, or roughly one and a half
square miles. By gerrymandering the city for over half a century, the Unionist had
inadvertently created an Achilles heel for themselves.445
Free Derry operated outside of security forces and even broadcasted its own radio station
from the Rossville Street Flats. In so doing it created what cultural and media theorists
Tom Herron and John Lynch describe as “self-generated structures of communication and
new networks of information” that flowed free of Northern Irish power structures.446 Free
Derry’s political autonomy made it both an embarrassment and a danger to the state.
Riots, marches, and civil rights sit-ins had become commonplace through the
summer of 1969, and the city seemed ripe for conflict by the time the Apprentice Boys
march arrived in August. Every 12th of August the Apprentice Boys of Derry have
marched the city’s walls to commemorate the Protestant victory over the besieging
Catholic forces. Although the march was initially friendly between the two populations of
Derry, it had become by 1969 what the critic Conor Cruise O’Brien termed an “annual
triumphal circuit,” wherein participants “toss pennies down from the walls into the
poverty of Derry’s great Bogside ghetto.”447 Resentful of the sectarian march and the
government that allowed it to go forward, Bogsiders began throwing stones. The police
responded with a baton charge and what became known as the “Battle of the Bogside”
commenced.
Bogsiders threw petrol bombs at the RUC, which eventually led police to push
through the make shift barriers and position themselves for an assault on Free Derry.
Qtd. in Tom Herron and John Lynch, After Bloody Sunday: Ethics, Representation, Justice (Cork: Cork
University Press, 2007), 18.
446 Herron and Lynch drew on Hakim Bey’s The Temporary Autonomous Zone here to discuss the
nature of Free Derry. Herron and Lynch, After Bloody Sunday, 18.
447 Conor Cruise O’Brien, “Holy War,” The New York Review of Books, November 6, 1969, 12.
445

142

Stettler relates how “a cruel stalemate persisted,” wherein the RUC now had one hundred
casualties and lacked the manpower to continue engaging the Bogsiders. In lieu of
reinforcements, the RUC obtained approval to fire CS gas (tear gas) into the Bogside. The
gas blanketed the Bogside with around 200 cartridges fired throughout the night on the
12th.448 As the next day unfolded, Bogsiders readied “bathtubs full of petrol” for bomb
making, along with “other defensive implements of ingenious design […] from simple
wooden planks studded with nails to lacerate tyres of invading vehicles to ‘spiders’, two
foot-six inch steel cylinders with steel spikes welded to the sides.”449 Civil rights and
republican demonstrators, along with some armed IRA members, marched on police
stations around the country to keep reinforcements from joining the battle.
The barricades would stay up until their eventual replacement by a symbolic white
line, and, for the moment at least, Free Derry celebrated with a Freedom Fleadh (Irish for
festival). Although the battle had ended, those in the Bogside still had to contend with the
lingering effects of CS gas. Many flats were now uninhabitable and those with preexisting conditions such as asthma and chronic bronchitis were particularly vulnerable to
ongoing complications from exposure.450 The Himsworth Report on the effects of CS gas
on the Bogside categorically denied any long-term effects. Stettler’s study, however,
challenges those findings, citing issues with methodology and rigor. As he laments,
“[u]nhappily, the Himsworth Report is likely to be remembered in Northern Ireland as
simply one more in a long line of official reports hastily produced and indifferent to the

1,147 canisters would be fired into the Bogside before the conflict concluded
Stettler, Battle of the Bogside, 90.
450 Ibid., 134-156.
448
449

143

views of the minority population.”451 Stettler’s words were prescient given the injustice to
follow Bloody Sunday only a couple of years later.

V.C. Bloody Sunday and its Aftermath

Though the Bogside community has slowly been shaped by centuries of conflict and
political turmoil, its most traumatic and impactful event happened in a manner of minutes.
The Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA) march that began on January 30,
1972 was a non-violent expression of resistance, protesting interment without trial and the
Special Powers Act generally.452 Internment without trial was a particularly egregious
affront to Catholics wherein security forces had taken hundreds of people from their
homes and locked them in prison camps for indeterminate periods. The march began in
the mid-afternoon with accounts varying widely of the number of participants; the
Widgery report states there were 3,000 to 5,000 marching while others put the numbers
much higher. Among those participating and scheduled to speak at the Free Derry rally at
march’s end were well known and respected figures such as Lord Fenner Brockway,
Presbyterian minister Terence McGaughey and Bernadette Devlin, MP for Mid-Ulster.
Although originally planned to proceed through Guildhall Square, the symbolic seat of
Protestant power, organizers opted to limit the march to the Creggan and Bogside
communities before terminating at Free Derry Corner. While most marchers followed the
organizers’ instruction to turn right at Rossville Street to proceed to the meeting, some

451
452

Ibid., 142.
See the Linen Hall chapter for more information on the Special Powers Act.

144

continued along William Street to the British barricade and began pelting British soldiers
with stones, bottles, and insults. The soldiers responded with rubber bullets and gas in a
typical response to rioting in the city.
Soon, however, the British soldiers began firing live rounds. The first shots,
which wounded Damien Donaghy and John Johnston, were fired away from the rioting at
the barricade and the meeting at Free Derry corner. Shortly after that the 1st Battalion
Parachute Regiment were ordered to begin arresting the rioters on William Street. As
things seemed to be quieting down with the majority of people moving towards the
meeting, paratroopers rushed into Rossville Street and began shooting into the crowd. The
assault lasted approximately 30 minutes, leaving 13 dead and 14 wounded (Johnston
would die in June raising the number of fatalities to 14). Victims ranged in age from 15 to
59 and were all from the local Bogside and Creggan area. No soldiers were injured in the
assault, which had primarily taken place in the area around Rossville Flats and Glenfada
Park—the future site of the Museum of Free Derry. Although the paratroopers claimed to
be responding to a sustained assault by firearms and nail-bombs, no guns or bombs were
ever found in the area of the shootings. Furthermore, no eyewitnesses, including an Italian
journalist and Lord Brockway, saw any of the victims using a weapon of any kind. Shock
and disbelief settled on the community as people struggled to comprehend why this had
happened.
The British Home Secretary and Ministry of Defense both issued statements
defending the soldiers’ actions as only targeting active gunmen and bombers. The British
Prime Minister appointed Lord Widgery to begin a formal inquiry into what happened.
Meanwhile, the island of Ireland mourned with prayer services and marches as many of

145

the dead were buried. In Dublin, 100,000 people marched on the British embassy, which
would lie in ashes by nightfall. Widgery held most of his inquiry in Coleraine, County
Derry (not Londonderry itself for “reasons of security and convenience”) with a few later
sessions taking place at the Royal Courts of Justice in London. The inquiry ran from the
21st of February to the 20th of March, entailing 20 sessions and 114 witnesses. Widgery
submitted his report to the Home Secretary on the 10th of April and the Report of the
Tribunal appointed to inquire into the events on Sunday, 30th January 1972, which led to
loss of life in connection with the procession in Londonderry on that day (or, as is
commonly known, the Widgery Report) was published a little more than a week later. His
“Summary of Conclusions” begins by first blaming the civil rights march itself for the
violence that day: “1. There would have been no deaths in Londonderry on 30 January if
those who organised the illegal march had not thereby created a highly dangerous situation
in which a clash between demonstrators and the security forces was almost inevitable.”453
Despite some concessions as to the military’s misjudgments and errors, Widgery
finds overwhelmingly in favor of the soldiers. His final summations shift the culpability
from the soldiers to the victims:
10. None of the deceased or wounded is proved to have been shot whilst handling
a firearm or bomb. Some are wholly acquitted of complicity in such action; but
there is a strong suspicion that some others had been firing weapons or handling
bombs in the course of the afternoon and that yet others had been closely
supporting them.
11. There was no general breakdown in discipline. For the most part the soldiers
acted as they did because they thought their orders required it […]454

The Rt. Hon. Lord Widgery, Report of the Tribunal appointed to inquire into the events on Sunday,
30th January 1972, which led to loss of life in connection with the procession in Londonderry on that
day, H.L. 101, H.C. 220 (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1972), accessed 25 October 2016,
<http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/hmso/widgery.htm>
454 Ibid.
453

146

These statements encapsulate Widgery’s approach to the truth, wherein his conclusions
were, in his words, “gradually built up over many days of listening to evidence and
watching the demeanour of witnesses under cross-examination”—an approach that
unsurprisingly privileged the paratroopers over those whom he already had a “strong
suspicion” had fired first on the soldiers.
McCann and others have suggested that Widgery’s report might be more than the
result of an intended or unintended bias. As he concludes in a chapter entitled,
“Whitewash:”
The inconsistencies, illogicalities and untruths in the report cannot be attributed to
the inability to discover and tell the truth. The distance between the report and
reality yawns far to widely for that. It is a politically-motivated unwillingness to
tell the truth, not an inability to see the truth, which explains the Widgery
Report.455
According to McCann, Widgery at times discounted the testimony of eyewitnesses and
ignored occurrences that did not exonerate the paratroopers among other inconsistencies.
Evidence suggesting an intentional government cover-up was unearthed in a Public
Records Office of Northern Ireland document, in which the Prime Minister, Edward
Heath, tells Widgery before the inquiry to remember “that we were in Northern Ireland
fighting not just a military war but a propaganda war.”456 It would be decades before the
truth of what occurred on Bloody Sunday would become widely known and
acknowledged.

V.D. The Fight for Justice
McCann, Bloody Sunday in Derry, 129.
Qtd. in Cillian McGrattan, Memory, Politics and Identity: Haunted by History (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2012), 74.
455
456

147

In playwright and Derry native, Brian Friel’s 1974 play about the dual injustices of
Bloody Sunday and the Widgery Report, the main characters are shot for no greater crime
than occupying the Guildhall—a testament to its symbolic significance in the city. 457 It
was, therefore, a powerful moment on June 15, 2010 when a surreptitious thumbs up from
a Guildhall window signaled to the crowd below that the new twelve-year inquiry into
Bloody Sunday had finally brought vindication and a measure of justice to the Bogside.
The road to that day’s Guildhall reading of the Saville Inquiry into Bloody Sunday was
both long and uncertain. Spearheaded by the families of victims, the formal campaign
began belatedly in 1989 with the creation of the Bloody Sunday Initiative (BSI), which, in
the words of campaigner Tony Doherty, formed “to focus national and international
attention on Bloody Sunday as a justice issue.”458
The Bloody Sunday Justice Campaign (BSJC) later superseded the Initiative in
1992, predicating itself on three core demands:459 “the repudiation of Widgery and
institution of a new inquiry; a formal acknowledgement of the innocence of all the
victims; and the prosecution of those responsible for the deaths and injuries”460 Journalist
and Bloody Sunday Trust member Julieann Campbell’s history of the BSJC clarifies that
the group had no alternative political agenda outside its stated objectives—a critical
assertion given the potential for the campaign to be dismissed as a nationalist exercise.461

Brian Friel, The Freedom of the City (London: Faber, 1974). Thomas Kinsella’s direct response to
Widgery in his poem, “Butcher’s Dozen: A Lesson for the Octave of Widgery” provides another well
known example of an artist grappling with Bloody Sunday.
458 Julieann Campbell, Setting the Truth Free: The Inside Story of the Bloody Sunday Justice Campaign
(Dublin: Liberties Press, 2012), 31.
459 The BSI would continue with a focus on human rights in general and would later be renamed the
Pat Finucane Centre for Human Rights and Social Change.
460 Campbell, Setting the Truth Free, 39.
461
Ibid.
457

148

The voices of those involved in the more than twenty-year campaign are front and center
in Campbell’s book, providing a glimpse into the sacrifice and determination of a truly
grass roots effort for justice. Even though the families at the heart of the BSJC often
disagreed and clashed behind the scenes, they publically presented a united front that very
slowly grew support from the political establishment of Ireland and, much later, the
United Kingdom.
Thanks in large part to the BSJC’s tireless advocacy, Tony Blair announced to
parliament the establishment of a new inquiry into Bloody Sunday in 1996. “Bloody
Sunday was a tragic day for all concerned,” he stated, “Our concern now is simply to
establish the truth, and close this painful chapter once and for all.”462 English Law Lord,
Mark Saville, would chair the inquiry composed of himself and justices Hoyt and Toohey
of Canada and Australia respectively. Even though the inquiry would be held in the
Guildhall in Derry, the soldiers won an appeal to testify anonymously in England due to
the danger of paramilitary retribution. During the course of the inquiry, over 900
witnesses gave evidence, including soldiers, government officials, journalists, police
officers, and civilians. The inquiry would take 12 years from its announcement to the
publication of its findings, the longest inquiry in British history at a cost of 195 million.
Despite the stir created by its unforeseen length and gargantuan cost, the inquiry’s
significance cannot be overstated. For the families, it was vindication after decades of
loss and struggle to overturn a great injustice against their loved ones. For Derry and
Northern Ireland, it was a necessary step towards paving the way for the peace process.
Campbell observes that the “prospect of a new inquiry had regularly featured in the talks
“Statement by Tony Blair, then British Prime Minister, made to the House of Commons, establishing
a new Inquiry into ‘Bloody Sunday’, (Thursday 29 January 1998),” accessed November 16, 2016,
<http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/bsunday/tb29198.htm>
462

149

which were to go ahead to the Good Friday Agreement. It was evident, particularly to the
nationalist population, that action on Bloody Sunday was necessary to facilitate a
successful and lasting peace process.”463 The Saville Report also had its shortcoming,
such as its inexplicably finding that Gerald Donaghey did, “in all probability,” have nail
bombs on his person even if he posed no threat to British forces. Donaghey’s qualified
innocence was a blow to both his family and the campaign. Despite its shortcomings,
however, the report represents a victory for the people of Derry the historical record will
now show, in Prime Minister David Cameron’s words, that the soldiers’ actions were
“unjustified and unjustifiable:”
The firing by soldiers of 1 PARA on Bloody Sunday caused the deaths of 13
people and injury to a similar number, none of whom was posing a threat of
causing death or serious injury. What happened on Bloody Sunday strengthened
the Provisional IRA, increased nationalist resentment and hostility towards the
Army and exacerbated the violent conflict of the years that followed. Bloody
Sunday was a tragedy for the bereaved and the wounded, and a catastrophe for the
people of Northern Ireland.464
On June 15, 2010, the families of the Bloody Sunday victims literally and figuratively tore
up the Widgery report forever.

V.E. The Bogside’s Museum

Saville’s findings were a public confirmation of the Bloody Sunday story that the BSJC
had been telling for years via its Museum of Free Derry. After the Saville Inquiry,

Campbell, Setting the Truth Free, 135.
The Rt Hon Lord Saville of Newdigate, The Hon William Hoyt OC, The Hon John Toohey AC,
Principle Conclusions and Overall Assessment of the Bloody Sunday Inquiry (London: The Stationery
Office, 2010), 58.
463
464

150

however, the Museum’s version of Bloody Sunday had shifted from what Aleida Assmann
terms “counter-memory” to “normative memory.”465 As Assmann explains, “In the
transition process, the repressed voices of the victims move from oblivion to the centre of
society. Individual memories of the victims create a new authoritative account of the
nation’s past […].”466 Even though what the Museum communicates is now “normative
memory” its advocacy for social justice continues. Kerr explains,
if we don’t play a part in using lessons from that history, using what we’ve learned
to try an impact others and to highlight other events, when we’ve failed in our
mission. It’s one thing to record Bloody Sunday as an example of state violence—
the most extreme example I think we’ve faced over here in recent memory, but if
we don’t remind people that it’s still happening in the world today we’re falling
short.467
As Kerr makes clear, a part of the Museum of Free Derry’s mission will remain “countermemory” as long as injustice—in all its multiple and shifting forms—continues both in
Northern Ireland and around the world.
Along with providing a means for Free Derry to communicate its story, the
Museum has served as a repository for the community’s stories, records, and evidence of
what occurred on Bloody Sunday. The artifacts—donated by the people of the area—
number over 20,000 and collectively tell the story of the Free Derry period of 1969 to
1971. By 2015, the Museum had introduced more than 150,000 visitors from around the
globe to their community’s story and struggle. As a self-described “openly subjective
museum,” the Museum of Free Derry unapologetically tries for neither balance nor

Aleida Assmann and Linda Shortt, introduction to Memory and Political Change, eds. Aleida
Assmann and Linda Shortt (London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2011), 8.
466 Ibid.
467 Adrian Kerr, manager, Museum of Free Derry, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
465

151

objectivity.468 Rather the Museum’s administrators see its approach as a more effective
and honest way to communicate its message and remain grounded in the community. As a
part of the BSJC, the Museum’s purpose has been “to be an active part in the process of
resolution and reconciliation, not just a passive window on the past.”469 It is a facility
active within the Bogside and its surrounding Catholic/Nationalists neighborhoods and, in
the words of its manager, Adrian Kerr—“a living thing, a breathing thing.”470
An extensive archive makes the museum’s work possible. Consisting of 25,000 to
30,000 individual items, it provides the content for most if not all of the museum’s
exhibits. Most materials are donated from within the community itself, while others—
such as an enormous, hard copy of the full Saville Inquiry—have arrived from external
sources.471 Speaking of the role of the archive within the museum, Kerr notes, “people see
the museum and they see the exhibition and they see the story but it’s the archive behind
it, that’s what keeps it going.”472 In fact, Kerr points out that the archive and museum are
“two sides of the same work.” He explains, for instance, that while a “20-page document
from 1971 outlining the British army’s plans to smash Free Derry is a really, really
interesting document in an archive [it is] Not so interesting in a museum.”473 A museum
exhibition might, therefore, draw instead on a historically important or evocative object to
communicate its story. In her visit to the Museum, museum studies professor Elizabeth
Crooke observed how “[c]ollectively the objects capture and represent the experiences,

Adrian Kerr, “Sitting on the Fence…What’s the Point?” in Museums of Ideas: Commitment and
Conflict: A Collection of Essays (Edinburgh: MuseumsEtc, 2011), 430.
469 Kerr, “Sitting on the Fence,” 431.
470 Adrian Kerr, Manager, Museum of Free Derry, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
471 Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
472 Ibid.
473 Ibid.
468

152

stories and memories of communities families and individuals.”474 The same could be said
of the Museum’s records, with both the museum and archive serving separate yet
complimentary functions in fulfilling the museum’s mission.
While in the past researchers were able to view materials in Kerr’s office, anything
not on display in the museum has been inaccessible during the years-long move into new
facilities. Reflecting on the devoted archival space within the new building, Kerr notes
that “[a]t the minute and for the last number of years, we’ve only been able to do one side
of that [the museum’s] work. Now it’s time to do the next part as well.”475 The second
floor of the museum remains under construction but will house both the reading room and
the archive. When the collections arrive at the new facility, they will begin a long recataloging and digitization process. Kerr explains that the original cataloging done on
some 70 to 75 % of the collection is inadequate for plans moving forward:
I think really when we start to bring the archive down and re-catalog it the best
idea is to start from zero. I’m going to treat it as a 100% backlog and re-catalog
the entire collection. It will take years of work—involve a lot of people, a lot of
time but will be worth it in the end.”476
In the meantime, the museum relies on the displayed artifacts and records to communicate
Free Derry’s story and puncture any lasting misconceptions of what occurred on Bloody
Sunday.
Michelle Caswell’s research into Cambodia’s DC-CAM provides a helpful analog
for pinpointing the Museum’s purpose and place within the community. DC-CAM was
founded in 1995 with the ongoing aim of helping “Cambodians heal the wounds of the

Elizabeth Crooke, “The Material Culture of Conflict: Artefacts in the Museum of Free Derry,
Northern Ireland,” in Narrating Objects, Collecting Stories, ed. Sandra H. Dudley et. al. (New York:
Routledge, 2012), 28.
475 Ibid.
476 Ibid.
474

153

past by documenting, researching, and sharing the history of the Khmer Rouge period.”477
Though internationally funded, DC-CAM’s director and staff are all Cambodian, with its
director, Youk Chhang, being a survivor of Khmer Rouge torture.478 It is the largest
repository of Khmer Rouge records in Cambodia, with many materials now accessible
internationally through the archive’s digitization, publications, and public displays.479
Furthermore, DC-CAM has been a source of evidence for a joint Cambodian/UN tribunal
for senior Khmer Rouge officials suspected of committing “crimes against humanity, war
crimes, and, in some cases, genocide.”480 Caswell examines the DC-CAM and its work
through the lens of archival theory, focusing on issues of evidence, power, historical
production, and absences within the official record.481 In her analysis of the archival
process in Cambodia, Caswell points out “the creation of archives is inextricably linked to
both the assembly of facts and the formation of political power.”482
For the BSJC, the creation of an archive meant reclaiming the power to tell its own
story in its own way on the very spot where events happened. Like the DC-CAM, local
people from Derry staff the museum, with the sole exception being its manager, Adrian
Kerr, who is from a nearby town in Northern Ireland. Its facility rises organically out of
Glenfada Park—one of the sites where British soldiers opened fire on Bloody Sunday,
injuring three and killing two, William McKinney and Jim Wray. A mural depicting civil
rights marchers holding a banner reading, “Anti Sectarian,” abuts the facility, while the
Bloody Sunday Memorial and famous “Free Derry” wall are just steps away around the

“Purpose,” DC-CAM, accessed April 16, 2017, http://www.dccam.org/#/our_mission/purpose
Caswell, Archiving the Unspeakable, 9.
479 Ibid.
480 Ibid.
481 Ibid., 7.
482 Ibid., 62.
477
478

154

corner. In his discussion of the Bloody Sunday memorial, sociologist Brian Conway
observes the museum’s interconnection with the murals, memorials, and historical sites
that collectively form Free Derry corner: “The memorial and Museum of Free Derry
museum across the road, located within clear view of each other, now work together to
shape the meaning of the Bloody Sunday story for new audiences including tourists,
visitors and political luminaries.” He goes on to mark the differing functions of Free
Derry corner’s sites, noting that the museum “chronicles what happened on Bloody
Sunday and preserves archival material related to it and other local events,” as opposed to
the memorial that serves as “the focus of ritual commemoration.”483 The museum plays an
integral part in preserving the community’s historical record and identity, working in
tandem with the memorials of Free Derry Corner to communicate their story to the people
of Northern Ireland and the world.
Some of the material within the Museum of Free Derry arrived as the result of the
campaign’s tenacious archival research in Northern Ireland and England to bolster the case
for a new inquiry into Bloody Sunday.484 Patricia Coyle, a solicitor at Belfast’s Madden
and Finucane law firm—Pat Finucane being a human rights solicitor slain by loyalist
paramilitaries in 1989—worked on behalf of the BSJC, scouring libraries and archives in
Northern Ireland for documentary evidence related to the Widgery Report. Primary
documentation of the inquiry was surprisingly difficult to locate, particularly in the largely
pre-Internet early ‘90s.485 Often key documents were located serendipitously, such as
when a bag full of 1972 eye-witness statements were found under the stairs of civil rights
Brian Conway, Commemoration and Bloody Sunday: Pathways of Memory (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2010), 58.
484 For an excellent narrative of the BSJC’s archival work and discovery, see: Campbell, Setting the
Truth Free, 66-110.
485 Ibid., 68.
483

155

activist Brigid Bond’s house. As Campbell relates, the statements had been “collected,
typed out and submitted to the original tribunal but Widgery chose to ignore them on the
basis that they had arrived too late.”486 Other records had been buried in a garden across
the Irish border for safekeeping after being rejected by the Inquiry. The witness
statements would later prove pivotal in the battle to unseat Widgery’s verdict.
Caswell’s analysis of the DC-CAM clarifies how records can be redeployed for
social justice. DC-CAM weathered attacks from a variety of fronts, including “Khmer
Rouge leaders, apologists for the regime, American Republicans, and the Wall Street
Journal.”487 Each of these categories had their own, sometimes overlapping, interest in
challenging the story emerging from the records preserved at DC-CAM. More
specifically, DC-CAM’s collection countered the suppression of information regarding
both the scale of Khmer Rouge carnage and its genocidal nature.488 In her examination of
this resistance through the lens of the mug shots of Khmer Rouge victims, Caswell argues
that archivists and survivors of the Khmer Rouge “strategically deploy” the photographs
“in legal testimonies, documentary films, and still photographs of Cambodians and tourists
looking at them.”489 What she calls a “community of records” has developed around these
mug shots, which in turn “supplant[s] a narrative of victimhood with a narrative of
witnessing, transforming records that document an unspeakably violent past into agents of
social change for the future.”490
While the Museum features some British military artifacts and documents, the
community itself created most of the records, which provide evidence of its struggle and
Ibid., 93.
Caswell, Archiving the Unspeakable, 82.
488 Ibid.,, 83.
489 Ibid., 7.
490 Ibid.
486
487

156

resistance. In this way, the context differs from DC-CAM’s collections, which were not
only created by the Khmer Rouge to “document the oppression of prisoners” but also to
“serve a key function within that oppression.”491 At the Museum of Free Derry, however,
a record’s creator and subject are often one and the same, with most materials existing to
counter oppression by documenting injustices. A hastily typed and corrected list of the
names and ages of Bloody Sunday victims and the 1972 handwritten witness statement of
a 52 year-old “unemployed painter” named Alexander Nash show how the community
produced its own written records of events. Other documents—such as a Derry Civil
Rights Songbook from 1968 and a “[h]andwritten minutes book for 1968 and a call to
protest from the Derry Housing Action Committee”—are indicative of the types of
materials on display. In a sense, the museum’s records are in and of themselves the tools
of resistance, which have since been called on to counter the injustice of the official
narrative of events.

V.F. “An Almost Automatic Empathy” and the Ongoing Struggle

Community archiving, according to Andrew Flinn’s definition, is “the grassroots activities
of documenting, recording and exploring community heritage in which community
participation, control and ownership of the project is essential.”492 The Bogside’s eventual
triumph over the “Widgery Whitewash” provides an emphatic example of why some
communities opt to control how their histories are communicated and preserved. While

491
492

Ibid., 158.
Flinn, “Community Histories, Community Archives,” 153.

157

several types of community archives exist at the intersection of activism and archiving, the
term most applicable to the museum’s work would be what Flinn and Ben Alexander call,
“activist archiving,” which “describes the process in which those who self-identify
primarily as activists engage in archival activity, not as a supplement to their activism but
as an integral part of their social movement activism.”493
As the Bloody Sunday Trust’s “main signature project,” the Museum is a vital
extension of the community’s ongoing activism for justice both locally and globally. Kerr
explains how the miscarriage of justice and historical fact has informed the Museum’s
own approach to communicating history:
Our story is one of a community against a government, first Stormont and then
Westminster, not of community against community. And we don’t feel any need
to balance our story by promoting a point of view that has been propagated as the
official one over many years by legions of government and army PR officers and
their tame press.494
Its work allows the Bogside to tell “its own story in its own way” so that visitors can
“come and learn about it, understand, and acknowledge it.”495 Retaining independence and
ownership of its history—both physically through artifacts and abstractly through the
community’s articulation of key events—remains foundational to the Museum’s work.
The Museum’s approach to history has repercussions beyond the Bogside,
providing a model for how various communities within Northern Ireland might deal with
the legacy of the Troubles. Kerr explains that each community must find its own way of
preserving and sharing its story since creating “an agreed version of the history of the

Andrew Flinn and Ben Alexander, “ ‘Humanizing an inevitability political craft’: Introduction to the
special issue on archiving activism and activist archiving,” Archival Science (2015) 15, 332.
494 Kerr, “Sitting on the Fence,” 441.
495 Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
493

158

North” is impossible and “not in anyway necessary.”496 The Museum is therefore
instructive for how the country might best approach its history, wherein, as Kerr
advocates, the people of Northern Ireland can “understand all the differences and accept
it” and in so doing, discuss their varied and often contradictory historical perspectives
“rather than fight about it.”497 As a point of comparison, Kerr offers the Troubles Gallery
in the Ulster Museum, part of the National Museums of Northern Ireland. As a national
museum that strives for political neutrality, Kerr argues that “they’ve had to offend no one
they satisfy on one either […] You could learn more from a school textbook. There’s no
sense of personal feeling. No sense of impact—it’s facts and figures.”498 As his remarks
make clear, there remains a sharp divide in opinion on how best to approach the history of
conflict in the North, with Kerr and the museum falling firmly on the side of activism with
each community telling its own story.
The Museum demonstrates how a community-driven approach to Northern Irish
history means bridging divides between unionist and nationalist communities. Its
relationship with the Siege Museum of the Apprentice Boys of Derry provides an
exemplar of Derry’s inter-community cooperation. More specifically, the Museum of
Free Derry and the Siege Museum have come together to educate visiting school groups
and community programs. The curriculum in the Republic of Ireland has students
studying the Apprentice Boys and civil rights concurrently, which means that it has made
logical sense for both museums to coordinate student visits.499 Kerr explains, “in the past
we always shared those visits, schools would come to one and to the other and a lot of

Ibid.
Ibid.
498 Ibid.
499 Ibid.
496
497

159

communication between the two museums coordinating visits.”500 More recently that
relationship has become formalized through the 2013 “Kids Kollections” project which
brings together children from the Protestant Fountain and Catholic Bogside communities
for projects at the museums during the traditionally violent summer marching season.501 In
2016, the museums jointly launched the Northern Ireland Schools Outreach Programme to
bring in Northern Irish students. Julieanne Campbell, the director of the Museum of Free
Derry, observed, “as an educational resource, we know that these shared visits will
enlighten young people, stimulate discussion and foster a greater understanding of the
different traditions here.”502 The museums’ educational arrangement benefits both
students and the communities themselves, suggesting, as Kerr argues, that intercommunity museums offer more impactful educational experiences than a centralized
museum striving for objectivity.
Despite inter-community cooperation and the vindication of the Saville Inquiry,
the Museum by no means views its social justice work as complete. Reflecting an attitude
very much in keeping with Flinn and Alexander’s “activist archiving,” Kerr discusses the
risk of “sanitize[ing]” past events by shifting from an activist to historical approach:
there will come a point where we have to go ‘yes, let’s try to move on.’ But if we
do that too early without the right resolution then we’re just leaving open the
wounds that will fester and erupt again in the future. We are never going to
achieve resolution. I don’t think that anyone is stupid enough to think that, but
there is much more I think we have to achieve before we can start to treat this as
history rather than current affairs.503

Ibid.
Brendan McDaid, “Old Foes Bridge Divide for City Youth Project,” Belfast Telegraph, July 11, 2013.
502 Qtd. in “Free Derry and Siege Shared School Visits,” Derry Journal, November 18, 2016,
http://www.derryjournal.com/news/free-derry-and-siege-shared-school-visits-1-7686394
503 Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
500
501

160

With Bloody Sunday, for instance, the quest remains to clear Gerald Donaghey, who the
report said was “probably” carrying nail bombs when shot and killed. Museum visitors
pass the actual clothes Donaghey wore on Bloody Sunday and are encouraged to see the
implausibility of concealing nail bombs in tight clothing. The final exhibit also features a
brief video about the Saville Inquiry reiterating the preponderance of evidence pointing
towards Donaghey’s innocence.
Furthermore, systemic issues caused by decades of misrule, oppression, and
conflict continue to inhibit Derry’s growth and progress. Kerr explains, “[p]eople may
not actively be discriminated against […] now in those terms but the fact that
infrastructure that did exist was taken away for so many decades and there was no new
investment in it as part of the discrimination against the city is what’s causing problems in
the city today.”504 According to the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency
(NISRA), for instance, the Derry and Strabane council area has by far the highest rate of
unemployment in Northern Ireland.505 Kerr goes on to note how issues of infrastructure,
education, transport links, and other indicators of economic depravation have a “very
direct link” to the history presented in the museum. 506 By making these links visible,
Flinn tells us, community archives “help communities not only to remember and
document their past but also to understand the present day and its connections to the
past.”507

Ibid.
Visit the NISRA website for the most recent labor statistics:
http://www.ninis2.nisra.gov.uk/public/InteractiveMapTheme.aspx?themeNumber=18&themeName=
Labour%20Market
506 Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
507 Flinn, “Community Histories, Community Archives,” 159.
504
505

161

Moreover, the Museum always has had an international dimension to its work,
which Kerr describes as “an almost automatic empathy with downtrodden people in other
parts.”508 Kerr hopes that international visitors to the Museum leave “thinking well, is my
government doing the same?”509 The Museum makes these connections explicit through,
for instance, exhibit text referencing American killings in Fallujah and a mural supporting
Palestine on the wall of the original museum.510 International concerns also extend to
Derry’s past and present connections to American civil rights. For instance, American
civil rights icon Jesse Jackson officially opened the new Museum in June 2017 and the
front of the building now features a joint art installation—a wav file of the Negro spiritual,
“We Shall Overcome” etched into the building’s steel facade—with the Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute. As Kerr explains, the installation serves as a “public and undeniable”
reminder of the connection between the two museums and struggles, as well as a “public
acknowledgment” of how civil rights leaders “set out for civil rights for the black
population in the states but they helped the nationalist population in the North of Ireland
get those same rights.”511 While the Museum makes these connections visible in Derry, it
also has helped to educate those in the American South about the struggle in Northern
Ireland. More specifically, the Museum provided a portable version of its exhibits to the
Little Rock Central High School National Historic Site where in 1957 nine African
American schoolchildren integrated the school in an iconic event in the civil rights
movement.

Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
Ibid.
510 Ibid.
511 Ibid.
508
509

162

The Museum also connects with a range of other human rights concerns, as its
conception of what constitutes civil rights continues to evolve. When asked about a
photograph in the exhibit featuring the famous Free Derry wall painted purple in support
of LGBT rights, Kerr responds, “Well, what are civil rights? At one-point civil rights was
one man, one vote and decent jobs and decent houses. But equality at large, freedom of
sexual expression, all of that, that’s civil rights, too.”512 As Kerr points out, however, the
use of the wall to support gay pride was the one time that the community was “attacked
from within,” with a small number of people protesting the gesture. This incident—along
with a protest by some Bloody Sunday families at the Museum’s official opening—are
unsurprising given how rarely, if ever, communities are in total lockstep on every issue.513
As Flinn observes, “many community histories and community identities can be as
exclusionary as mainstream histories in that they may marginalize or exclude other groups
(on the basis of class, gender, sexual orientation or transgression from community
orthodoxies).514 The fact that the Free Derry wall remained purple and that the museum is
making inroads with the unionist Siege museum indicates that the dominant strand within
the community at present is one of tolerance. For the Museum of Free Derry, in

Ibid.
On at least two occasions the Museum has faced criticism from within its own community
regarding its re-opening. In June 2017 a few Bloody Sunday families protested that a visual exhibit
would include the names of British soldiers among those killed from 1969-1972. There were also
protests in 2014 when plans for the new facility showed it would block an important civil rights
mural. Even residents who did not feel properly consulted by the museum and threatened to stand “in
front of the bulldozers,” prefaced their comments to the Derry Journal by first stating, “we all back the
new museum” and “I fully support the regeneration of the museum.” In response to the front page
story, Campbell assured readers that the museum will in no way block the mural or harm it in anyway.
She concluded by inviting residents with continued questions about the new facility to contact the
museum and discuss the matter. “Residents Riled by Museum Plans,” Derry Journal, July 11, 2014 and
Julieann Campbell, “Museum Plan Won’t Impact on Bogside civil rights mural,” Derry Journal, July 21,
2014, http://www.derryjournal.com/news/museum-plan-won-t-impact-on-bogside-civil-rightsmural-1-6184755.
514 Flinn, “Community Histories, Community Archives,” 165.
512
513

163

particular, evidence points to it being inclusive of its whole community and unwavering in
its support of oppressed people of all kinds.

V. G. Summary

The Museum of Free Derry archives and communicates the history of civil rights in
Northern Ireland with unapologetic activism. “History is a bit of a waste of time,” Kerr
observes, “unless we use the lessons from it now.”515 Doing so, according to Kerr, can be
dangerous in Northern Ireland where some continue to argue, “Let’s just move on and
forget everything.”516 For the Museum the struggle for social justice, both locally and
globally, is very much ongoing. History can either be a means to further that struggle by
connecting past events to the issues of today, or serve as a hindrance when presented as
something other than and unrelated to the realities of today. As in the previously
mentioned Ulster Museum exhibit cited by Kerr, attempting to tell a neutral or
depoliticized version of history can sometimes “sanitize” uncomfortable histories and
make them appear resolved.517 Visiting the Museum is an emotional experience by design,
presenting history as personal and ongoing.
In challenging its visitors, the Museum echoes the design of the Birmingham Civil
Rights Museum [BCRI], which was built to cast the visitor in the role of a civil rights
marcher. The Museum of Free Derry makes a similar move in its new facility by creating
a section where visitors face a barricade and are surrounded by the actual sounds of the
Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.
Ibid.
517 Ibid.
515
516

164

civil rights march. In so doing, both institutions reinforce their overall themes of
continuing injustices and the need for activism and activists to address them. Whereas the
BCRI’s museum operates largely independent of its archive, however, the Museum’s
exhibits are tightly interwoven with its archival materials and mission. In this respect, the
Museum not only draws on the archive for exhibits but also sees it as an integral part of its
overall work. Its importance is made visible in the new facility, which devotes most of the
second floor to what will become archival storage and reading spaces.
As an activist institution, the Museum addresses the contemporary effects of
historical injustices, as well as forges local and international partnerships to further its
aims. The Museum’s description of its work leaves no ambiguity as to its own approach
to history:
The museum is a public space where the concept of Free Derry can be explored in
both historic and contemporary contexts. Free Derry is about our future together
as much as it is about the past. The struggle of Free Derry is part of a wider
struggle in Ireland and internationally for freedom and equality for all.518
The statement, like the museum itself, is built around collapsing the distance between
oppositional states in time and space: historical and contemporary, local and global. In so
doing, the museum positions itself to serve its community specifically and social justice
generally. Its previously mentioned educational initiatives, for instance, are a testament to
its future-orientation and commitment to cross-community and international dialogue. As
a community museum and archive, it has been created by and exists for the Bogside to tell
its story—a story intertwined with the struggles of oppressed people around the globe both
past and present.

“About the Museum of Free Derry,” Museum of Free Derry, Accessed April 13, 2017,
http://www.museumoffreederry.org/content/museum
518

165

VI. “MAKING CONNECTIONS": EDUCATION, ADVOCACY,
AND THE BIRMINGHAM CIVIL RIGHTS INSTITUTE

Ahmad Ward of the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute (BCRI) did not set out to create a
stir with his 2015 article on a popular news site in the state. By 6:30 the morning after Mr.
Ward’s article went live on AL.com, however, it had already received 600 comments,
most of them derogatory in tone and some racist in content. What Mr. Ward had
considered a simple history lesson had struck a nerve, highlighting the state’s continuing
struggle with systemic racism and individual prejudice. The piece, entitled, “For black
Alabamians, Voter ID law feels like déjà vu,” begins with a cartoon evocative of Bull
Connor’s infamous police and firemen assaulting African American protesters with highpressure hoses and police dogs in 1963.519 The hose and hydrant in this cartoon, however,
read “DMV CLOSINGS” and “VOTER ID LAWS” respectively and a road sign stamped
“21st CENTURY” points away from the regressive fireman labeled “ALABAMA.” The
cartoon visually encapsulates Mr. Ward’s point: closing Alabama DMV offices in
counties with the highest percentages of non-white voters is cause for concern in a state
that systematically disenfranchised African Americans in the past. In blurring the lines
between education and advocacy, Mr. Ward’s piece exemplifies how BCRI makes
connections between historical and present day injustices visible.
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute sits at the physical epicenter of
Birmingham’s long civil rights struggle. Kelly Ingram Park, with its statues of Connor’s
police dogs and the youths who stood against them, lies just across the road, cattycorner to
Ahmad Ward, “For Black Alabamians, Voter ID Law Feels like Déjà vu,” AL.com, October 8, 2015,
http://www.al.com/opinion/index.ssf/2015/10/for_black_alabamians_voter_id.html.

519

166

the 16th Street Baptist Church and the memory of the four little girls murdered in the 1963
bombings. The BCRI self-identifies first and foremost as an educational center, featuring
exhibits, lectures, and other community events alongside its museum of civil rights
artifacts and stories. The archive is intertwined with the museum and its work, housing
various civil rights collections along with BCRI’s 500 interviews of civil rights activists or
“foot soldiers.” As exemplified by the previously mentioned AL.com article, BCRI staff
use their historical knowledge and resources to advocate for present-day human rights. In
this chapter, I draw on the theoretical work of Manuel Castells to explicate BCRI’s social
justice advocacy through civil rights education.520 More specifically, I hope to reveal how
the BCRI serves as an educational hub for a diverse range of social issues, drawing on
archival material to make visible the connection between contemporary injustices and
their historical antecedents.

VI.A. “The Magic City” and “Bombingham”

Visitors to the BCRI quickly realize that Birmingham’s civil rights story began long
before the movement of the 1960s when Alabama adopted its new state constitution in
1901. More than two decades after the end of Reconstruction, the state’s leaders called a
convention in the capital of Montgomery “to establish,” in the words of its president,

520

Manuel Castells, Communication Power (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009) and Manuel
Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age, 2nd ed. (Cambridge:
Polity Press, 2015),

167

“white supremacy in this State.”521 An editorial in an 1899 issue of the Pratt City
Herald—the paper of a community in present-day Birmingham—offered a similar
rationale for convening a new constitutional convention:
The present constitution of Alabama makes no limitation whatever upon suffrage,
except for crime. All races and conditions have the right to vote. This puts certain
sections of the State at the mercy of negro rule, and in almost every county in the
State it would give the negro either the dominant or balance of power, provided
there was a fair election and honest count. This alternative, then, is inevitable, towit: Negro rule or fraudulent elections. Under our present constitution it must be
one or the other.522
As Alabama historian Wayne Flynt notes, only fear of federal intervention had delayed the
move to disenfranchise black voters in the state. By 1900, the federal government had byin-large left the South to its own devices and opened the door for mass
disenfranchisement. The new constitution would prove devastatingly effective at
cementing white supremacy, with Flynt recounting that “in 1900 there were 181,000
registered black male voter; in 1903 there were less than 5,000.”523 The constitution,
which remains in place today, solidified a new era of post-reconstruction systemic racism
in the state.
Birmingham, which would become the most populous city in the state, was a
product of industry. Historian Blaine Brownell explains how the city sprung from “almost
purely industrial origins:” “The rich deposits of coal, limestone, and iron ore located in
the immediate area and the influx of northern capital during the 1880s combined to make

Qtd. in Will Parker, “Still Afraid of ‘Negro Domination?’: Why County Home Rule Limitations in the
Alabama Constitution of 1901 are Unconstitutional,” Alabama Law Review (Winter 2005): 547.
522 Charles H. Frye, “The Object of a Constitutional Convention,” Pratt City Herald (Pratt City, AL), April
15, 1899, From Birmingham Public Library, Newspapers (1874-1901),
http://bplonline.cdmhost.com/cdm/compoundobject/collection/BrmnghmNP01/id/7918/rec/2
(accessed December 21, 2016)
523 Wayne Flynt, “Alabama’s Shame: The Historical Origins of the 1901 Constitution,” Alabama Law
Review (Fall, 2001): 71.
521

168

Birmingham the steel center of the New South.”524 Its industrial promise led to a
population boom in the early part of the twentieth century, immortalized in Birmingham’s
sobriquet “the magic city.” Unlike Montgomery, the first capital of the Confederacy,
Birmingham did not exist before Reconstruction. As Brownell observes, the absence of a
“prewar aristocracy” left the city open to the development of a “business aristocracy.”525
In Birmingham, therefore, African American rights have uniquely been intertwined with
larger labor struggles. Robert J. Norrell’s “Caste in Steel: Jim Crow Careers in
Birmingham, Alabama,” traces the African American workers relationship to the city from
1880 to the 1970s. Labor in the city was divided between skilled and unskilled, with
whites taking all of the skilled jobs and blacks taking most of the unskilled work in the
iron furnaces and steel mills. In the ongoing battles between employers and unions, the
unions courted African Americans to the benefit of all workers—a strategy that met with
much success in the 1930s. Tragically, as Norell argues, the white workers used the
improved position to cement their superior status in both the workplace and society in
general: “Birmingham conforms more closely to the South African pattern. Like the
Afrikaaners, white workers in Birmingham moved aggressively to preserve their economic
superiority over blacks. The competition for jobs gave them a powerful economic
incentive for defending segregation.”526
Naturally, oppression in the state ran far deeper than the individual prejudices of
Alabama’s working class. Injustice towards African Americans was blatant, systemic, and
encompassed all spheres power in the state. Douglas Blackmon’s Pulitzer Prize winning
Blaine Brownell, “Birmingham, Alabama: New South City in the 1920s,” The Journal of Southern
History 38, no 1 (Feb., 1972): 22.
525 Brownell, “Birmingham, Alabama,” 25.
526 Robert J. Norrell, “Caste in Steel: Jim Crow Careers in Birmingham, Alabama,” The Journal of
American History 73, no. 3 (Dec., 1986): 694.
524

169

Slavery by Another Name provides a window into the scale and devastation wrought by
racist governance following Reconstruction. As Blackmon notes, an 1883 U.S. Supreme
Court Ruling on the nearly decade-old Civil Rights Act “opened a torrent of repression”
by declaring the federal government unable to enforce equal treatment of citizens in the
South.527 Blackmon explains how in Alabama and every other Southern state, African
Americans were totally disenfranchised and excluded from state juries and meaningful
political offices.528 In his devastating exploration of convict leasing in the South,
Blackmon argues that African Americans were for all intents and purposes “re-enslaved”
to work in the massive industrial operations underway in the former Confederate states:
“The resubjugation of black labor was a lucrative enterprise, and critical to the
industrialists and entrepreneurial farmers amassing capital and land.”529 Blackmon relates
how unlike antebellum slavery—wherein African Americans “were at least minimally
insulated from physical harm by their intrinsic financial value—these laborers were
replaceable and could be worked to their absolute physiological limits.”530 As a
powerhouse for the national production of iron and steel at the turn of the century,
Birmingham fueled its success through the horrific mistreatment and oppression of its
African American workers.
The racial situation in Birmingham remained somewhat static until the 1930s. It
was during this time that Birmingham found its first black lawyer of the 20th century in
Arthur Shores. Shores challenged the legality of voter discrimination as set forth in the
Alabama constitution and would become a champion of the city’s African American
527Douglas

A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name: The Re-enslavement of Black Americans from the
Civil War to World War II (New York: Anchor Books, 2008), 93.
528 Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name, 157.
529 Ibid., 90.
530 Ibid., 96.

170

community for years to come. Much of the sustained activism within the community,
however, came directly from the labor sector. Drawing on oral histories at the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Max Krochmal observes, “[f]rom the 1930s through
the 1960s, community-and workplace-based civil rights activism consistently dovetailed.
Often orchestrated by the same individuals, struggles in one arena gained strength from
and simultaneously emboldened the other.”531 The BCRI’s Ahmad Ward and Laura
Anderson wrote on the same subject in a 2015 Labor Day article intended to educate the
public on organized labor’s role in the civil rights movement.532 Also drawing on the oral
history archive, Ward and Anderson focus on Colonel Stone Johnson and how he and
other union men guarded the homes and churches of civil rights leaders. As Ward and
Anderson note, visitors to the BCRI encounter the “laborers, black and white, who built
our city” before learning “about the movement in the churches and streets of
Birmingham.”533 For Ward and Anderson, the story of Birmingham’s civil rights
movement is interconnected with the history of the city’s labor struggle.
Birmingham, like most major Southern cities, changed in the post-war years as
African American veterans returned home. No longer satisfied to accept second-class
citizenship, activists worked to improve community and workplace conditions.
Furthermore, as historian Glenn Eskew points out, “for black families wanting to leave
congested neighborhoods, the shortage of houses and land for expansion in ‘negro’ areas
created a desperate situation.”534 Encroachment into white neighborhoods and other
Max Krochmal, “An Unmistakably Working-Class Vision: Birmingham’s Foot Soldiers and Their
Civil Rights Movement,” The Journal of Southern History 76, no. 4 (November 2010), 924.
532 Ahmad Ward and Laura Anderson, “Birmingham’s Civil Rights Movement was Strengthened by
Organized Labor,” AL.com, September 06, 2015.
533
Ibid.
534 Glenn T. Eskew, But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the Civil Rights Struggle
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 54.
531

171

changes in the racial status quo elicited a violent response from those driven to maintain
white supremacy. Eskew notes how Birmingham was exceptional among Southern cities
for the level of racially motivated attacks, with “some fifty dynamitings between 1947 and
1965.”535 The decades of bombings and other hate crimes gave Birmingham its infamous
nickname, “Bombingham.” During this period, the Klan operated in the open under the
aegis of the city’s commissioner of public safety, Bull Connor. With control of the city’s
fire and police departments, Connor waged a brutal campaign against threats to racial
segregation in the city. Under Connor’s years of city control, the police department would
became, in historian Thornton Mills’s words, “a sink of corruption and racial prejudice.”536
He embodied the racist system that the Birmingham campaign sought to undo through
peaceful protests, marches, sit-ins, and boycotts.
A driving force behind the movement in Birmingham was the church. Just as the
labor and civil rights struggles were at times indistinguishable, biographer Andrew Manis
notes that Shuttlesworth’s ministry “and his civil rights activism were different sides of
the same coin.”537 Shuttlesworth, the most respected and iconic of Birmingham’s civil
rights leaders, interpreted his calling to the civil rights struggle in biblical terms, as “a
righteous program between the forces of good and evil.”538 Shuttlesworth’s faith was only
strengthened by what Mills describes as “a near reign of terror” in Birmingham that began
with Klan bombings of Shuttlesworth’s home and church in 1956.539 Nineteen sixty-three,
however, proved to be the costliest, and most critical, year for the city’s racial struggle.
Eskew, But for Birmingham, 50.
Thornton J. Mills, Dividing Lines: Municipal Politics and the Struggle for Civil Rights in Montgomery,
Birmingham, and Selma (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002), 179.
537 Andrew Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham’s Reverend Fred
Shuttlesworth (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1999), xi.
538 Qtd. in Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 109.
539 Mills, Dividing Lines, 250.
535
536

172

Mills reports that in that year alone, there were “eight bombings, one firebombing, one
unsuccessful bombing, three night-rider shootings, a stink bombing, and seven deaths.”540
Furthermore, it was the year that revealed to the world the brutality of Birmingham’s
power structures, as cameras captured Connor’s snarling police dogs and high-pressure
hoses assaulting the city’s black youths in Kelly Ingram Park.
Nineteen sixty-three was also the year of the tragic 16th Street Baptist Church
bombing that killed four little girls. The church had made an obvious target for the Klan
given its importance among African Americans. As Rose Freeman Massey writes in the
introduction to a book of BCRI oral histories on the Birmingham movement, “the black
church—often the one institution that whites did not control—has served as a place of
worship, a school, and a meeting place […] Out of the mass meetings came a sense that
God was on your side and no police dogs or jail could turn you around.”541 Along with
providing inspiration and courage to the movement’s “foot soldiers”, the 16th Street
Baptist Church also served as a physical base of operations for pivotal demonstrations in
1963. It was at the church that activists planned demonstrations and marchers gathered
before proceeding to city hall. It was no coincidence that the Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute would later be built next to the church’s sacred ground and that the front of the
BCRI would feature a statue of Fred Shuttlesworth. Ultimately, the sacrifices of
Birmingham’s activists and “foot soldiers” would bring more equality to what Martin

Ibid., 251.
Rose Freeman Massey, “Look for Them in the Whirlwind,” in Foot Soldiers for Democracy: The Men,
Women, and Children of the Birmingham Civil Rights Movement, eds. Horace Huntley and John W.
McKerley (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press), xx-xxi.
540
541

173

Luther King called “the most thoroughly segregated city in America” and create pressure
on the Kennedy administration to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964.542

VI. B. A City Remembers

The BCRI arose in part out of Birmingham’s long preoccupation with its national and
international image. Even during the civil rights movement itself, Birmingham business
leaders realized that its burgeoning international reputation for injustice and violence
would inhibit the city’s prosperity. In fact, the president of Birmingham’s Chamber of
Commerce, Sid Smyer, was representing the city at a 1961 conference in Tokyo when the
image of a Birmingham mob attacking Freedom Riders flashed across the globe.543 Forced
to spend his trip defending the city’s reputation, Smyer told the Wall Street Journal a
couple of weeks later, “These racial incidents have given us a black eye we’ll be a long
time trying to forget.”544 Driven by the economic impact of an abysmal international
reputation for intolerance, Smyer and other businessmen were an early force for
improving race relations in the city. The need to rehab Birmingham’s reputation would
continue long after the civil rights movement officially ended, as an impulse that both

While historians agree on the Birmingham Campaign’s national significance, Eskew & Mills have
questioned its significance locally. Mills calls its legacy “problematic” and cites the “electoral alliance
between the white business progressives and the black moderates” as the true driving force for racial
progress in the city. Mills, Dividing Lines, 378-379. Eskew goes even further by noting that while a
black middle class continues to benefit from the city’s civil rights struggle, “not all black people have
benefited from black political empowerment, equal access as consumers, and equal employment
opportunities.” As he concludes, “In Birmingham and elsewhere, the ‘perpetual promise’ remained
unfulfilled.” Eskew, But for Birmingham, 339-341.
543 Eskew, But For Birmingham, 150, 170-173.
544 “Business in Dixie: Many Southerners Say Racial Tension Slows Area’s Economic Gains,” Wall Street
Journal, May 26, 1961: 1.
542

174

complimented and complicated the larger project of remembrance, reconciliation, and
justice.
Throughout the subsequent decades, Birmingham’s civic leaders grappled with
how to exorcize its legacy of racial violence and usher in a new era of progress and
prosperity. One way the city sought to bring closure to the past—as Susan Willoughby
Anderson points out in The Past on Trial: The Sixteenth Street Baptist Church Bombing,
Civil Rights Memory and the Remaking of Birmingham—was through the long-delayed
trials of the men who gave “Bombingham” its name. As Willoughby notes, law
enforcement had failed to act on bombing suspects for years and “the lack of prosecutions
kept the memory of the bombing alive and attached an image of violent resistance to
Birmingham that haunts local people to the present.”545 In regards to the infamous Klan
bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church, no one would be brought to justice before
1977. Robert Chambliss was the first to be convicted, followed by Thomas Blanton in
2001, and finally Bobby Frank Cherry in 2002. Writing for the New York Times on the
eve of Cherry’s trial, Pulitzer Prize winning journalist and Alabama native Rick Bragg
questioned how much closure the trial might bring: “But in the old black neighborhoods
in a new-looking city of downtown skyscrapers and vast suburban sprawl, there is a
sadness too severe, too profound, to correct with a courtroom, and a pain as new as
yesterday.”546 Anderson makes a similar point regarding the complexity and elusiveness
of closure through legal justice, noting that “the trials could not fully revise or redeem the
past because the harms caused by the crime reached forward into the present.”547

Susan Willoughby Anderson, The Past on Trial: The Sixteenth Street Baptist Church Bombing, Civil
Rights Memory and the Remaking of Birmingham (Ph.D. Diss., Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest LLC, 2008),
546 Rick Bragg, “Alabama Faces Old Wound in One Last Trial,” New York Times, May 12, 2002: 1.
547 Anderson, The Past on Trial, 35.
545

175

Momentum for another form of historical reckoning also had been building for
some time. Anderson describes how the push for a memorial to the city’s civil rights
struggle had been in the works since the 1970s but “funding issues, lack of public support,
and eventually a major contracting scandal threatened to derail the project.”548 Odessa
Woolfolk, the founding president of the BCRI, credits Mayor David Vann in 1978 with
the “idea that the city should build a museum-like facility to memorialize its civil rights
history.”549 According to Woolfolk, Vann was inspired by visits to Holocaust and Jewish
Diaspora Museums while in Israel. He left convinced “that respectful remembrance of
horror could be therapeutic for a community.”550 In this sense, the BCRI’s origins are both
international and firmly rooted in the therapeutic value of remembrance.
Not everyone in Birmingham, however, saw the value in dredging up the city’s
violent past. As Bragg had observed during the Cherry trial, the impulse to remember and
rectify the past was divisive and at times fell along racial lines: “Many whites said they
want to see justice done, some say they believe the old man should be left alone, and
others say they want nothing to do with it […] Black people here, of course, tend to
support the state’s decision to try Mr. Cherry.”551 Woolfolk, however, also mentions that
some blacks did not support what would become the civil rights museum because they
“don’t want to remember what’s traumatic in their history.”552 For many of Birmingham’s
politicians and leaders in the 1980s remembering the civil rights movement in general

Ibid., 141.
Odessa Woolfolk, “BCRI History,” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, 2,
http://www.bcri.org/resources/documents/bcrihistory.pdf.
550 Ibid.
551 Bragg, “Alabama Faces Old Wound,” 2.
552 Qtd. in Glenn Eskew, “The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute and the New Ideology of Tolerance,” in
the Civil Rights Movement in American Memory, eds. Renee C. Romano and Leigh Raiford (Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 2006), 45.
548
549

176

seemed counterproductive to the city’s progress. Woolkfolk provides an account of the
various objections to what would become the BCRI:
Opposition to so prominent a depiction of Birmingham’s past emerged well
before the ground breaking for the facility. Birmingham’s elected officials
had tried to forget the past. Many civic leaders recoiled at the thought of
summoning up old images of fire hoses and police dogs. ‘Why open up old
wounds?’ some asked. ‘Such an Institute will only alienate whites of good
will, said others. 553
Of course, the urge to avoid or forget troubled times is not unique to either Birmingham or
the South. Elisabetta Viggiani, for instance, mentions that in Northern Ireland some
republicans and loyalists she interviewed thought memorials sustained wounds and
divisions, while Douglas Egerton recounts how one white commission member of an
investigation into the North Carolina Election Day riots in 1898 believed their work would
only “keep old wounds open.”554
Other roadblocks to the project were more practical in nature. A combination of
lingering reservations about the project, voter apathy, and the city’s dire financial straits
led to voter rejection of two separate bond proposals to fund the museum in 1986 and
1989.555 The city’s first black mayor, Richard Arrington, who had been behind the failed
bond proposals, remained steadfast in his search for funding.556 Eventually Arrington
found a way to bypass a voter referendum and, along with help from former activists and

Woolfolk, “BCRI History,” 3.
Douglas R. Egerton, The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent History of America’s Most
Progressive Era (New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2014), 348. Viggiani writes that for certain
paramilitaries, “Memorials are seen as ‘regressive’, in the sense that ‘they don’t heal the wounds, they
in fact do nothing really to heal the divisions that exist in our community, but help to sustain those
wounds and help to sustain division in the community.’ They are ‘insulating conflict, [maintaining] a
little bit of the conflict, albeit not a physical conflict’ and are seen as ‘a continuation of the struggle’.”
Elisabetta Viggiani, Talking Stones: The Politics of Memorialization in Post-Conflict Northern Ireland
(New York: Bergahn, 2014), 60.
555 Anderson, The Past on Trial, 145-146 and Woolfolk, “BCRI History,” 2.
556 Ibid.
553

554

177

various civic and business leaders, secured the necessary funds.557 By the mid-1980s,
Alabama politicians and business leaders had finally come around to the idea of
memorializing the movement, thanks in part to the commercial possibilities it raised. As
Glenn Eskew’s study of the BCRI points out, federal, state, and local governments were
subsidizing civil rights heritage tourism across the South at the time, with even George
Wallace—infamous for his staunch defense of segregation in the 1960s—funding “black
heritage tourism and aggressively market[ing] Alabama’s civil rights sites” during his
fourth term as governor in the early 1980s.558
Now funded, the question became what exactly should be built. In 1986 the mayor
appointed a Task Force to define the memorial’s mission and liaise with the architects and
various consultants.559 First and foremost, the Task Force argued that the facility should
be an institute as opposed to a museum—a distinction intended “to imply an actionoriented establishment.”560 In the consulting American History Workshop’s “Introduction
and Philosophical Approach” section of its 1987 program statement, they explain the
institution’s rationale and mission:
Such an institution, stemming from a need to comprehend and celebrate recent
events of such timeliness and significance, forces us to redefine the meaning of
‘museum.’ And to know what we mean by ‘civil rights.’ We have to interpret the
experience of our grandparents and parents, in order to understand the remarkable
events which continue to occur in our own lifetime. The Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute will be the nation’s major permanent public interpretive
program about the most important events in the 20th-century history of the
United States (bold in original).561

Ibid.
Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 29.
559 Woolkfolk, “BCRI History,” 2.
560 Ibid.
561 American History Workshop, “Program Statement,” June 1987, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
557
558

178

As the statement makes clear, the Institute will not be a museum for things past, but rather
a place for understanding and interpreting the past in order to act on present-day issues. A
1991 media statement by the BCRI reiterated and further clarified its primary mission:
“The goal of the Institute is not only to preserve the past and make it accessible to the
present, but also to create an opportunity to learn from the past and apply its lessons to
contemporary challenges in the areas of race relations and human rights.”562 The Institute
would be a dynamic place where past materials and lessons could further social justice in
present-day contexts.
BCRI’s planners designed it to have several interconnected parts that furthered the
Institute’s mission to educate. The first statement of the Institute’s “press packet”
provides a concise and direct vision for the facility: “The Birmingham Civil Rights
institute has been designed to be an educational, cultural and research center that will
include exhibitions and information, as well as act as a repository of historical
materials.”563 Each part would work towards the previously mentioned mission of the
Institute as a whole, educating the public about the past in order to bring about a better
future. As task force member, Dr. Edward LaMonte described the facility, “it will be a
kind of community school or university where people can come and learn.”564 As a “multipurpose educational institute,” it would offer educational programming, school curriculum
development, mini-conference spaces, and traveling exhibits alongside the permanent
museum facility and exhibits. 565 The permanent exhibition space would be completed in

Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, “Media Package,” January 30, 1991, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
563 Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Press Packet, unprocessed collection, Birmingham Public Library,
Department of Archives and Manuscripts.
564 Qtd. in Anderson, The Past on Trial, 144.
565 Anderson, The Past on Trial, 144-145.
562

179

two phases: museum exhibits corresponding to traditional themes and the second phase of
using “computer-based educational tools to explore how ‘the struggle continues’ for
human rights around the globe.”566 Exhibit films, sounds, and artifacts would be selected
by local figures, and visitors would progress from learning about segregation and racism
to the civil rights struggle and finally “the symbolic triumph of tolerance.”567
Organizers proposed constructing the facility near many of the city’s most
important civil rights locations. This physical grounding in the “sacred space” that would
become known as the Civil Rights District, placed the Institute within short walking
distance of iconic African American and civil rights sites such as the 16th Street Baptist
Church, Kelly Ingram Park, the Carver Theatre, and the historical black business
district.568 By situating the Institute in this district, its developers reinforced its identity as
a “living institution,” wherein the Institute would become a new and vital part of an
existing network of historical sites. 569 Those planning the facility envisioned all of these
sites working together to tell the civil rights story. By design, departing visitors would
find themselves facing the same church and park as the youths who marched in 1963, thus
making the Institute “a permanent gathering-point, a constant place to rally, a persistent
jumping-off point for efforts to push forward.”570 While its historic location was wisely
incorporated into the Institute’s design and narrative, its location was also intended to
serve as a boon to the local community by providing “a step toward the revitalization of
the black community’s presence in downtown Birmingham.”571
Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 47.
Ibid., 44-52.
568 Woolfolk, “BCRI History,” 3.
569 Ibid.
570 American History Workshop, “Program Statement,” June 1987, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
571 Ibid.
566
567

180

With the Institute designed and ready to be built in 1991, Mayor Arrington became
embroiled in a corruption scandal. He was named as an “unindicted co-conspirator” in the
case of minority contractors he selected defrauding the city of monies earmarked for the
BCRI.572 According to Eskew, “Arrington used the charges of corruption to unify the black
community behind his administration” during his reelection bid, as well as used the
BCRI’s dedication ceremony “to solidify his control over the black community.”573 Eskew
also notes how the “white racial liberals and academics involved in the Task Force and a
black protest group that complained that the city had ignored the poor in the planning,”
were excluded from the Institute’s groundbreaking.574 The controversy provided
ammunition for those opposed to the civil rights institute, with Woolfolk noting, “Then
you had on the side of naysayers a group in the town who felt that the Arrington
administration and his staff were not good stewards of public taxes anyway, that their
priorities weren’t the best priorities in the minds of the naysayers. So let’s not entrust
them with more money to do yet another ‘wasteful’ project.”575 Although Arrington had
been instrumental in making the museum a reality, the scandal would sully to some extent
his role in the process and stoke preexisting discontent with the project.
Despite these untimely revelations, the Institute opened with great success. It had
25,000 visitors in just the first two weeks after opening, thereby affirming both the public
interest in remembering and reflecting on history—as evidenced by the 12 million dollars
of taxpayer money devoted to the project—and the dedication of its founders who worked

Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 54-58.
Glenn T. Eskew, “Memorializing the Movement: The Struggle to Build Civil Rights Museums in the
South,” in Warm Ashes: Issues in Southern History at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century, eds.
Winfred B. Moore, Jr., et al. (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2003), 370-371.
574 Ibid.
575 Woolfolk interview qtd. in Anderson, The Past on Trial, 148.
572
573

181

for 13 years to build the Institute.576 Historian Julian Bond examined the statements left on
the visitor’s ledger book by early visitors to the Institute who had marched in the 1963
demonstrations.577 The notes left were simple yet poignant and provided “a roll call for the
movement’s nameless and forgotten”:
“Empress Akweke-king, now of Brooklyn wrote: ‘dog attacked.’ Rev.
BW. Henderson of Avenue O reports ‘house bombed on Sugar Hill.’ Ruth
Barefield-Pendleton of 2nd Street West ‘marched Selma to Montgomery.’
Doris Brewster of Riverchase Parkway simply wrote ‘hosed.’ […] Willie
James Coleman boasts he was ‘first to go to jail for park.’ Sandra
Johnson’s brief narrative says simply ‘left school.’ Glenda Bailey of
Adamsville remembers ‘heard blast of church from the fountain Heights
Methodist Church.”578
These miniature testimonies would later be drawn upon and much expanded for the
Institute’s oral history project, which preserved the voices of the movement’s “foot
soldiers” among others. Even though the facility was now open and flooded with visitors,
the BCRI’s work in memorializing the past in order to facilitate a better future had just
begun.

VI. C. The Networked Archive

Networks, according to Manuel Castells, are “complex structures of communication
constructed around a set of goals that simultaneously ensure unity of purpose and
flexibility of execution by their adaptability to the operating environment.”579 From its
inception, organizers envisioned BCRI’s archive in terms of a civic network, whereby it
Eskew, “Memorializing the Movement,” 371.
Julian Bond, “History, Hope and Heroes,” Southern Changes, 15, no.4 (Winter 1993): 1-7.
578 Bond, “History, Hope and Heroes,” 6.
579 Castells, Communication Power, 21.
576
577

182

could build on the city’s pre-existing civil rights collections. More specifically, the
archive would draw on the expertise and resources of the established and much respected
civil rights collections at the Birmingham Public Library [BPL]. As stated in an early case
statement, “the Institute will be linked by computer to the archives of the Birmingham
Public Library which is highly regarded for its holdings.”580 In this respect, the archive’s
work has always been intertwined with both the Institute itself and other civic institutions
in the manner of Castells’s social and organizational networks: “communicative
structures” created and programed by interacting social actors.581 As such, the archive has
contributed both information and expertise to its various networks, circulating unique and
invaluable materials related to Birmingham’s civil rights history.
Marvin Whiting, the first archivist at the Birmingham Public Library, was
instrumental in the building of the BCRI. Whiting witnessed the civil rights struggle firsthand while on the faculty of Atlanta’s Lovett School, which was protested for the barring
of Martin Luther King and Ralph Abernathy’s children.582 Upon arriving in Birmingham
to work at the Birmingham Public Library in the 1970s, Whiting found himself there, as
Eskew notes, “at just the right moment to preserve irreplaceable municipal documents
detailing postwar civil rights protests, unique photographs, recordings, film footage from
area media outlets, and materials released from the FBI under the Freedom of Information
Act.”583 The work, however, would be challenging given the lingering racial tensions in
Birmingham. Reflecting on his predecessor, current BPL archivist, Jim Baggett recalls
Whiting telling him “that there were people here who were not thrilled to find out he was
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, “Case Statement,” Robert Corley Collection, Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute.
581 Castells, Communication Power, 20.
582 Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 35.
583 Ibid.
580

183

collecting civil rights materials because at that time Birmingham was sort of in this denial
stage. A lot of people here felt that if you just don’t talk about that history everybody will
forget.”584 Despite the pushback, Whiting went on to build what Eskew describes as “one
of the most significant collections of civil rights documents in the country.”585
The BCRI archive was designed to complement and build on the BPL’s civil rights
work. In this respect, the two would form the core of a civic network of institutions
documenting and preserving the city’s civil rights history. As early in the Institute’s
planning as 1984, the Community Affairs Committee of Operation New Birmingham
appointed a committee to arrange a policy with the BPL’s Department of Archives to
begin “a temporary repository for civil rights documentation gathered in the name of the
museum.”586 Later, the American History Workshop’s 1987 report further addressed the
role of the Institute’s archive:
The archives at the Birmingham Public Library are already one of this
country’s most important resources for civil rights scholarship. With the
addition of the Institute’s own archival effort, the city will be a key resource
for scholarship. The museum program will not only draw heavily on the
archives for programmatic content, and photographic and audio material, it
will foster increased awareness of these resources in the scholarly and local
community. Once the community recognizes the value of resources not
often identified as scholarly—personal memoirs and memorabilia, photo
collections, and the like, it can begin to take stock in its own contribution to
Birmingham’s history.587
The archive would therefore serve as a source of materials for its other functions—
namely, the museum and educational programming—as well as empower the community
to realize its own individual and collective contributions to history.
Jim Baggett, Head of the Department of Archives and Manuscripts at the Birmingham Public
Library and Archivist for the City of Birmingham, interview with author, November 3, 2015,
Birmingham Public Library, Birmingham, AL, United States of America.
585 Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 35.
586 Qtd. in Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 40.
587 American History Workshop, “Program Statement,” June 1987, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
584

184

Others objected to the archive, however, with Eskew calling it “a bone of
contention” throughout the BCRI’s development.588 Whiting, in particular, questioned the
wisdom of the Institute having an archive, which he considered redundant given the BPL’s
success collecting civil rights materials.589 As shown by the BPL’s evolving and
multifaceted relationship with the BCRI archive, networks are complex and can practice,
in Castells’s words, “cooperation and competition simultaneously.”590 Despite Whiting’s
reservations, however, both he and Vann saw the need for the BCRI to collect civil rights
materials:
As an archivist, Whiting was reluctant to see the papers he had processed
split apart and housed in a separate civil rights facility, but Vann recognized
that significant collections held by African Americans were not being
offered to the library because of perceived racism on the part of the staff.
The financial records of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human
Rights, for example, were in the attic of an abandoned funeral home, and the
widow of the group’s treasurer refused to share them with scholars or donate
them to the Birmingham Public Library. An independent institute seemed
the best way to secure these important documents before they fell victim to
time.591
With invaluable civil rights material imperiled by time and neglect, the Institute adopted a
philosophy of “we don’t wait—we collect” during the few years between the Institute’s
opening and the hiring of an archivist.592 Whiting would be instrumental in finding a
suitable archivist for the Institute, with Wayne Coleman becoming the first archivist in the
mid-1990s.593 The BPL and BCRI remain connected as of 2015, with Anderson and

Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 34-36.
Ibid.
590 Castells, Communication Power, 20, 426.
591 Ibid.
592 Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, “Meeting of the Board of Directors,” March 17, 1994, Robert
Corley Collection, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
593 Ibid; Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author,
November 4, 2015.
588
589

185

Baggett consulting on a near daily basis concerning patron queries and drawing on
materials from both collections to co-present on surveillance of mass meetings.594
Other nodal points on Birmingham’s civil rights network have developed since the
BPL began collecting materials. Along with the BCRI, local universities such as Samford,
Birmingham Southern, and the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) have
developed complimentary archives. Baggett notes how when a patron contacts BPL with
“Baptist material, I refer them to Samford, if it’s Methodist material, I refer them to
Birmingham Southern and they do the same, they refer people to us.”595 Although these
archives may not mention civil rights specifically within their collecting policies,
collections such as UAB’s Dr. Jack Ellis interviews with African American health
professionals regarding “pre-integration education and practice” are tangentially related.596
The same would be true of the civil rights dimensions of the collections at Samford and
Birmingham Southern, with the use of Samford’s original copy of King’s “Letter from
Birmingham Jail” in a documentary providing a recent example.597
Moreover, UAB was the home institution of a key figure within BCRI’s archive:
history professor Dr. Horace Huntley. Huntley, who was a founding board member of
BCRI, split his time between UAB and the BCRI to launch the Institute’s oral history
project in 1994.598 Huntley and Lola Hendrix, former corresponding secretary for the

Ibid; Baggett, interview with author, November 3, 2015.
Ibid.
596 Tim Pennycuff, email message to author, November 2, 2015. Other examples of UAB’s civil rightsrelated materials include a 1947 commencement address about practicing medicine in a majority
African American community and 1961 pamphlet on the history of Mobile General Hospital and its
housing of black patients. Ibid.
597 See: Gerald Smith, “Samford’s Copy of ‘Letter from Birmingham Jail’ Used for Documentary,”
Samford University, July 18, 2017, https://www.samford.edu/news/2017/07/Samfords-Copy-ofLetter-from-Birmingham-Jaill-Used-for-Documentary .
598 Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author, November 4,
2015.
594
595

186

Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, would collect “more than four hundred
interviews with participants from across the social spectrum.”599 The project continued
past Hendrix’s passing in 2013 with the assistance of archivists Laura Anderson, Wayne
Coleman, and others.600 Huntley would publish two volumes of oral histories: The Black
Workers’ Struggle for Equality in Birmingham, which focused on black union members
fighting “to transform their labor organizations into vehicles for racial justice as well as
working-class empowerment, and Foot Soldiers for Democracy—an examination of
“black community activism across lines of class, gender, and generation.”601 All of the
interviews remain accessible in the BCRI archive as VHS recordings and transcripts.
Along with their stories, civil rights veterans also entrusted the BCRI with physical
artifacts and records. Former BCRI archivist Laura Anderson relates how “people came
to opening week with items they wanted to donate and the founding board members had
identified a few collections in the community that they wanted to have here, those
materials [that] were donated still comprise the bulk of what we [the archive] have.”602
The BCRI archive also contributes to a state-wide archival network through the
digital repository, Alabama Mosaic. Maintained by Auburn University on behalf of the
Network of Alabama Academic Libraries (NAAL), Alabama Mosaic exists “to make
unique historical treasures from Alabama’s archives, libraries, museums, and other
repositories electronically accessible to Alabama residents and to students, researchers,

Ibid. Horace Huntley and John W. McKerley, eds., Preface to Foot Soldiers for Democracy: The Men,
Women, and Children of the Birmingham Civil Rights Movement (Urbana and Chicago: University of
Illinois Press, 2009), IX.
600 Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author, November 4,
2015.
601 Ibid. and Huntley and McKerley, Preface to Foot Soldiers for Democracy: IX.
602 Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author, November 4,
2015.
599

187

and the general public in other states and countries.”603 Its precursor originated at the
Alabama Department of Archives and History (ADAH) as a digital means to compliment
the state history curriculum. Civil rights was made an early cornerstone of what would
become Alabama Mosaic, which is unsurprising given that, as ADAH’s Edwin C. Bridges
points out, it was one of the three formative conflicts that shaped the state.604 In their
history of Alabama Mosaic, Sherida Downer and her co-authors note how “The Project is
especially interested in preserving and making publicly available collections of materials
on the history of the civil rights movement in Alabama.”605 The Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute contributed a digital collection of materials from the Concerned Citizens of
Alabama (CWCA), which had formed in 1965 to push social change in the state. The
collection, which is also available via ADAH’s digital collections, complements other
civil rights materials made available from various libraries, museums, and archives across
the state.
Alongside its civic and state interconnections, the archive also interfaces internally
among the various departments within the BCRI. To varying degrees, temporary
exhibitions, the museum, and educational programming are all interlocked with the work
of the archive. Anderson has worked closely with Ward on educational exhibits, noting
how “[h]e’s very good at the layout, conceiving of an exhibit in terms of how its going to
look, and I’m the content person, so we’ve done some really fun things.”606 Anderson
points specifically to their work on a 2005 W.C. Patton exhibit as an example of a
“About Alabama Mosaic,” Alabama Mosaic, accessed October 2, 2017,
http://alabamamosaic.org/about.php .
604 Edwin C. Bridges, “Becoming Alabama: A Time Rich in Historical Remembrances,” Alabama
Heritage (Winter 2010:, 38. The other two seminal conflicts, according to Bridges, were the Creek and
Civil Wars. Ibid.
605 Sherida Downer, Sue Medina, Beth Nicol, and Aaron Trehub, “AlabamaMosaic: Sharing Alabama
History Online,” Library Hi Tech 23, no. 2, 250.
606 Ibid.
603

188

successful collaboration.607 The physical layout of the exhibit, for example, relied on the
archive’s Patton collection of 40 boxes of materials and 35 artifacts to recreate his office
down to the “mess” and bumper stickers on his door.608 In terms of content, Ward and
Anderson “weave in the story of the Alabama constitution and [how it] disenfranchised
people through the legislature and different court cases.”609
The main museum itself, however, has drawn little on BCRI’s archival holdings.
The archive’s underutilization in this respect is unsurprising given that the museum
predates the archive by several years, meaning that there were no in-house materials for
the permanent exhibits to draw from originally.610 Although the archive would later
collect the originals of the copies and replicas on display in the museum, a regular
interchange between the archive and the museum never developed.611 According to
Anderson, the archive and museum have “not interfaced very well over the years […]
mostly the result of just staffing and a lack of understanding of what an archive is. The
same lack of understanding that’s just in the world in general applies here.”612 Oral
histories provide one of the few connection points between the archive and museum,
composing an important part of several exhibits that feature audio triggered by visitor
motion.613 Fortunately, as Anderson’s points out, the situation has begun to change in
W.C. Patton (1910-1997) was a voting rights pioneer in Alabama who registered ½ million voters
through his work with the NAACP. In 2015, the BCRI reinstalled the exhibit in part because of “the
recent changes to the Voting Rights Act and the upcoming 50th anniversary of that landmark
legislation in American history.” Ahmad Ward, “The Birmingham Civil Rights institute Presents ‘A
Voteless People is a Hopeless People: Alabama’s W.C. Patton and the Struggle for Voting Rights,” June
5, 2015, https://birminghambusinessalliance.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/pattonformat.pdf
608 Laura Anderson, Archivist, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, interview with author, November 4,
2015.
609 Ibid.
610 Ibid.
611 Ibid.
612 ibid.
613 Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, “Media Package,” January 30, 1991, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
607

189

recent years with the hiring of new CEO, Andrea Taylor, who values and supports the
archive’s work.614

VI. D. Advocacy through Education

In its report to the BCRI Task Force, the consulting American History Workshop argued
that the “civil rights museum is, in essence, a museum about communication.”615 The
tumultuous years leading up to the 1963 demonstrations, the report argues, were
predicated on a fundamental lack of communication between the black and white
communities.616 Civil rights activism reestablished a new kind of communication, and it
is, therefore, the museum’s “fundamental responsibility to tell the story of how men and
women come to listen to one another.”617 While the BCRI’s mission and purpose remain
the same, it now frames its work predominately in terms of education. In writing about the
BCRI in 2007, its long-time director Lawrence Pijeaux, Jr. provides a succinct explanation
of the Institute’s aims: “The particular mission of the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute is
to promote civil and human rights worldwide through education.”618 Ahmad Ward, vice
president of education and exhibitions, echoes this sentiment by calling the BCRI an
“education facility” whose “overall goal is to improve race relations, or gender relations,

Ibid. Andrea Taylor, most recently director of citizenship and public affairs for Microsoft,
succeeded director Lawrence Pijeaux on September 8, 2015.
615 American History Workshop, “Program Statement,” June 1987, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
616 Ibid.
617 Ibid.
618 Lawrence J. Pijeaux, Jr. “The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute: A Case Study in library, Archives,
and Museum Collaboration,” RBM 8, no.1 (Spring 2007): 56.
614

190

or religious relations.”619 The BCRI works to empower marginalized groups through
education, providing information and historical context for contemporary struggles.
Communication, education, and power are also the fundamental forces within
Castells’s “network society.” According to Castells, power lies in communication, and
“the most fundamental form of power lies in the ability to shape the human mind.”620
Communication shapes minds through both the macro-level of governments and mass
media and the micro-level of organizations.621 Of course, to “shape a mind” is to educate
it, which speaks to both the mission and the power of the BCRI. In some respects, the
BCRI’s work constitutes what Castells calls “counterpower”,” meaning “the capacity of
social actors to challenge the power embedded in the institutions of society for the purpose
of claiming representation for their values and interests.”622 The BCRI employs
education—through its museum, archive, and programming—to communicate a collective
message of advocacy for racial equality and universal human rights.
Following in the tradition of Fred Shuttlesworth’s Alabama Christian Movement
for Human Rights, the BCRI’s scope encompasses a variety of civil and human rights
issues. At the organization’s founding in 1956, Shuttlesworth argued that it should have
“human rights” in the title since it would fight for both whites and blacks.623 Ward
explains how he also interprets civil rights within a larger human rights context:
I see it like this: the early foot soldiers got mad, or got upset about it being
termed civil rights because when we started out it was a human rights issue.
When the NAACP was kicked out of this state in 1956, Fred Shuttlesworth
and others created the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights.
Ahmad Ward, Vice President of Education and Exhibitions, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute,
interview with author, November 2, 2015.
620 Castells, Communication Power, 3.
621 Ibid.
622 Manuel Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age (Malden, MA:
Polity Press, 2012), 5.
623 Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 95-96.
619

191

This was ultimately a human rights issue for them, but because of all of this
legislation it was stamped with this civil rights moniker. And unfortunately
now when you say civil rights to people they automatically go to black and
white and 1960s and that stuff doesn’t happen anymore, which is not true.
Civil rights are human rights but because of the way people think, human
rights issues seem to involve all the other stuff, like poverty and religious
freedom and cultural freedom, orientation and gender. Those things keep
coming lumped with human rights. But it’s all human rights.624
The BCRI has made it clear from the beginning that its mandate exceeds the traditional,
ongoing cause of domestic racial equality. In an early press packet, the Institute notes that
it exists “to understand our history in relation to present and future developments of
human relations and democratic institutions in Birmingham, the United States and the
World.”625 The current BCRI website continues and furthers this sentiment by
highlighting its “increasing emphasis on the international struggle for universal human
rights.”626
A global perspective on civil and human rights was present from the Institute’s
inception. A 1990 letter from the contracted exhibit designers to Odessa Woolfolk noted
that phase II of the museum’s construction would feature a large gallery focusing on
places around the globe “where people are still struggling to exercise their rights as
citizens.”627 The gallery would focus on “prisoners of conscience” and be designed to
“encourage visitors to consider theories of non-violent direct action and civil
disobedience.”628 Its name “Beyond Birmingham: Human Rights around the World”
would encapsulate the BCRI’s view that the “America’s Civil Rights Movement is part of

Ward, interview with author, November 2, 2015.
“Birmingham Civil Rights Institute ‘Press Packet,’” unprocessed collection, Birmingham Public
Library, Department of Archives and Manuscripts.
626 “About BCRI,” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, accessed January 31, 2017,
http://www.bcri.org/information/aboutbcri.html
627 Joseph A. Wetzel Associates, Inc. to Odessa Woolfolk, March 2, 1990, Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
628 Ibid.
624
625

192

an international human rights struggle that began long before the 1960s.”629 For the BCRI,
the story of the American civil rights movement is interconnected with likeminded
movements around the globe that both preceded and followed the historical civil rights
movement in the US. As Castells reminds us when discussing activism in the network
society, the “roots” of all social movements past and present “are in the fundamental
injustice of all societies, relentlessly confronted by human aspirations of justice.”630 The
BCRI as an educational institution embraces the universality of its history and ongoing
work.
“Beyond Birmingham” not only educates visitors about global injustices but also
encourages them to become agents of social progress. When the permanent exhibit
opened in 1994, its press release noted that it “serves as a call for action and challenges
visitors to heed the words of Dr. Martin Luther King: ‘Injustice anywhere is a threat to
justice everywhere.’”631 The exhibit centers on the United Nations’ 1948 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and addresses issues from South African apartheid to
present-day sex trafficking. Visitors are also encouraged to tell their own stories via a
computer station flanked by signs asking such questions as “Has someone you love
experienced discrimination?” and “How have you coped with a bully?”. Juxtaposing
global injustices with a visitor’s own struggle is likely to foster empathy and nudge him or
her towards social action. In this respect, it reflects the overall strategy of the BCRI to
cast the visitor into the role of activist. As Eskew observes, the building itself was
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute pamphlet, Robert Corley Collection, Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute.
630 Manuel Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 2015), 12.
631 Florence Wilson-Davis, “International Human Rights Gallery Opens at Birmingham Civil Rights
institute: Beyond Birmingham Human Rights Around the World,” Robert Corley Collection,
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
629

193

designed to make a visitor “feel like a civil rights supporter going to a mass meeting” and
the exhibits explain racial tolerance in a manner akin to how “the movement indoctrinated
its followers.”632 In terms of tangible action, exiting visitors could then sign the
Birmingham Pledge or sign up for an event such as BCRI’s 1996 “Speaking for the
Children” conference, which was predicated on “identifying global needs, offering
solutions, and preparing for the future.”633
BCRI’s education program provides another example of how the Institute blurs the
distinction between advocacy and education. The BCRI encourages K-12 students to
“make connections” between past and present injustices through lesson plans designed “to
convey the importance of this Movement then and now.”634 Since little of BCRI’s
collection has been digitized, its lesson plans fail to reference the Institute’s own archival
resources, opting instead to point students towards reliable external sources. In a 2011
collaborative educational project with the Apartheid Museum in Soweto, South Africa,
however, the BCRI did draw on its own materials. Called the International Legacy Youth
Leadership Project, ten students each from Birmingham and Soweto were selected to
connect and travel to each other’s civil rights museums. Reflecting on when the South
African students toured BCRI and met with veterans of the movement, Ward recalls
They made a lot of parallels [been the movements] […] we could talk about this
stuff all day, we’ve got it, but it’s different when it comes from somebody who
lived it or it’s different when you can see the photo or touch the fabric and know
that this was the actual, that this was there when this thing happened, and it’s a

Eskew, “New Ideology of Tolerance,” 48.
Thebirminghampledge.org provides an explanation for and copy of the pledge: “The Birmingham
pledge is a grassroots effort to recognize the worth of every individual, by making a personal, daily
commitment to remove prejudice from our own lives and to treat all people with dignity and respect.”
Program for “Speaking for the Children,” Robert Corley Collection, Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
634 “Curriculum Guide” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, accessed September 2, 2017,
http://www.bcri.org/education_programs/CurriculumGuide.html.
632
633

194

much more powerful statement when you can have a one-on-one experience with
the source material, physical or inanimate.635
Connections made between students appear to have been real and lasting, with many
remaining in touch via Facebook and other means.636

VI. E. Educational Advocacy through Technology
The Internet, according to Castells, is part of “a virtuous circle between the technologies
of freedom and the struggle to free minds from the frames of domination.”637 Though
problematic for reasons stated in the preceding literature review, Castells’ observation
shows how intertwined communication technologies and social justice have become.
While the BCRI’s work differs from the “mass self-communication” of the activists and
social movements analyzed by Castells, the Institute has long capitalized on the advocacy
and education potential of the Internet. BCRI has not shied away from adopting new
technologies to further its mission, as shown both within its network of civil institutions
and digital projects like the previously mentioned Alabama Mosaic. Perhaps most
notably, Ann Jimerson of the DOVE history preservation project, worked with Anderson
and the BCRI archive to create a “web-based hybrid heritage project” called Kids in
Birmingham 1963.638 The project sought to record and to share the previously unheard
voices of “passive participants” to the most pivotal year in Birmingham’s civil rights
Ward, interview with author, November 2, 2015.
Ibid.
637 Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope, 233.
638 Sonia Yaco, et al., “A Web-based community-building archives project: a case study of Kids in
Birmingham 1963, Archival Science 15, no. 4 (April 2015): 399-427. DOVE is an acronym for the
Desegregation of Virginia Education and, according to its website, is a collaborative venture of
universities, libraries, and community groups working to make accessible and preserve materials
related to school desegregation in Virginia.
635
636

195

history. “Passive participants,” according to Yaco and her co-authors, are defined as the
“city’s black and white children who were not directly involved in demonstrations” and,
therefore, have been left out of historical undertakings like the BCRI’s oral history
project.639
Along with expanding our understanding of Birmingham’s civil rights history, the
project’s initial purpose “was to offer storytellers a catharsis” through recounting their part
in historical events.640 Reflecting on her interactions with “passive participants” at the
BCRI, Anderson notes the therapeutic quality of their encounter with archive and
archivist:
My encounters with ‘passive participants’ find me more in the position of a
counselor or therapist than an archivist. Persons who were affected by the Civil
Rights Movement, but unable to participate in any direct ways, want to tell me
their stories of being denied permission to participate or not even knowing that
movement was underway. They want to talk about the bubbles in which they were
forced to live either by parents or whole communities. Typically, they come to the
archives as learners or researchers—seeking to familiarize themselves with a
narrative that they realize they could know firsthand, or that they feel they should
know firsthand, but do not.641
Kids in Birmingham 1963, therefore, both benefited the storyteller and the listener, as
those who visited the project’s website or social media channels could access first-person
stories, lesson plans and other educational materials concerning the movement.642
Jimerson designed Kids in Birmingham 1963 to be networked in a variety of ways.
The foundations of the project itself were firmly rooted in what Yaco and her co-authors
terms “partnerships among stakeholder groups.” Repositories and community groups with
which Jimerson and DOVE had preexisting relationships provided the project’s

Ibid.
Yaco, et al., “A Web-based community-building archives project,” 414.
641 Ibid., 405-406.
642 Ibid., 408.
639
640

196

storytellers.643 Jimerson also worked to connect with “community members, the media,
historical institutes, libraries, and educators,” which were “potential record creators,
potential end users, and potential collaborators in community building.”644 Just as the
project relied on a network of various stakeholders during its creation, it hoped to build
another network of end users through a platform described as a “community of exchange
among activists, passive observers, and contemporary students and researchers.”645
Visitors to the site can request to contact storytellers via email or in person—a feature that
Jimerson built to provide “an essential continuum of the larger social justice
movement.”646 A group of California secondary students, for instance, acted on this option
and engaged with project storytellers at a BPL event in 2014.647 As a networked project,
Kids in Birmingham 1963 fosters cross-generational dialogue and education, which in turn
plants the seed for future acts of activism and social justice.
The BCRI’s The Struggle Continues blog provides another instance of the Institute
harnessing the Internet to further social justice. As any visitor to the site would quickly
realize, the blog’s design and content encapsulate the BCRI’s forward-looking approach to
history. Visitors to the site are first greeted by a banner composed of three amalgamated
images above the words “witness,” “understand,” “connect,” and “act.” The leftmost
image is a black and white archival photograph of civil rights marchers, which is
connected to the image of a little girl celebrating the one-year anniversary of the Arab
Spring. Joining the two is a colorful painting of an open book with the words “civil rights
are human rights” next to an American flag with information about the Civil Rights Bill of
Ibid., 420.
Ibid.
645 Ibid., 416.
646 Ibid., 408.
647 Ibid., 416.
643
644

197

1965. The banner itself implies that the historical civil rights movement and
contemporary human rights movements such as the Arab Spring share an indirect link.
Or, to borrow from the BCRI mission statement, the imagery conveys to visitors “a
common past,” from which we can work “together in the present to build a better
future.”648
The content of The Struggle Continues works both to educate the public on civil
and human rights and to make explicit connections between past and present injustices and
activism. Launched in conjunction with the BCRI’s Lessons of the Birmingham
Movement: A Symposium on Youth, Activism and Human Rights, the blog originated to
commemorate the 50th anniversary of the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing, the
Birmingham Children’s Movement, and other seminal events happening in 1963
Birmingham.649 Tammi Sharpe, a visiting human rights fellow, initiated and oversaw the
blog for its first year to further BCRI’s mission of “helping visitors understand the past’s
relationship to the present and future developments of human relations in Birmingham, the
U.S. and abroad.”650 Since its inception the blog has had 56 posts by 17 different
contributors as of October 2017. Posts cover a range of topics, from the merits of Black
History month to the rise of Donald Trump. Some are straightforwardly historical in
content—such as “The A.G. Gaston Hotel” and “Reconciliation and Forgiveness in the US
Civil Rights Movement”—while others are opinion pieces that make connections between
historical and contemporary social justice issues by pairing such topics as slavery and

“About BCRI,” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, accessed January 31, 2017,
http://www.bcri.org/information/aboutbcri.html
649 Laura Anderson, “Welcome to the Struggle Continues,” The Struggle Continues (blog), December 18,
2012 (2:54 p.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/struggle-continues
650 Ibid.
648

198

human trafficking and the civil rights movement and the Arab Spring.651 In fact, the blog’s
first post, “The Human-Rights Struggle in Egypt,” was written by an Alabamian of
Egyptian heritage watching its revolution unfold.652 Its first line reads, “ When my
Egyptian dad saw news photos of water cannons unleashed on Cairo protesters in the first
days of the January 2011 uprising in Egypt, he said ‘it’s like what happened in
Birmingham.”
Several posts in The Struggle Continues draw on the BCRI’s archival material.
Many of these excerpt interviews from the previously mentioned BCRI oral history
project. Such posts might commemorate the passing of civil rights icons—such as a 2015
post excerpting an interview with Reverend Thomas Gilmore, “the sheriff without a
gun”—reflect on an historical anniversary, or contribute to an event such as a 2013
posting of interview excerpts with female “foot soldiers” for International Women’s
Day.653 Others are used as calls for reflection on the current state of affairs in the country.
For instance, Tammi Sharpe asks in a 2013 post on Martin Luther King featuring “foot
soldiers” interviews: “Does America currently have a national leader fighting for a just

Marie Sutton, “The A.G. Gaston Hotel: Once Birmingham’s Premier African American Resort,” The
Struggle Continues (blog), December 6, 2013 (3:58), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/The-AGGaston-Hotel-Once-Birminghams-Premier-African-American-Resort. Rami Khouri, “Reconciliation
and Forgiveness in the US Civil Rights Movement,” The Struggle Continues (blog), April 25, 2013
(10:35 a.m..), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/Reconciliation-and-Forgiveness-in-the-US-CivilRights-Movement. Sunnetta ‘Sunny’ Slaughter, “Connecting the Dots ‘Slavery is Human Trafficking
Evolved,’ The Struggle Continues (blog), July 16, 2013 (10:37 a.m.),
http://strugglecontinues.org/post/Connecting-the-Dots-Slavery-is-Human-Trafficking-Evolved-BySunnetta-Sunny-Slaughter. Rami Khouri, “Birmingham and the Arab Spring,” The Struggle Continues
(blog), April 22, 2013 (7:37 a.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/Birmingham-and-the-ArabSpring.
652 Ashley Makar, “The Human-Rights Struggle in Egypt,” The Struggle Continues (blog), December 17,
2012 (12:25 p.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/The-Human-Rights-Struggle-in-Egypt
653 Elizabeth Spenst, “Honoring the Memory of Reverend Gilmore, Part 1,” The Struggle Continues
(blog), September 9, 2015 (4:35 p.m.) http://strugglecontinues.org/post/honoring-the-memory-ofreverend-gilmore-part-i-by-elizabeth-spenst. Tammi Sharpe, “Young Female Foot Soldiers of the Civil
Rights Movement,” The Struggle Continues (blog), March 8, 2013 (9:26 a.m.),
http://strugglecontinues.org/post/Young-Female-Foot-Soldiers-of-the-Civil-Rights-Movement.
651

199

American society like we had in the 1960s? A leader that, as Binnie Myles said, would
make you describe him/her as ‘the only leader that I can honestly say that I ever
followed’.”654 Such posts reflect BCRI’s commitment to education, which both teaches
civil rights history and suggests how that history might be applied to today’s world.
Alongside oral history excerpts, the blog also posts archival images, reports and
other materials for reflection or comment on current social issues. For instance, a 2013
post focuses on the 1966 report, Birmingham: People in Motion.655 Commentary and
historical context accompany the downloadable PDF, as well as frames how it might be
interpreted in today’s society:
Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, the President of ACMHR, donated a copy of this
booklet to the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Archives. Flip through the report
to gain some understanding of the injustices of segregation and the sacrifices—
including potential loss of employment, arrest, physical abuse and death—that it
took to bring about change. Then consider this question: Since 1966, have we
continued to challenge advice to ‘go slow’?656
Ahmad Ward makes a much more explicit connection between past and present racial
struggles in his 2015 post concerning the BCRI’s collection of Spider Martin’s images of
the Selma march.657 Ward frames the archival images and observations of Martin as part
of a broader discussion on police brutality in the age of social media and online video
sharing. Ward draws on Martin’s account of the dangers he faced to comment on
contemporary activists documenting police brutality in the Eric Garner, Walter Scott, and

Tammi Sharpe, “A Leader: A Tribute to Dr. Martin Luther King, his fellow leaders and the
Birmingham foot soldiers,” The Struggle Continues (blog), January 21, 2013 (1:44 p.m.),
http://strugglecontinues.org/post/A-Leader-A-tribute-to-Dr-Martin-Luther-King-his-fellow-leadersand-the-Birmingham-foot-soldiers.
655 Tammi Sharpe, “Go Slow/People in Motion,” The Struggle Continues (blog), January 9, 2013 (5:00
p.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/Go-Slow.
656Ibid.
657 Ahmad Ward, “Spider Martin: Image and Activism,” The Struggle Continues (blog), November 19,
2015 (10:02 a.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org/post/spider-martin-image-and-activism-by-ahmadward
654

200

Freddie Gray cases. “The tool of activism has changed from a 35 mm camera into a cell
phone […]” Ward notes, “[i]t is quite possible that in the next fifty years, we may be
discussing someone’s cellphone video or pictures with the same gravitas that we use with
Spider’s work.”658 As evidenced here, contributors to The Struggle Continues often look
to archival materials as a way to make sense of and comment on present-day social issues.
Moreover, the blog creates an informal space for BCRI staff and affiliates to freely
comment on social issues of the day and plug into the contemporary movements
Birmingham influenced. Ward describes the blog as “an opportunity for us [BCRI] to
broaden the scope,” by providing perspectives on tangentially related issues such as Sickle
Cell Anemia and Hurricane Katrina.659 In terms of content, contributors “might be able to
blur some lines” between the BCRI’s self-identification as an education center and
activism.660 Posts on the blog are often more opinionated and political than official BCRI
publications and statements. Many of the posts do not shy away from emotion—a vital
ingredient, in Castells’ opinion, for social action to take place in the network society.661 In
his exploration of the Arab Spring, Occupy Wall Street, and other recent mass
movements, he notes, “[b]y sharing sorrow and hope in the free public space of the
Internet, by connecting to each other, and by envisioning projects from multiple sources of
being, individuals formed networks, regardless of their personal views or organizational
attachments.”662 Castells here is referring to “mass self-communication,” which are
“based on horizontal networks of interactive communication.”663 Even though, The

Ibid.
Ward, interview with author, November 2, 2015.
660 Ibid.
661 Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope, 2.
662 Ibid.
663 Ibid., 7.
658
659

201

Struggle Continues does allow for comments on posts and the BCRI’s Facebook page
facilitates some interaction, there is little two-way communication that takes place
online.664 What does happen, however, is that the BCRI can put its message into the
information flows of the Internet. It can connect to a place where, according to Ward,
social change happens: “[…] you can see things happening. And you never would have
thought you could do that without marching and getting in people’s faces. But people are
creating change at a computer.”665

VI. F. Summary

The BCRI unambiguously self-identifies as an educational institute first and foremost. As
an independent non-profit with civic origins and continued city funding, it endeavors to
advocate without becoming overly politicized or polarizing within the community. Its
primary focus, as Laura Anderson notes, is always education: “[w]e all across the board,
we’re intent everyday on educating people.”666 Education for Anderson and others at the
BCRI, however, is defined in terms of social justice. Reflecting on how social justice
informs her work as an archivist, Anderson replies,
No, it [social justice] completely informs the work I do. It’s the only
reason I work here and it’s the only reason that when I try to think about
working somewhere else---it’s hard. Because I think any history can be
interpreted to help us address a contemporary justice issue and righting a
wrong but it’s certainly easier in a place like this to do that work every day
than it would be in another institution that either tells another story---a
Unlike the genuine comments on the BCRI Facebook page, most if not all of the 93 comments on the
blog appear to be SPAM.
665 Ward, interview with author, November 2, 2015.
666 Anderson, interview with author, November 4, 2015.
664

202

more benign story perhaps or that would have a board of directors that
wouldn’t want me to tell the stories or find the stories of injustice [...].667
By employing its collections to further education, the BCRI has become a resource for
those fighting a range of contemporary injustices.
Ward, reflecting on his work as Head of Education, acknowledges the
unavoidability of advocacy in his position: “[y]ou also become an advocate when you
provide programs. You have to pro and con with the people you bring in. Involuntarily
you are kind of making a point.”668 Ward goes on to describe a predicament similar to the
ones faced by archivists who try to remain apolitical and neutral: “I think it’s a line that
you try not to cross but unconsciously you’re kind of crossing. You really do even with
the stuff you bring in or maybe the stuff you decide not to bring in.”669 An illustrative
example of how the BCRI balances advocacy and education was a photographic exhibit
entitled “Living in Limbo: Lesbian Families in the Deep South.” The exhibit was the
BCRI’s first to deal with LGBT issues and would go on to be a great success, attracting
“17,000 visitors in a two month run” and, according to the Birmingham photographer
behind the exhibit, “prompt[ing] much private and public dialogue about who is entitled to
equality.”670 The BCRI made concessions to any school groups that might want to bypass
the exhibit, and the portraits and accompanying statements were straightforward and
without explicit political comment. Ward did not view the BCRI as “taking a stand” on
the issue as much as simply fulfilling its mission and mandate. “If cultural institutions are

Ibid.
Ward, Interview with author, November 2, 2015.
669 Ibid.
670 James Michael Nicholas, “Photographer Carolyn L. Sherer Documents ‘Living in Limbo: Lesbian
Families in the Deep South’,” Huffington Post, last modified February 2, 2016,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/06/06/living-in-limbo-carolyn-sherer_n_7512032.html.
667
668

203

not willing to do those kind of things, why are we here? What are we scared of?”671 Not
unlike the Linen Hall Library’s “engaged neutrality”, the BCRI’s approach is a kind of
educational advocacy, wherein it engages social justice issues carefully and with the intent
to inform.
Furthermore, “Living in Limbo” shows how the Institute draws on its various
networks. Ward notes that both the BCRI’s reputation and the backing of key community
leaders were pivotal to the exhibit’s success:
Our reputation was enough nationally that we could do that show. And
people were like ‘ah well, the civil rights institute is doing it, ok, we get it,’
and it kind of insulated us. We had folks in high places that we’re like,
‘yeah, this is a good idea,’ and there were people who would get people to
back up off of us too. Bishop Calvin Woods who---love that guy---he
marched was arrested, attacked, and he’s over 80---we reached out to him
and head of NAACP before time and told him this was what we were going
to do. And he was like ‘OK,’ because he understands---he’s not going to
get in front of his congregation and be like, ‘yeah, this is something we
ought to support,’ but he also understands what the scope of the facility is.
672

Bishop Woods’s support speaks to the strength of these civic networks, wherein
community leaders set aside personal differences of opinion to support the institution.
BCRI’s interconnectedness with the city’s individuals and institutions has driven the
Institute’s work from its inception to the present-day. While each archive researched for
this dissertation is predicated to some degree on education and networking, none have it so
intrinsically built into their mission and everyday work.
Though the BCRI archive is a part of a larger institutional whole, its value to the
organization, city, and beyond is obvious. Once again, The Living in Limbo exhibit
provides an illustrative example of the archive’s role within the institution. BCRI’s

671
672

Ibid.
Ibid.

204

handling of the exhibit and ongoing relationship with its creator led to an understanding
that the papers of the nonprofit of the same name will be housed at the Institute.673
According to Anderson, these are the types of collections that BCRI hopes to build: “I
always am saying 50 years from now people are going to turn around and say what was
happening in the early 2000s [a]nd for us it’s that struggle [LGBTQ] and it’s the Hispanic
[…] the Alabama Coalition for Immigrant Justice, so we’ve talked to them as well about
getting their papers.”674 By pursuing these papers, the archive ensures that the BCRI’s
commitment to issues like LGTBQ and immigrant rights extend beyond temporary
exhibits and programs. It also exemplifies how the BCRI will continue to evolve and
enter the social justice fray via its progressive approach to education. Its archive, as a
node in both internal and external networks, intends to continue furthering civil and
human rights through education as long as “the struggle continues” in Birmingham and
around the world.

673
674

Anderson, Interview with author, November 4, 2015.
Ibid.

205

VII. “HISTORY IS LUNCH”: NEUTRALITY AND THE
MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES AND HISTORY

On June 12, 1963, the day that the NAACP’s Medgar Evers was shot and killed, an
investigator named A. L. Hopkins was gathering information from his informants. In his
report to the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, Hopkins notes,
I contacted two more informants that have furnished me a lot of valuable
information to ascertain what the Negroes were saying about the death of Medgar
Evers. These two informants had not heard any remarks made by Negroes
regarding this incident in their places of business near Tougaloo Christian College;
however, they did report that large number of Negroes were congregating at
Tougaloo that day.675
Reports such as this are indicative of Mississippi at the time, where civil rights proponents
were under constant surveillance by the Commission. On Evers alone, investigators
would collect reams of information on everything from his license plate number to his
father’s reputation among whites as a “good Negro [sic]” to the supposed jealousy of
peers at the local Elks Lodge.676 These reports were meticulously recorded with a filing
system modeled on that of the FBI. The previous report from Hopkins, for instance,
would have the identifier 1-23-0-74-1-1-1, with the first “1” marking its subject matter as
pertaining to a “race agitator.” In the phrasing of historian J. Michael Butler, the
Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, “Investigation of the death of Medgar Evers, Mississippi
Field Representative for the NAACP,” June 17, 1963, SCRID # 1-23-0-74-1-1-1, Mississippi State
Sovereignty Commission Records, 1994-2006, Mississippi Department of Archives and History,
accessed June 11,
2017,http://www.mdah.ms.gov/arrec/digital_archives/sovcom/result.php?image=images/png/cd01
/001697.png&otherstuff=1|23|0|74|1|1|1|1658|.
676 See: Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, “Investigation of the death of Medgar Evers,
Mississippi Field Representative for the NAACP,” June 17, 1963, SCRID # 1-23-0-70-1-1-1, Mississippi
State Sovereignty Commission Records, 1994-2006, Mississippi Department of Archives and History,
accessed August 28, 2017,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/arrec/digital_archives/sovcom/result.php?image=images/png/cd01/0016
76.png&otherstuff=1|23|0|70|1|1|1|1638|).
675

206

commission acted as a “Cotton-Patch Gestapo,” building a vast surveillance network
dependent on the complicity of ordinary Mississippians.677
The Commission is representative of the “Mississippi of the Old South” as
identified in Carol V. R. George’s One Mississippi, Two Mississippi—a land blighted by
Jim Crow laws, the Ku Klux Klan, and nostalgia for the Lost Cause.678 This Mississippi,
George reminds us, has “deep roots” and “continues to grow new branches” with many
African Americans still hampered by “the continuing barriers of second-generation Jim
Crow laws.679 The “other Mississippi” is future-oriented, focusing on issues such as
education reform and voter mobilization; the emerging, progressive Mississippi prizes
“compassion and tolerance” above all else.680 The construction of the Mississippi Civil
Rights Museum provides a superlative example of the latter version of the state. As the
state’s comprehensive historical center since 1902, the Mississippi Department of
Archives and History (MDAH) has been both witness to and participant in both versions
of the state. In this chapter, I explore the institution’s origins in the Jim Crow South
before tracing its development through the civil rights movement in Mississippi. My
primary focus, however, is the use of civil rights materials since the 1998 opening of the
Mississippi Sovereignty Commission records. Along with the specific case of the
Commission records, I analyze the role of civil rights materials in archival exhibits,
outreach, and education. The chapter concludes with MDAH’s future plans and work

J. Michael Butler, “The Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission and Beach Integration, 19591963: A Cotton Patch Gestapo?” The Journal of Southern History 68, no. 1 (February 2002): 147.
While Butler, admits that it “may be a stretch” to compare civil rights era-Mississippi and Nazi
Germany, he believes it to be an apt comparison in terms of public complicity. As I will explore later, a
parallel could also be drawn between the meticulous record keeping of both groups.
678 Carol V. R. George, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi: Methodists, Murder, and the Struggle for Racial
Justice in Neshoba County (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2015), 3.
679 Ibid.
680 Ibid.
677

207

towards racial reconciliation, with particular emphasis on the forthcoming Mississippi
Civil Rights Museum. Ultimately, I argue that through its programming, partnerships, and
digital projects, MDAH has fostered a space for furthering racial reconciliation in
Mississippi.

VII. A. An Old South Archive

Ernst Posner’s history of state archives noted that in 1941 MDAH was housed in a small,
inadequate space within the War Memorial building.681 The location seems fitting given
the institution’s origins within a segregated, post-reconstruction South desperate to
memorialize a politically romanticized Lost Cause history of the Confederacy. Both the
first and second directors of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History—Dunbar
Rowland (1902-1937) and William McCain (1938-1955)—perpetuated the dominant, proSouthern view of history. MDAH was not unique in this respect, as most public archives
in the South furthered the Lost Cause narrative by focusing on records and materials
related to the Confederacy. Historian Fitzhugh Brundage explains the intersection of
archives and the project to memorialize the Confederacy:
For the United Confederate Veterans and the Sons of Confederate Veterans,
campaigning for historical repositories was an extension of their campaign to
preserve the ‘true history’ of the South’s failed experiment in nationhood. While
the federal government scrupulously preserved Union records, it had made no
comparable commitment to conserve those of the Confederacy. Aside from their
practical benefits to veterans, who would be able to trace more easily their war

681

Ernst Posner, American State Archives (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1964), 159.

208

records (and secure state pensions), public archives would be reliquaries of the
Lost Cause.682
As shown by Brundage’s quotation, archives across the South joined in the larger project
to collect neglected Confederate records and further a pro-South narrative of history. In
this respect, MDAH was anything but neutral during its first half-century of existence.
When the board of trustees of the Mississippi Historical Society selected Dunbar
Rowland to direct the nascent state archive, it was with an implicit directive to perpetuate
a Lost Cause version of history. As Galloway notes, the board had already made its
intents clear in a previous statement: “Mississippi, in common with the other Southern
states, is entering upon a great historical renaissance and the people of the South are
beginning to realize as never before that ‘there is nothing wrong with our history, but in
the writing of it.’683 The founding of the State Archives of Mississippi in 1902 came on
the heels of the nation’s first state archive in Alabama, which had been established with a
similar rationale and purpose. According to Brundage, boosters of the archive argued that
it would be a place “to which the patriotic heart of all Alabamians could turn with pride
and delight.”684 For Alabama, Mississippi, and the rest of the South, archives and
museums provided a means to counter the humiliation of reconstruction with a narrative of
an honorable South ever defiant in defeat.

Fitzhugh Brundage, Southern Past: A Clash of Race and Memory (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2005), 125.
683 Qtd. in Patricia Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History: Dunbar Rowland and the Beginning of the
State Archives of Mississippi (1902-1936),” The American Archivist 69 (Spring/Summer 2006), 88.
684 Qtd. in Brundage, Southern Past, 115. The website for the Alabama Department of Archives and
History also mentions its origins in memorializing the Confederacy: “Through the 1890s, the feeling of
a need to honor those who had served the Confederacy grew increasingly stronger. This memorial
movement led to the establishment of patriotic societies, the erection of monuments, and the creation
of the Department of Archives and History as an institution in which key documents and artifacts
could be preserved. “History of the Alabama Department of Archives and History,” Alabama
Department of Archives and History, accessed May 18, 2017,
http://www.archives.alabama.gov/intro/adah.html .
682

209

As director from 1902 to 1937, Rowland had an unparalleled influence on the
development of MDAH’s collections with his first task being “the sacred duty to preserve”
the records of Mississippi’s Confederate soldiers.685 By prioritizing records that
“support[ed] his own views and that looked determinedly backward to a romanticized Lost
Cause of the Confederacy,” argues Galloway, Rowland “failed to obtain collections that
were representative of all the people of Mississippi while they were still available to
collect.”686 Furthermore, Galloway’s research shows Rowland used his position as
director to advocate enthusiastically for a pro-South telling of history. In an illustrative
example, she recounts Rowland’s remarks at a 1902 address on race relations in the South:
“he [Rowland] painted a chivalrous picture of antebellum planter society and a lurid
portrait of carpetbagger Reconstruction […] His argument, buttressed by legal citations,
advocated that the inferior black race be segregated from the white race and that it never
be allowed political control in the South again.”687 During his tenure, Rowland instituted
sound archival practices at MDAH, which in turn were employed to further the state’s
agenda of white supremacy.688
Rowland remained director until his passing in 1937, after which William D.
McCain became the MDAH’s director. With the outbreak of World War II during his
tenure, McCain served with the Monuments Men before departing to accept the
presidency of the University of Southern Mississippi in 1955.689 During his leadership of

Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History,” 92, 98.
Ibid., 115.
687 Ibid., 91-92.
688 For more information on Rowland’s archival legacy at MDAH, see: “Dunbar Rowland’s Tenure at
MDAH,” A Sense of Place: Collections Blog, March 15, 2011,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/senseofplace/2011/03/15/dunbar-rowlands-tenure-at-mdah/ .
689 See: Galloway, “Archives, Power, and History,” 114, and “Mississippi’s Monuments Man: William D.
McCain,” A Sense of Place: Collections Blog, February 7, 2014,
685
686

210

Mississippi’s Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV) from 1953 to 1962, McCain bolstered
the membership of “an attractive organization for giving white men the kind of identity
they valued and confidence to fight to maintain their superior status in the South.”690
Furthermore, McCain was, according to historian Alyssa D. Warrick, “working in concert
with the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission against Civil Rights workers and the
NAACP.”691 Unsurprisingly, McCain’s time at MDAH shows an archival bias towards
preserving Confederate history to the exclusion of African American history. In his 1950
history and program rationale of the MDAH for The American Archivist, for instance,
McCain emphasizes its Confederate holdings without any acknowledgement of the history
of Mississippi’s sizeable African American population.692 Interestingly, though, McCain
would later acknowledge the practical toll of Mississippi’s systemic racism: “White
supremacy has been gained at a terrible cost. The people of Mississippi would have
undoubtedly preferred an inefficient and even corrupt government in the hands of white
men, than a perfect government in which there was a danger of Negro control.”693
It would take the arrival of Charlotte Capers as MDAH’s third director to begin a
change in the institution’s practices and politics. Though Capers had a cosmopolitan
perspective—as shown by her many contributions to the New York Times Review of
Books—she remained devoted to her home state of Mississippi. A shrewd and lively
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/senseofplace/2014/02/07/mississippis-monuments-man-william-dmccain/
690 Alyssa D. Warrick, “ ‘Mississippi’s Greatest Hour’: the Mississippi Civil War Centennial and
Southern Resistance, Southern Cultures 19, no. 3 (Fall 2013): 108-109. Warrick also suggests that
McCain might have had a hand in crafting the SCV’s motto during the 1960s: “Preserving the courage
of the 1860’s amidst the problems of the 1960’s.” The organization’s archival library was named in
honor of McCain after his death.
691 Ibid.
692 William D. McCain, “History and Program of the Mississippi State Department of Archives and
History,” The American Archivist 13, no. 1 (Jan.,1950): 27-34.
693 Qtd. in James W. Silver, Mississippi: The Closed Society (Jackson: University of Mississippi, [1964]
2012), 18.

211

observer of Southern culture, Capers was described by author and friend Eudora Welty as
someone who “sees the social world we all move in with its history behind it, too, that
built and shaped and sometimes shadowed, our own times.”694 Unlike her predecessor,
Capers emphasized her service to the entire state, writing in the 1965 annual report, “the
value of a department of the state government to the people of the state should be
measured by the service it renders to the public.”695 During her time as director from 1955
to 1969, Capers modernized MDAH’s archival practices in an unprecedented fashion. In
consultation with renowned archivist, Ernst Posner, she began keeping detailed statistics
on patron requests and use, as well as solved the department’s storage problems by
persisting to push legislators to create what would become the new Archives and History
building in 1971.696 She also was responsible for spearheading a long campaign to bring a
records management program to the state and played a key role in the restoration of the
old capital building.697 Crucial to that capital project was the previously mentioned
Winter, whom Capers had asked to join the board in 1957. Forty-years later, he would be
breaking ground to the state’s new Civil Rights Museum.698
Elbert R. Hilliard followed R. A. McLemore’s brief tenure as director at MDAH,
ushering in a commitment to building African American and civil rights collections. In
the annual report for 1975 to 1976, for instance, the Department accessioned a slavery
collection purchased from LSU Library and placed major emphasis on “loca[ting] and
Eudora Welty, forward to The Capers Papers, by Charlotte Capers (Jackson, MS: University of
Mississippi Press, 1982), 10. For one example of the style of Capers’s book reviews, see: Charlotte
Capers, “Fortune Hunter at the Old White: Roses from the South,” New York Times (New York, NY),
January 25, 1959.
695 Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1965 Annual Report, 8.
696 Ibid. Charlotte Capers, “In Memoriam Ernst Posner 1892-1980,” The Primary Source, 2, no. 2 (May
1980): 4.
697 Capers, “In Memoriam,” 4.
698 Amanda Lyons, “Giving Shape and Substance to Our Society: William F. Winter, Leadership, and the
Mississippi Department of Archives and History,” The Southern Quarterly 54, no. 1 (Fall 2016): 118.
694

212

acquir[ing] materials on the history of Blacks in Mississippi both in manuscript and
published form.”699 Hilliard would continue to build MDAH’s civil rights collections with
an oral history project collecting the stories of Mississippians involved in the movement
during the 1960s. The resulting collection, along with other ongoing oral history projects,
would span several years and “be used by scholars and researchers,” as well as provide
material for multiple publications.700 In 1983, the National Endowment for the
Humanities awarded MDAH a grant for an exhibit devoted to the civil rights movement,
while other grant funding was used to create a computerized finding aid for a newsfilm
collection that included “valuable material pertaining to the Civil Rights Movement.”701
Under Hilliard and later Hank Holmes, the department would steadily build an impressive
collection of African American and civil rights material related to the state of Mississippi.
MDAH under Hilliard’s direction also collected the materials of those working
counter to the civil rights movement. Along with the Sovereignty Commission records,
which I will discuss in more depth in later sections, MDAH has collected Ku Klux Klan
materials, and the records of the white supremacist Citizens Councils. Between 1973 and
1975, for instance, MDAH acquired three boxes of Citizen Council records, as well as a
collection of Citizen Council Forum Films.702 Reflecting on MDAH’s commitment to
documenting all sides of the state’s civil rights story, former Archives and Records
Services Director, Julia Young, sees such collecting practices as a way for the department

Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1975-76 Annual Report, 17.
Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1978-79 Annual Report, 16 and Mississippi
Department of Archives and History, 1980-1981 Annual Report, 18.
701 Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1973-74 Annual Report and Mississippi
Department of Archives and History, 1974-75 Annual Report.
702 Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1977-78 Annual Report, 13.
699
700

213

to “provide a safe place for conversation and dialogue.”703 MDAH’s ability to foster an
open space for dialogue owes much to the political independence identified by Hilliard in
1977:
Its [MDAH] accomplishments and reputation for service have been largely due to
the generous support of the Mississippi Legislature, to the counsel of the
distinguished trustees, to the leadership of its first four directors, and to its unique
nonpolitical governing structure [emphasis added].704
Only by remaining “free of partisanship and political patronage,” Hilliard explains, could
MDAH fulfill its mission to provide “documentation and interpretation of the State’s
history.” 705 Though obviously still beholden to the legislature for funding, MDAH’s
governance—an independent agency with a head who reports only and directly to the
legislature—helps sustain its unique potential to facilitate social justice.

VII. B. Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission

When the Commission records arrived at MDAH in 1977, it presented an opportunity for
the Department to prove itself an independent, unbiased repository serving the interest of
all Mississippians. Although the move to MDAH guaranteed the preservation of
Commission materials, the legislature mandated that all files be sealed for fifty years.706
The following year, the American Civil Liberties Union [ACLU] filed a federal suit on

Julia Marks Young, Division Director, Mississippi Department of Archives and History, interview
with author, November 5, 2015.
704 Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1977-78 Annual Report, 9.
705 Ibid. Hilliard’s history of MDAH also emphasizes the importance of MDAH being apolitical. Elbert
Hilliard, “The Mississippi Department of Archives and History,” The Primary Source 25, no. 2 (2003): 2.
706 Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 1978-79 Annual Report, 16-17.
703

214

behalf of ninety-four individuals and six organizations that the files be opened.707 The
ACLU won that ruling and the MDAH began preparing for release before another federal
ruling temporarily reversed the decision.708 Plaintiffs were thereby barred from records
directly observing and commenting on their own lives. Though discouraging for litigants,
the struggle would continue for decades with ethical and archival repercussions. The
following section explores the issues raised by the case while focusing on MDAH’s
stewardship of the Commission records. More specifically, I hope to show how the
endeavor to preserve and provide access to the collection is an exemplar of the state
archive’s attempt to take an active and unbiased approach to civil rights materials.
The Mississippi Legislature created the Commission in 1956 as a response to the
Brown v. Board of Education ruling that segregated public schools were unconstitutional.
Sarah Rowe Sims, a special projects officer in MDAH’s Archives and Library Division,
recounts the Commission’s mission to protect Mississippi from “encroachment thereon by
the Federal Government or any branch, department or agency thereof; to resist the
usurpation of the rights and powers reserved to this state and our sister states by the
Federal Government or any branch, department or agency thereof.”709 The agency set
about accomplishing its objectives with a small team consisting of a director, public
relations director, investigators, and clerical staff.710 Although the Commission would
liken itself to the FBI, it more closely resembled the spy network of a totalitarian
government or police state. Its work depended on a web of black and white informers
who supplied the Commission with information about their friends and neighbors. Percy
Ibid.
Ibid.
709 Sarah Rowe-Sims, “The Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission: An Agency History,” Journal of
Mississippi History 61 (Spring 1999): 29.
710 Ibid., 30.
707
708

215

Greene, for instance, was both the black editor of the Jackson Advocate and a Commission
informer for nearly ten years.711 While Greene’s conservatism and outspoken support of
segregation made him an unsurprising informant, other informers remained undetected
within the African American community.
Naturally, the Commission did not work in a vacuum but rather formed an integral
part of what University of Mississippi historian, James Silver, famously called the “closed
society.” According to Silver, a “closed society” indoctrinates its citizens to a common
social view, leaving no space for major dissent. Furthermore, as Silver relates, “with a
substantial challenge from the outside—to slavery in the 1850’s and to segregation in the
1950’s—the society tightly closes its ranks, becomes inflexible and stubborn, and lets no
scruple, legal or ethical, stand in the way of the enforcement of the orthodoxy.”712 In
Mississippi, citizens from all walks of life were culpable in perpetuating the “closed
society,” from the “men of good will” too frightened to act to “the press, the clergy,
businessmen, labor leaders, lawyers, judges, politicians, educators, and patriots” who
defended the status quo.713 William Winter’s reflection on the 1962 Ole Miss integration
riot makes a similar observation: “[t]he guilt for it [the riots] were on all of our hands” for

See: Julian Williams, “Percy Greene and the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission,” Journalism
History 28, no. 2 (Summer 2002): 66-72.
712 Silver, The Closed Society, 6. The quotation comes from a full outlining of how a closed society takes
shape: “For whatever reason, the community sets up the orthodox view. Its people are constantly
indoctrinated—not a difficult task, since they are inclined to the accepted creed by circumstance.
When there is no effective challenge to the code, a mild toleration of dissent is evident, provided the
non-comformist is tactful and does not go far. But with a substantial challenge from the outside—to
slavery in the 1850’s and to segregation in the 1950’s—the society tightly closes its ranks, becomes
inflexible and stubborn, and lets no scruple, legal or ethical, stand in the way of the enforcement of the
orthodoxy. The voice of reason is stilled and the moderate either goes along or is eliminated. Those in
control during such times of crisis are certain to be extremists whose decisions are determined by
their conformity to the orthodoxy. The likelihood of intelligent decisions is thus being reduced, and
eventual disaster is predictable.”
713 Ibid., 145, 71.
711

216

creating and maintaining a “closed society.”714 Although each Deep South state had its
own version of a “closed society,” Mississippi’s was unique in both degree and duration.
According to Silver, no other Southern state “has clung so much more desperately to its
closed society” than Mississippi, thereby resulting in an inefficient and corrupt
government and the shameful distinction of being the last state to have “complete public
school segregation”715
In order to maintain a “closed society” amidst outside pressure from the federal
government, Mississippi looked to the Commission and other state and civic organizations
to enforce orthodoxy. Silver writes that the state’s “doctrine of white supremacy is
guarded by a bureaucracy, by ceaseless, high-powered, and skillful indoctrination
employing both persuasion and fear, and by the elimination, without regard for law or
ethics of those who will not go along.”716 The Commission shows how that
“indoctrination” was woven into the fabric of governance itself, with Rowe-Simms bluntly
describing it as “the state’s official tax-funded agency to combat activities of the civil
rights movement.”717 Although, as Rowe-Simms relates, the Commission would
emphasize certain duties depending on its director and governor at the time, its three core
functions were “investigative, advisory, and public relations,” wherein it “spied on civil
rights workers, acted as a clearing-house for information on civil rights activities and
legislation from around the nation, funneled funds to pro-segregation causes, and
disseminated right-wing propaganda.”718 The Commission, long known for its ineptitude,

William F. Winter, “Opening Doors in a Closed Society,” Essays on Deepening the American Dream
16 (Winter 2010) (Kalamazoo, MI: Fetzer Institute, 2010), 2.
715 Silver, The Closed Society, 10, 18, 64.
716 Ibid., 151.
717 Rowe Sims, “An Agency History,” 34.
718 Ibid.
714

217

would come to be seen as something of a joke before ceasing operations in 1973 and fully
dissolving in 1977.719
The Commission’s records—constituting “six filing cabinets, two unsealed
pasteboard boxes said to contain fiscal records, two separate folders in a manila envelope,
and a bound volume which was said to be a minute book”—were in peril of being
destroyed following the agency’s closure.720 Representative John Sharp Holmes
introduced an amendment to burn Commission records to prevent a “witch hunt” of those
implicated.721 Unsurprisingly, the Commission itself had likely already destroyed some of
its records. In a 1965 memo cc’d to the Governor’s Office, then director, Erle Johnston,
Jr. ordered staff to “remove from the files any reports of investigators which might in any
way be construed to mean that the Sovereignty Commission has interfered in any way
with voter registration drives or demonstrations.”722 The memo goes on to state that a
“decision on disposal [of reports] will be forthcoming”—a logical move given that the
Justice Department would later look to sealed Commission records to investigate voter
registration.723 Fortunately calls from other legislators, Director Hilliard, and a resolution
from the MDAH Board of Trustees “strongly imploring the legislature” not to destroy
Commission files, were enough to ensure their preservation.724

Ibid., 50.
Ibid., 52.
721 Ibid., 53. A few days later an additional small package of records arrived from the governor’s office.
722 Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, “Files and Future Procedures,” February 8, 1965, SCRID
# 99-62-0-33-1-1-1, Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission Records, 1994-2006, Mississippi
Department of Archives and History, accessed June 25, 2017,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/arrec/digital_archives/sovcom/result.php?image=images/png/cd10/0831
82.png&otherstuff=99|62|0|33|1|1|1|82138|.
723 Ibid. David Pilcher, Electronic Archives, Mississippi Department of Archives and History, interview
with author, November 6, 2015.
724 Rowe-Sims, “An Agency History,” 52. Director Hilliard argued that the records of this “unpopular
or unfortunate period of history” should be preserved for future historians. Yasuhiro Katagiri,
Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission (Oxford: University Press of Mississippi, 2001),183.
719
720

218

Arguments to preserve the records tended to emphasize both their historical value
and potential to help Mississippians heal and move on from the injustices of the past.
Winter, who was a former lieutenant governor at the time and president of the MDAH
Board of Trustees, alluded to both factors in his statement on the Commission records,
stating that there was “too much historical value in these records to destroy them” and that
their destruction would be “inconsistent with the way we do things and smacks of
totalitarianism.”725 As Rowe Sims’s history shows, other legislators shared Winter’s
opinion and spoke out about not wanting “to be characterized as book burners” and the
futility of “shoving it under the rug.”726 Even a former Commission member admitted to
the need to preserve them for historical significance.727 Katherine Wisser and Joel BlancoRivera’s comparative analysis of state intelligence records categorized the Commission
among international agencies whose records were not destroyed and are now open “with
clear policies.”728 Though initially sealed, the fact that the Commission records were
preserved at all was indicative of Mississippi’s conscious move away from its “closed
society” of the past. The state was now poised to begin a new relationship with history,
wherein it acknowledged ignominious recent events—the Ole Miss riots, the murder of
Medgar Evers, and the murders of civil rights workers in Neshoba County—as a means to
move forward into a more peaceful and prosperous future.

Qtd. in Rowe-Sims, “An Agency History,” 53.
Ibid., 51-52
727 Ibid., 53.
728 Katherine M. Wisser and Joel A. Blanco-Rivera, “Surveillance, Documentation and Privacy: An
International Comparative Analysis of State Intelligence Records,” Archival Science 16 (2016): 135140. East Germany’s Stasi and Mexico’s Federal Directorate of Security fall within the same
classification as MDAH.
725
726

219

VII. C. Access, Privacy, and the Sovereignty Commission Online

The eventual release and digitization of the Commission records provided a tangible
marker of Mississippi’s opening of its “closed society.” For the state archive to gain the
public’s trust its work had to be apolitical and thoroughly transparent—the antithesis of
the Commission records they would be opening. It also had to show sensitivity to the
Commission’s victims by allowing them to remain anonymous. An ongoing dialogue
between MDAH and the public was vital to releasing records fraught with such political
implications and personal trauma. It provided a rare opportunity for state actors to regain
public trust by acting on behalf of all of Mississippi’s citizens—a task made possible by
an MDAH that had proven its independence and social conscience under the leadership of
Elbert Hilliard. The following section examines MDAH’s opening and digitization of
Commission records with an emphasis on their archival and social justice implications.
As a government archive, MDAH itself was entangled in the governance that had
created the Commission records with which it was now entrusted. Just as the Department
had been implicated in the racist power structures that led to the creation of the
Commission, it now had the power to ameliorate the state government’s legacy of
divisions and ongoing trauma. As Pat Galloway argues in her case study of Mississippi’s
electronic recordkeeping initiative, “ [a]s archivists we need to recognize that the records
of government embody power and to admit that we ourselves unavoidably help to
construct what counts as the official record of state government by managing and

220

collecting it—and by failing to do so.”729 By advocating for the preservation of the
Commission files, MDAH avoided the sin of omission and helped ensure that the state
would be held accountable for deeds many of its legislatures would as soon forget.
When David Pilcher, current Archives and Records Services Director, arrived at
MDAH straight out of college in 1985, the Commission records “were stored in the vault
and were under seal.”730 As previously mentioned, the records were the subject of a
lengthy court battle initiated by the ACLU/M to open the records public following their
move to MDAH in 1977. The twenty-one year long struggle centered on, as Pilcher and
Rowe-Simms observe, “balancing the demands of public access with the rights of privacy
protection.”731 The files would remain sealed for years with the only exceptions being
instances such as a United States Justice Department search for information pertaining to a
judicial redistricting case in 1988.732 The following year Judge Barbour ruled that the state
had acted unconstitutionally in sealing the Commission records, and that the files should
be released as public records. Influencing Barbour’s decision were multiple leaks from
sources outside of MDAH and the availability of some commission documents at the
University of Southern Mississippi at Hattiesburg.733 Finally, in 1994, Judge Barbour

Patricia Galloway, Mississippi Electronic Records Initiative: A Case Study in State Government
Electronic Record, Final Report (Jackson, MS. Mississippi Department of Archives and History, 2000),
27-28.
730 Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
731 Sarah Rowe-Simms and David Pilcher, “The Conversion of the Mississippi State Sovereignty
Commission Records,” The Primary Source 21, no. 1 (1999): 18.
732 For further detail on the provenance of the records, see “Sovereignty Commission Online,”
Mississippi Department of Archives and History, accessed June 27, 2017,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/arrec/digital_archives/sovcom/colldesc.php.
733 Lisa K. Speer, “Fresh Focus: Mississippi’s ‘Spy Files’: The State Sovereignty Commission Records
Controversy, 1977-1999,” Provenance, Journal of the Society of Georgia Archivists 17, no. 1 (January
1999): 110.
729

221

released a memorandum both ordering the files to be opened and suggesting access be
provided through a “computer imaging system.”734
Alongside the ethical and legal challenges of the Commission records the order
now presented a major technical hurdle for MDAH. The archive had no previous
experience in imaging and looked to archivists who dealt with governmental records to
learn the skills necessary.735 Rowe-Simms and Pilcher describe the “crash course” that the
“MDAH Official Records Section underwent”: “Staff members spoke to and
corresponded with people who did have experience with imaging, gathered published
information on the topic, viewed government imaging systems in action, and attended
vendor demonstrations.”736 Working in conjunction with the Mississippi Department of
Information Technology Services, a request for proposal went out for a vender to take on
the project. SYSCON of Tuscaloosa, Alabama won the contract and began working with
MDAH staff to implement the judge’s order. MDAH’s first foray into imaging had
begun.
Given that the judge originally allowed only one year for the scanning and
indexing of Commission records, MDAH had to factor its time constraints into all
decisions.737 With SYSCON on board, they began developing a plan for input, retrieval
and access within the database, which would draw on the Commission’s own file

Rowe-Simms and Pilcher,” The Conversion,” 19. Pilcher recalls the judge offering several options
on how to provide access, but he and the rest of the staff felt that the only way to comply with the
judge’s order was to embark on an imaging project. Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
735 Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
736 Rowe-Simms and Pilcher, “The Conversion,” 19.
737 Ibid. The original timetable was altered by subsequent appeals.
734

222

numbering system.738 Pilcher describes how work proceeded both in terms of day-to-day
operations and the working relationship between MDAH and SYSCON:
It was really a three-person team that did the actual scanning. And quality control
and then began with the indexing. And it was really two scanners going—kind of
all day long […] And it was a great working relationship with them and so
basically we were just kind of in constant contact with them about—[like if] we’ve
discovered there is a little change we need to make in the software, there’s
something we didn’t anticipate in the indexing and they would just work with us
throughout and on the fly to make it happen.739
The hard work of those involved ensured that MDAH met the necessary deadlines as laid
out by the court. According to Rowe-Simms and Pilcher, an average of 1000 images were
scanned and checked per day, which meant that by summer 1995 the database had
approximately 132,700 images.740
Other parts of the judge’s order directly addressed the rights of the Commission’s
victims.741 Commission records were, after all, surreptitious and unauthorized glimpses
into the private lives of citizens, many of whom might now wish to keep their records
private. Yasuhiro Katigura’s Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission recounts how
Judge Barbour weighed issues of privacy and access when formulating “a series of
complicated and time-consuming procedures” to protect those named in Commission
records: “the Department of Archives and History was directed to place a public notice in
the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, and USA Today to ‘sufficiently notify those
who may have been victims of unlawful Commission activities as to their rights as set
Ibid, 20. The Commission’s system for categorization provides further insight into the scope of
their operations: (1) Race Agitators (2) Integration Organizations (3) School Integration (4) Civil
Rights-Elections (5) Civil Rights-Violence (6) Miscellaneous-Inquiry Concerning (7) AdministrativeOffice (8)Administrative-Personnel (9) Administrative-Informants (10) Publicity-General (11)
Criminal Cases (12) Speeches (13) Subversion. Ibid.
739 Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
740 Rowe-Simms and Pilcher, “The Conversion,” 22.
741 Judge Barbour defined a victim as anyone who was “subject to investigation, surveillance,
intrusions or the dissemination of false and misleading information by the Sovereignty Commission.”
Qtd. in Speer, “Fresh Focus: Mississippi’s ‘Spy Files,” 111.
738

223

forth’ in his decision.”742 Though later appealed, these were the instructions MDAH
followed preceding the release of any records. Pilcher describes how the process
proceeded in three parts: a notification period, a period “where people could write in and
requests to see things that had been indexed with their name,” and a period wherein
victims could “make a decision about whether or not they wanted to exercise any type of
privacy.”743
The privacy versus access debate continued after the public release of Commission
records on March 17, 1998. According to the New York Times, “only about 1,000 of the
60,000 people mentioned in the files” responded to the notifications, and, in at least one
case, a women mentioned in a Commission report “had no idea such files existed” and
was embarrassed by the report’s release. 744 Barbour himself admitted that “no system of
disclosure is perfect” and the balance between privacy and access is difficult—if not
impossible—to strike. As Lisa Speer observes in a 1999 issue of Provenance, there exists
a “heavy responsibility faced by the courts and the archival community of balancing
individual privacy rights and public interest.”745 Rowe-Sims and her MDAH co-authors
draw similar conclusions, noting the “ominous responsibility” and “murky waters of
privacy and access rights” that archivists must navigate.746 Though admittedly imperfect,

Katagiri, Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, 188.
Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
744 Rick Bragg, “Old Allies Part Ways on Opening Files of Hate,” The New York Times (New York, NY),
March 18, 1998. Sarah Rowe-Sims and her co-authors identify 87,000 unique names out of 300,000
names occurring in the records. Sarah Rowe-Sims, Sandra Boyd., H. T. Holmes, “Balancing Privacy and
Access: Opening the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission Records,” in Privacy and Confidentiality
Perspectives: Archivists and Archival Records, eds. M.L. Behrnd-Klodt , P.J. Wosk (Chicago: Society of
American Archivists), 168.
745 Speer, “Fresh Focus: Mississippi’s Spy Files,” 115.
746 Rowe-Sims, et. al., “Balancing Privacy and Access,” 160.
742
743

224

both Barbour and MDAH worked to balance, in Speer’s words, “individual privacy rights
with the public’s right to know.”747
The impact of the Commission electronic records was hard to gauge when first
released. Access was initially limited to a few computer workstations within the library
with users registering for one-hour blocks of use.748 Rowe-Sims describes the scene inside
the archive at the 1998 opening:
Initially, the media blitzed the archives, hurriedly scanning the pages for a possible
‘smoking gun.’ A hesitant public trickled into the library. Students, historians, and
researchers began to comb through the records. Individuals came to search for
information on themselves as well as friends and relatives. Some, like the family
of assassinated civil rights activist Vernon Dahmer, came seeking justice, hoping
to find evidence to help convict Dahmer’s killers. Others were driven by
curiosity.749
While such a range of users indicates a positive sign of access and use, Speer pointed out
in 1999 that as of then “scholarly researchers have paid only modest attention to the files
in the almost three years since their opening.”750 In the years since then, however,
Commission records have been used in a range of books and articles with such diverse
titles as “The Citizens Council and Africa: White Supremacy in Global Perspective” and
Kill Anything that Moves: the Real American War in Vietnam.751

Speer, “Fresh Focus: Mississippi’s Spy Files,” 111.
Rowe-Sims reports that initial users had access to three computer workstations, while Speer writes
that there were only two workstations. Rowe-Sims, “An Agency History,” 57 and Speer, “Fresh Focus:
Mississippi’s Spy Files,” 114.
749 Rowe-Sims, “An Agency History,” 57-58.
750 Speer, “Fresh Focus: Mississippi’s Spy Files,” 114.
751 Stephanie R. Rolph, “The Citizens’ Council and Africa: White Supremacy in Global Perspective,”
Journal of Southern History 82, no. 3 (August 2016): 617-650. Nick Turse, Kill Anything that Moves: the
Real American War in Vietnam (New York: Picador, 2013). There are 49 books and articles listed on
Google Scholar that use MDAH’s suggested citation for individual records of “Mississippi State
Sovereignty Commission Records.” Usage is likely higher with some books and articles not indexed by
Google Scholar or relying on an alternative citation such as listing the name of the archive and the
collection.
747
748

225

As Rowe-Sims points out the Commission records ultimately have had two kinds
of impacts: an expanded historical understanding of everyday civil rights activists and the
conviction of those responsible for civil rights-era crimes.752 In regards to the latter,
Rowe-Sims recounts how Commission records brought perpetrators to justice both before
and after they were opened to the public. Leaked Commission records in 1994 prompted a
third retrial and final conviction of Byron De La Beckwith for the murder of Medgar
Evers and, in 1998, MDAH “delivered commission documents to the family of Vernon
Dahmer, a Hattiesburg businessman and activist who was killed when the Klan
firebombed his home in January 1966,” which helped convict his murderer, Ku Klux Klan
grand wizard Sam Bowers.753 Given that justice had been so long delayed for the victims
of civil rights-era crimes, the Commission records were primarily used for convictions in
the years immediately following their release. While the Commission records’ potential to
facilitate legal justice may have waned over the years, their historical value has only
grown as historians and other researchers continue to mine the Commission records for
more insights into both their specific historical period and government surveillance in
general.754

VII. D. “Exceedingly Neutral” and Active Memory

Rowe-Sims, “Balancing Privacy and Access,” 172.
Ibid. Rowe-Sims further notes that “commission documents are also being reviewed in connection
with the 1964 murders of civil rights workers James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael
Schwerner in Neshoba County and in the February 1967 murder of Wharlest Jackson in Natchez.” Ibid.
754 For recent examples, see: Alan Draper, “Class and Politics in the Mississippi Movement: An
Analysis of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Delegation,” Journal of Southern History 82, no.
2 (May 2016): 269-304, and the previously mentioned Rolph, “The Citizens’ Council and Africa,” and
Wisser and Blanco-Rivera, “Surveillance, Documentation, and Privacy.”
752
753

226

While typically cast as a case study of access versus privacy in governmental records, the
Commission records also speak to the archive’s need to play an active role in determining
how state records are preserved and accessed. As a governmental archive, MDAH was
entrusted with carrying out a judicial order, which, in Pilcher’s words meant that “we
[MDAH] basically just did what the judge said to do.”755 Rowe-Sims and her co-authors
also allude to how, aside from “saving the records from the funeral pyre,” MDAH’s role
had been limited to legal custodianship of the records.756 That position changed, however,
in the September 1993 hearings on privacy and access issues, wherein MDAH “adamantly
insisted […] that the physical and intellectual integrity of the files should be preserved”
through electronic imaging.757 According to Rowe-Sims, MDAH’s newfound
assertiveness impacted the court by making Judge Barbour, “sympathetic to archival
concerns,” as shown by his intent to maintain “the original integrity of the files while
balancing the competing interests of the various plaintiffs in privacy and disclosure.”758 In
the struggle to balance privacy and access, MDAH was itself learning how to navigate its
responsibilities as a legal custodian with the imperative to assert its principles. By the
time the lengthy court battle ended, MDAH had decided that passivity was no longer a
tenable option.759
The release and digitization of the Commission records is indicative of MDAH’s
contemporary role in furthering social justice and facilitating intercommunity dialogue in
Mississippi. Though counterintuitive, Young cites neutrality as the primary force behind
the Department’s social justice interventions:
Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
Rowe-Sims, et. al., “Balancing Privacy and Access,” 166.
757 Ibid., 166-167.
758 Ibid.
759 Ibid., 172.
755
756

227

We are deliberately trying to be exceedingly neutral. We have to be neutral. We
collect materials from all citizens, we document all activities, and we try to
document all organizations. We have Clan material. We have Citizen’s Council
material. We have Civil Rights workers materials, and we have to be neutral. But,
by being neutral we provide a safe place for conversation and dialogue. And,
therefore, that is an activist role in a way.760
As the quotation suggests, MDAH defines neutrality as both collecting without intentional
bias or exclusions and providing a “safe place” for the community to come together
uninhibited, if possible, by racial or political divides. In so doing, MDAH does not view
activism and neutrality as forking paths but rather as alternative, often complimentary
means for improving the community.
Given the problematic political and historical connotations of archives and
neutrality, a better descriptor of the work Young describes might be what Aleida Assmann
calls “active memory.”761 In her research into cultural memory, Assmann identifies active
memory as perpetuating “what a society has consciously selected and maintains as salient
and vital for a common orientation and a shared remembering.”762 Manifestations of
active memory occur at schools and museums and during holidays and other occasions
where the community shares and reflects on its culture and heritage. Assmann contrasts
active memory with “archival memory,” which stores “information that “has been
neglected, forgotten, excluded, or discarded but is still deemed worthy and important
enough to be preserved in material form.”763 Eric Ketelaar rightly points out the faultiness
of Assmann’s division between active and archival memories, given that archives are

Young, interview with author, November 5, 2015.
See the preceding literature review for a survey of archival writings on neutrality.
762 Aleida Assmann, “Re-framing Memory: Between Individual and Collective Forms of Constructing
the Past,” in Performing the Past: Memory, History and Identity in Modern Europe, ed. Karin Tilmans, et.
al. (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2010), 43.
763 Ibid.
760
761

228

neither static nor uninvolved in the formation and maintenance of a community.764
Assmann herself clarifies, however, that “the borderline between the archival and the
canon’s active memory is permeable in both directions.”765 Assmann’s observation that
the memories collectively valued by a community are fluid and can shift provides a
helpful way of identifying MDAH’s own transformation from an “Old South” archive to a
civil rights hub for the state and nation.
The community driven nature of active memory captures how MDAH views itself
as being independent of, as opposed to disconnected from, state politics. Young
emphasizes the Department’s established independence from the legislature, which has
kept it from being “subject to the political whims” of the state’s largely conservative,
Republican governance.766 In so doing, MDAH shields the state’s historical legacy from
the vagaries of politics and the will of powerful state legislators. Of course, as Mississippi
has continued to shift into George’s “Other Mississippi” of tolerance and equality, MDAH
and Mississippi’s Legislature have been working towards similar aims. For instance, the
Legislature, in the words of former director Elbert Hilliard, “formally acknowledged the
State’s responsibility for the preservation of its documentary heritage” by funding the
William F. Winter Archives and History Building that opened in 2003 and, in 2018, the
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum.767 The Department’s evolution, thereby, both reflects
and further facilitates Mississippi’s ongoing effort to move away from a “closed society”
to one that values equal rights and opportunities for its citizens.

Eric Ketelaar, “Records Out and Archives In: Early Modern Cities as Creators of Records and as
Communities of Archives,” Archival Science 10: 202-203.
765 Assmann, “Re-framing Memory,” 44.
766 Young, interview with author, November 5, 2015.
767
Hilliard, “The Mississippi Department of Archives and History,” 7.
764

229

Like the schools and museums that Assmann points to as institutions of “active
memory,” MDAH reflects and shapes its community. Whereas—as Rowe-Sims and her
co-authors argue—MDAH initially acted as a “mere keeper of records” in response to the
Commission records court proceedings, it began to change in 1990 when the board of
trustees acted contrary to the wishes of the governor and attorney general by advocating
privacy screenings for Commission records.768 MDAH has since shown itself to be a
dynamic and active institution, willing to assert itself and challenge legislative decisions
related to how the state reckons with its history. The “exceedingly neutral” institution that
Young describes does not cling to the illusion of an apolitical archive, but rather, in the
words of Rowe-Simms and her MDAH colleagues, affirms that “[a]rchivists do not exist
in a vacuum, but must respond appropriately to the social, cultural, and political
environment in which they live and work.”769 They are stewards of memory in regular
interplay with their community, working to provide a “neutral” or equally representative
and welcoming institution for all of its citizens.
MDAH’s overall approach to history has helped foster dialogue between
Mississippians about their history, governance, and other vital issues. Public forums,
events, and the weekly “History is Lunch” series are all opportunities for the public to
gather at the archive and openly discuss the sometimes raw and unresolved history of their
state. As Young observes when describing the “History is Lunch” series,
you frequently have mixed audiences that come and hear an author talk about
difficult stories, and so it’s a neutral ground where people feel comfortable asking
questions and having a discussion in a mixed group, and I know this seems
simplistic to people but for this to be happening in Mississippi is really
important.770
Rowe-Simms, Boyd, and Holmes, “Balancing Privacy and Access,” 172
Ibid., 173-174.
770 Ibid.
768
769

230

Along with creating a space to discuss the past, MDAH provides venues for citizens to air
their opinions of the current legislature. Young recalls a recent public viewing of a
collaborative MDAH/University of Mississippi documentary, wherein viewers voiced
their criticisms of the current governor, legislature, and Republican Party.771 Such
instances are indicative of how people from various viewpoints and backgrounds can
comfortably discuss important issues about the past and present at MDAH.772
Moreover, MDAH’s work transcends the physical space of the archive and has
implications for those outside of the state. Its digitization of the Commission files, in
particular, shows how MDAH has prioritized making important civil rights materials
universally accessible. Following the 2001 conclusion of the privacy and disclosure
process of the Commission record release, MDAH pivoted to the “long-term requirements
of preservation and access.”773 The Commission records provided the first opportunity for
the Electronic Records division to try a constant migration approach to records
preservation. Also, with the requirements of the court order now fulfilled, MDAH could
act on its own priorities. One such priority was providing “universal, worldwide access to
the Sovereignty Commission images, which meant making them available through the
World Wide Web.”774 Commission photographs, for instance, had been difficult to access
since the court order had required indexing by personal names. MDAH was able to
provide better access by creating a way for photographs to be searched and indexed
individually while still linking back to the main folder. Also, they were able to rescan

Ibid.
Ibid.
773 Anna Schwind, Sarah Rowe-Sims, and David Pilcher, “The Conversion of the Mississippi
Sovereignty Commission Records,” The Primary Source 24, no. 2 (2002): 8.
774 Ibid.
771
772

231

images at a higher resolution, which helped facilitate their subsequent re-use. Reflecting
on the improved scans, Pilcher notes, “that’s been a great thing because you have probably
seen those mug shots of the freedom riders. If you’ve seen the book, Breach of Peace,
there have been exhibits in Memphis and Birmingham and other places that have acquired
the higher resolution scans of those, and it made all that possible.”775

VII. E. Furthering Racial Reconciliation

Entrusted with two oppositional types of collections—one representative of Mississippi’s
past transgressions and the other an exemplar of courage and forward progress—MDAH
provides a space for Mississippians to learn various viewpoints on their history and act on
the clear lessons of the past. Governor Winter has long argued that citizens must have
access to their history in order to move forward as a society, and MDAH’s purposeful
move away from a Lost Cause version of history to one that acknowledges injustices and
celebrates civil rights is indicative of that ethos. At the dedication of the William F.
Winters Archives and History Building in 2003, he made the following observation:
History must reflect our bad times as well as our good ones, our mistakes as well
as our successes, our defeats as well as our victories. It is only through a clear and
honest look at our past that we are able to find the basis now and in the future to
make wise judgments that will keep us from repeating the mistakes of that past.
We must in short learn to be instructed by history but not imprisoned by it.776
MDAH has been the chief facilitator in Mississippi’s “instruct[ion] by history” through
preserving and digitizing the Commission records, building a world-class civil rights

775
776

Pilcher, interview with author, November 6, 2015.
Qtd. in Hilliard, “The Mississippi Department of Archives and History,” 7.

232

collection, developing primary education materials, and, most importantly, providing a
trusted repository for the state’s historical materials. In so doing, it aids the larger
statewide project of furthering racial reconciliation.
Although there is much truth to Galloway’s observation that the “history of
archival behavior” in the state “more or less mirrors the dominant political climate of the
day for individual periods,” MDAH has often outpaced the rest of the state in terms of
racial progressiveness.777 The agency had the first permanent civil rights exhibit in a
museum and a modern legacy of appointing African Americans to its Board of Trustees—
from Dr. Gilbert Mason who led the Biloxi wade-in movement in the 1960s to Rueben
Anderson who was “the first African American at the University of Mississippi law school
and the first African American on the state supreme court.”778 Young notes that there was
a “very clear pattern and effort” to be inclusive, which, to her, is indicative of an effort by
figures such as Governor Winter and former director Hank Holmes to do “what they knew
was right and what they believed in their heart and even if they couldn’t change the
system around them, they could do what they could do at this agency to make it unbiased
and make it reflect all of Mississippi’s history.”779
By nurturing a reputation for fairness and equality over the last few decades, key
figures such as Governor Winter and MDAH Director Hilbert have made it possible for
African Americans to place their trust in the state archive. Governor Winter, for instance,
was instrumental in Myrlie Evers’s decision to donate the papers of her husband, Medgar
Evers, to MDAH.780 According to MDAH’s Amanda Lyons, the 2002 donation of what

Galloway, “Mississippi Electronic Records Initiative,” 28.
Ibid.
779 Ibid.
780 Lyons, “Giving Shape and Substance to Our Society,” 129.
777
778

233

would become the Medgar and Myrlie Evers Papers remains the core of MDAH’s civil
rights collection.781 The now digitized collection consists of thirty-two boxes of materials
related to the Evers and Beasley family dating from 1900 to 1964.782 Myrlie Evers’s
decision to donate the collection to MDAH made a “ ‘strong and public statement’—the
widow of a slain civil rights leader entrusted her papers to the state of Mississippi.”783 As
the archival extension of the state government, MDAH has journeyed from indirect
complicity in the Sovereignty Commission to being entrusted with the historical legacy of
a key civil rights icon. In some respects, the fact that both are now housed at MDAH is a
testament to both the archive’s ability to handle material fraught with political and ethical
complexities and the progress made in the last two decades towards rebuilding African
American trust in their state government.
Racial reconciliation in Mississippi has been aided both by large-scale efforts, such
as the Winter Institute for Racial Reconciliation and small-scale community outreach,
programming, and events at MDAH. Most of Mississippi’s citizens and institutions were
complicit to varying degrees in the “closed society,” and, as George notes, “reconciliation
requires accepting that complicity rests not only in the doing of violent deeds, but also
knowing of them and remaining silent.”784 The Winter Institute and MDAH have
countered the legacy of silence by fostering cross-community communication. In fact, the
Winter Institute for Racial Reconciliation originated in a “free and open discussion of
race” at the University of Mississippi, which showed the need for a permanent institute

Ibid., 130.
For more information about the papers and a collection description, see: “Medgar and Myrlie Evers
Papers,” Mississippi Department of Archives and History, accessed July 29, 2007,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/new/research/collections/medgar-and-myrlie-evers-papers/
783 Ibid.
784 George, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi, 161.
781
782

234

devoted to “reconciling racial differences” across the South.785 Winter notes that the
institute’s work “has demonstrated how the opening of communication between people of
different races reveals how much we have in common.”786 Alongside the opening of new
interracial channels of communication, the Winter Institute works to stamp out hate
speech by “creating a point of view that places racial prejudice and racist speech and acts
outside the bounds of acceptable behavior.”787 Fostering dialogue and open
communication about race in the South provides the lynchpin by which reconciliation and
progress happens at the community level.
MDAH’s events and programs reflect the Department’s awareness of
communication as a core element of racial reconciliation. Conferences and
commemorations of important civil rights events have provided opportunities for MDAH
to bring the community together to discuss the state’s race relations in the past and
present. MDAH and the Mississippi Humanities Council, for instance, partnered with
other organizations and communities to feature local civil rights veterans in programs
entitled “Freedom Summer and Beyond.”788 The successful partnerships ultimately would
draw more than 325 people over the five programs.789 Other instances of MDAH bringing
Mississippians together through history include commemorations of Medgar Evers and the
Freedom Riders. In regards to the latter, MDAH provided one of the sites for a week of
commemorative activities for the fiftieth anniversary of the Freedom Riders journey.
Along with hosting an exhibit and taking part in the Freedom Riders Digital Collaborative
Winter, “Opening Doors in a Closed Society,” 11.
Ibid.
787 Qtd. in Charles C. Bolton, William F. Winter and the New Mississippi: A Biography (Jackson:
University Press of Mississippi, 2013), 261.
788 “Local Civil Rights Veterans Featured in Series,” Mississippi History Newsletter 56 no. 4 (Winter
2014): 6.
789 Ibid.
785
786

235

to scan and preserve the materials of Freedom Riders, MDAH also “invited the public to
share their experiences of the Freedom Rides and the civil rights era” through a program
called “Speak Now Memories of the Civil Rights Era.”790 Participant recordings are now
available online in MDAH’s digital archives, thus ensuring that reminiscences by those
active during the civil rights era will continue to inform future conversations on race.
Education provides another measure of how MDAH attempts to further racial
reconciliation in Mississippi. MDAH has developed lesson plans and teaching units for
primary and secondary school teachers based on the Mississippi Department of Education
Frameworks and the Common Core Curriculum. While other lessons draw on various
civil rights artifacts within MDAH’s collections, the teaching unit for Civil Rights in
Mississippi (Grades 9-12) deals specifically with the Commission records. The activity
begins by drawing parallels between the Sovereignty Commission records and present-day
surveillance by asking students to research post-9/11 instances of government invasions of
privacy. It then proceeds by having students divide into groups to research various civil
rights figures in both the Commission files online and in other web resources. The
activity concludes with a section entitled “The Sovereignty Commission and You,” which,
once again encourages students to draw connections between the past and present by
searching Commission files for relatives. Students are then asked to discuss “their
feelings about having their ancestors spied on.”791 Lessons such as these encourage
students to draw connections between past injustices and their present-lives, as well as
“Thousands Attend Freedom 50th Celebrations,” Mississippi History Newsletter 53, no. 2 (Summer
2011). For information on MDAH’s role in the observance of the fiftieth anniversary of Medgar Evers’s
death, see: “Life of Medgar Evers Commemorated,” Mississippi History Newsletter 55, no. 1 (Spring
2013).
791 “Lesson Two Mississippi Civil Rights Timeline,” Mississippi Department of Archives and History,
accessed July 25, 2017, http://www.mdah.ms.gov/new/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Lesson-TwoCivil-Rights-Timeline.pdf
790

236

creates an opportunity for students to talk about race—all important lessons to instill in the
next generation of Mississippians.

VII. F. Summary

Whether it is George’s “second Mississippi” or what Winter describes as “opening doors
in a closed society,” state and independent actors have worked to improve race relations
over the last few decades. MDAH has aided the struggle against Mississippi’s racist past
by exposing the records of state oppression and recovering the voices of its African
American population and their movement for civil rights; or, in Assmann and Linda
Shortt’s words, shifting the state’s historical memory “from silence to speaking out, from a
repressed or forgotten, to a recovered and socially circulated and shared memory.”792 As
Winter reminds us, however, inequality persists with a need “to break down the suspicion
and hostility that seem to accompany human differences, whether of race, color and
religion, nationality, language, politics, or culture.”793 MDAH acknowledges its own need
to address a range of human justice issues beyond civil rights by expanding its collection
to focus on underrepresented groups such as the LGBT community, immigrants, and
women in Mississippi.794 Future documentation of these groups will be aided by the same
engaged, transparent, and communicative approach it has used to build its civil rights
collection. Overall, MDAH’s progressive leadership by Elbert Hilliard, Hank Holmes,

Aleida Assmann and Linda Shortt, introduction to Memory and Political Change, eds. Aleida
Assmann and Linda Shortt (London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2011), 8.
793 Winter, “Opening Doors,” 9.
794 Young, interview with author, November 5, 2015.
792

237

Governor Winter and others has both steered the archive towards documenting the state’s
African American and civil rights experience and promoted racial reconciliation through
programming and education.
If, in Young’s words, “we [MDAH] are history,” then the nearly completed
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum concretizes Mississippi’s new beginning. As the first
state sponsored civil rights museum, it opened concurrently with the Museum of
Mississippi History in December 2017. While the Museum of Mississippi History mostly
features MDAH’s artifacts, the Civil Rights Museum predominantly relies on documents,
with more than eight hundred documents and images from the archive being exhibited.795
Along with contributing materials to the museum, archival staff also helped develop the
museum. Young reports that both the heads of Image and Sound and Reference Services
were on the museum committee, with the latter vetting every item and story featured in the
museum.796 Young goes on to note that because the archive has more African Americans
than any other division, a further three were selected for the design committee.
Furthermore, archival staff continues to provide support through such tasks as consulting
with exhibit fabricators about the provenance of certain items and finalizing copyright
clearance on documents.797
State-support for the museum is indicative of the legislature’s present willingness
both to acknowledge the state’s history of systemic racism and to celebrate the civil rights
movement that struggled against it. In 2011 during his final State of the State address,
Governor Haley Barbour voiced his support for the museum “as an appropriate way to do
justice to the civil rights movement and to stand as a monument of remembrance and
Ibid.
Ibid.
797 Ibid.
795
796

238

reconciliation.”798 Four years later as the Museum moved closer to construction, Winter
called the Civil Rights Museum “the most significant building project in my lifetime in
Mississippi.”799 Realizing the need for public input and support, MDAH held community
meetings about the Museum in various towns around the state in order “to gather
suggestions for the museum and stories of local people involved in the civil rights
movement.”800 Members of the general public as well as a coalition of powerful
supporters—“four governors, legislators from across the political spectrum, civil rights
veterans, business leaders, educators, Native American nations”—worked to make the
museum a reality. In so doing, they created not just a symbol of Mississippi’s progress
but also a means for grappling with its ignoble past.
Though MDAH is a government archive predicated on serving a wide range of
citizens, key elements of its approach to collecting and social justice align with the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. It was no coincidence that Winter carried a copy of
the Birmingham Pledge with him as a reminder of the principles necessary to combat
racism.801 For both MDAH and the BCRI, the pledge’s message of racial tolerance and
progress has been foundational to the leadership and operation of both institutions over the
last few decades. Furthermore, both institutions view education as a core component of
their work. Whereas BCRI views itself primarily as an educational facility, MDAH sees
Qtd. in Lyons, “Giving Shape and Substance,” 133.
Qtd. in C. Todd Sherman, “History, Civil Rights Museums Taking Shape,” The Clarion-Ledger
(Jackson, MS) June 11, 2015.
800 “Museum Designs Developed,” Mississippi History Newsletter 54, no. 2 (Mid summer 2012): 1-2.
801 The six tenants of the Birmingham Pledge are as follows: “I believe that every person has worth as
an individual. I believe that every person is entitled to dignity and respect, regardless of race or color.
I believe that every thought and every act of racial prejudice is harmful; if it is my thought or act, then
it is harmful to me as well as to others. Therefore, from this day forward I will strive daily to eliminate
racial prejudice from my thoughts and actions. I will discourage racial prejudice by others at every
opportunity. I will treat all people with dignity and respect; and I will strive daily to honor this pledge,
knowing that the world will be a better place because of my effort.” Qtd. in Bolton, William F. Winter
and the New Mississippi, 261.
798
799

239

education as a critical part of its overall work as the state archive. Its commitment to
secondary education is shown by its development of the previously mentioned resources
and lesson plans, while its contributions to informal public education are seen in any
number of public exhibitions, lectures, and activities. Education also undoubtedly drives
MDAH’s future plans, with Winter referring to the new Museum of Mississippi History
and the Mississippi Civil Rights Museum as “the largest classrooms in the state.” Without
understanding history in all of “its messiness,” Young notes, Mississippians can’t “move
forward together.”802
MDAH’s hard-won transition from a tool of the “closed society” to a leader in
“speaking out,” has positioned it to play a pivotal role in Mississippi’s efforts to right the
injustices of the past and present. MDAH has been effective first and foremost because it
is active and socially minded in a similar sense to the “engaged neutrality” of Belfast’s
Linen Hall Library. For both institutions, the version of neutrality they prioritize is not
the evasion of present-day conflicts but rather a productive means to address the contested
historical legacies upon which divisions are rooted and reinforced. MDAH’s allocation of
a large grant from the Kellogg Foundation, for instance, shows its ongoing commitment to
social justice and racial reconciliation. The money bolsters the opening of the civil rights
museum by supporting civil rights education and programming in conjunction with the
Winter Racial Reconciliation Institute and the Myrlie and Medgar Evers Institute.
Deliverables have included the digitization of the Evers Collection, the launch of the
Evers Scholars Program, and a teacher workshop with the Winter Institute concerning

802

Young, interview with author, November 5, 2015.

240

racial reconciliation and the use of archival documents to develop lesson plans.803
Although, as George reminds us, barriers remain for “meaningful progress toward
reconciliation in Mississippi,” MDAH continues to be a driving force for positive change
in the state804

Ibid. The 2017 winner of the Evers Scholarship is a Cornell doctoral student who “will explore the
relationship between the politics of food, race, and activism” using MDAH’s holdings. “Bobby J. Smith
II Named 2017 Evers Scholar,” MDAH, accessed June 26, 2017,
http://www.mdah.ms.gov/new/news/bobby-j-smith-ii-named-2017-evers-scholar/ .
804 George, One Mississippi, Two Mississippi, 229.
803

241

VIII. Conclusion

When the Museum of Free Derry’s new facility opened in 2017, it featured a new front
wall and entryway. The previous building’s wall had shown an image in support of
Palestine alongside a giant reimagining of Picasso’s Guernica. The images spoke to the
Museum’s ongoing solidarity with others suffering from injustices around the globe.
Visitors to the new museum now encounter a singular, powerful art installation by Derry
artist, Locky Morris: Steel panels etched with the digital pattern of the waveform of “We
Shall Overcome”—the Negro spiritual that became the civil rights anthem of Derry. The
art piece, itself entitled “We Shall Overcome,” not only captures the moments that, in
Morris’s words, created a “seismic shift in the whole history of this city” but also makes
visible its connection to the American civil rights movement.805 Kerr points out the
significance of both the installation at the Museum of Free Derry and its proposed parallel
artwork at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute: “To have that connected artwork at
another civil-rights museum, in the States…Well, the symbolism of that would be
absolutely fantastic.”806 For the Museum of Free Derry and the BCRI, “We Shall
Overcome” both celebrates their interconnected roots and, more importantly, affirms their
shared commitment to ongoing human and civil rights issues around the world.

Figure. 1. Museum of Free Derry
Qtd. in Freya McClements, “Derry and ‘We Shall Overcome’: We Plagiarized an Entire Movement,”
The Irish Times, March 4, 2017, accessed September 7, 2017,
https://www.irishtimes.com/culture/art-and-design/derry-and-we-shall-overcome-we-plagiarisedan-entire-movement-1.2989759 .
806 Ibid.
805

242

Figure. 1. Museum of Free Derry

VIII. A. Reflection on Civil Rights Archives and Social Justice
Approaches to archiving civil rights materials in Northern Ireland and the American South
have intersected and diverged in multiple ways. While the planned joint art installations at
the Museum of Free Derry and the BCRI provide a tangible symbol of the interconnected
histories and missions of those two institutions, other civil rights archives intersect in
alternative ways. The Linen Hall Library and the BCRI, for instance, are both hubs of
activity and learning for their communities. Various educational programs and events
draw on civil rights objects and other archival materials to present exhibits that either
implicitly or explicitly link the past to the present. The Library’s “Troubled Images” and
the BCRI’s “A Voteless People is a Hopeless People” provide representative examples of
how the institutions employ archival materials to promote awareness of both past
injustices and those who stood against them. Moreover, the two archives devoted solely
to civil rights, the BCRI and the Museum of Free Derry, share multiple commonalities in

243

their mandate, mission, and approach. Both institutions were created in response to
historical injustices and unapologetically make connections between present and past
political situations. In this respect, the archives studied appear less to be defined by their
national or cultural contexts than issues of mission, mandate, and concerns unique to their
local community.
The national legacies of the movements themselves, however, have created
identifiable differences in how civil rights archives operate and are supported in the two
countries. The public support and governmental funding for MDAH’s new Mississippi
Civil Rights Museum, for instance, is indicative of the esteem with which most Americans
hold the national civil rights movement. While many of the tensions and systemic issues
at the forefront of the US civil rights movement remain, the basic facts of what occurred
have by in large been resolved and generally accepted. Whereas American civil rights
archives document a movement with a broad historical consensus of its events and legacy,
the Museum of Free Derry’s work has been predicated on correcting the historical record.
We have very diverse perceptions of history in the North and that has been a cause
of division for a long, long time. And that’s talking in the sort of broader general
sense over and above or alongside, beyond the legacy issues that still have to be
resolved with the conflict in terms of victim’s issues and stuff. So the museum—
one of its really important roles is as an example of how we can deal with that sort
of a past.807
The country’s complicated and contentious political history has resulted in the Museum
both countering the official record and putting forth the message of its community in a
productive fashion.
Regardless of national differences, each research site self identifies in a different
way based on their unique missions and mandates. The dissertation’s broad scope of

807

Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.

244

research sites encompasses an institute, a library, an archive, and a museum. While I
loosely categorize each of these as a different type of archive, there are fundamental
differences between them. The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, for instance, self
identifies as “a cultural and educational research center” that exists to educate the public
about civil rights in Birmingham.808 According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the
name “institute” is “often popularly applied to the building appropriated to the work of a
benevolent or educational institution.” By calling itself an institute, the BCRI underscores
its educational work as a force for positive change in the city. By way of comparison, the
Museum of Free Derry shares a similar mission to the BCRI but self identifies as a
museum. In so doing, the Museum places an emphasis on remembrance and the
legitimacy of its community’s history. On a more practical level, it also helps advertise to
visitors that the main feature of the facility, at least at present, is the main exhibit area of
historical objects.
Other identifiers, such as “library” and “archive,” also reflect the mission and
purpose of research sites. As a space, the Linen Hall Library encompasses much more
than the sum of its holdings. Its archival collections are only a part of what the Library
has offered its community over its long history. The term “library” in this context
suggests a bringing together of people in search of knowledge—a continuing mission in
the spirit of its older iterations as the “Belfast Reading Society” and the “Belfast Society
for Promoting Knowledge.” The Mississippi Department of Archives and History, by
comparison, exists to connect all Mississippians to their history through archival materials.
As an archive in a governmental department with three other divisions, MDAH’s role is

808

“About BCRI,” Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, accessed December 5, 2017,
https://www.bcri.org/about-bcri/,

245

clearly defined as collecting, preserving, and providing access to the state’s wealth of
historical resources. In the case of these two institutions, “library” signifies a bringing
together of readers to share knowledge and “archive” refers to the active management of
the materials of Mississippi’s past and present. While much overlap exists between these
and other libraries and archives, the terminology provides insight into institutional and
community priorities.
Though working under different institutional titles and organizational structures,
every research site I studied facilitates social justice in some fashion. In fact, a major
finding of my study is that civil rights archives in Northern Ireland and the American
South draw on a variety of approaches to intervene in contemporary social justice issues.
The range of archival responses to civil rights materials indicates a continuum of
approaches to social justice generally. As shown below, each archive studied falls
arguably within the poles of neutrality and activism. Neutrality is a term used by certain
research sites and interviewees that capture the attempt to balance and apolitically
message their work. I have tried in each chapter to differentiate it from the traditional
conception of neutrality, which ignores the political implications of archival work. All
archives studied either implicitly or explicitly acknowledge the political dimensions of
their work through exhibits and programming, as well as actively make their materials
available to social justice actors.

246

Neutrality

Mississippi
Department
of Archives
and History

Linen Hall
Library

Birmingham
Civil Rights
Institute

Museum of
Free Derry

Activism

Figure 2. Continuum of Archival Approaches to Social Justice

Archives that fall closer to the continuum’s activism pole are tempered by elements
of neutrality and vice versa. Each archive shares an ethos of education and community
building, with commonalities between archival approaches being more pronounced than
their differences. Activism, in fact, is often indistinguishable from the type of advocacy
practiced in institutions typically associated with neutrality. All the archives I studied
practiced some type of advocacy, wherein acts of social justice were more often subtle
expressions of support for positive change generally than ardent campaigning for a
specific issue. The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, for instance, advocates for a range
of social justice causes but avoids outright activism in the interest of maintaining its nonpartisan, educational role in the city. In the highly politicized Deep South, the BCRI
pragmatically addresses social issues in a way that does not leave it vulnerable to unfair

247

criticisms and mischaracterizations of its mission and work. The roots of the Museum of
Free Derry, by comparison, are firmly fixed in activist causes, which enables them to
continue as an overtly activist force for positive change. Like neutrality, the activism pole
is multifaceted and able to accommodate various shades of activism, advocacy, and other
forms of social action.
As the continuum’s overlapping circles suggest, a rigid dichotomy between archival
activism and neutrality is counterproductive. Even MDAH and the Museum of Free
Derry—which fall closest to pure neutrality and activism, respectively—have elements of
its oppositional approach. MDAH fosters social justice by creating a space from which
activists can draw, as well as advocates for civil and human rights to the degree permitted
by its governmental mandate. It also partners with activist institutions such as the Winter
Institute for Racial Reconciliation, which can more explicitly advocate for social justice
causes. Along similar lines, the archive most closely associated with activism, the
Museum of Free Derry, also shares some commonalities with archives closer to the
neutrality pole. More specifically, the Museum’s activism falls within a larger peacebuilding project, wherein the creation of a better Derry, Northern Ireland, and world in
general is paramount. Its cross-community work and commitment to peace and progress
has been shown in multiple respects: the tireless Bloody Sunday campaign to help the
community heal and move forward, its educational initiative with the Siege Museum of
the Apprentice Boys of Derry, and its ongoing domestic and international human rights
work.
The archives I studied have worked to further social justice in a variety of ways.
Interventions have encompassed both local and global human rights issues, ranging from

248

indirect involvement to purposeful engagement. BCRI, for instance, has had an
immeasurable impact through its educational approach to the civil rights movement,
wherein it has taught countless children about the city’s civil rights history through
school visits, local programming, and other forms of outreach. In terms of specific
interventions, the BCRI has hosted and/or helped facilitate two web-based platforms for
social justice: The Struggle Continues blog and Kids in Birmingham 1963. The former is
a space for staff to share connections between past and present civil and human rights
issues, while the latter records and shares the stories of the “passive” and often
overlooked participants to the movement. The Linen Hall Library’s Troubled Images
exhibit and the “Divided Society” project provide other examples of specific archival
interventions. Through its approach of “engaged neutrality,” these ventures draw on the
Library’s vast collection of political posters from all sides of the conflict in order to help
preserve and communicate the lessons of the Troubles. The table below provides
examples of other archival interventions and their specific social justice aims.
Table 2. Archival Social Justice Interventions
Institution
Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute

Specific Interventions
1. Struggle Continues
blog
2. Kids in Birmingham
1963

Mississippi Department
of Archives and History

1. Mississippi State
Sovereignty
Commission
Records
2. Mississippi Civil
Rights Museum

249

Aims
1. “Helping visitors
understand the past’s
relationship to the present”
2. Record & share “passive
participants” to movement
1. Comply with judge’s
order, protecting privacy
and providing public access
2. Promote “a greater
understanding of the
Mississippi Civil Rights
Movement and its impact.”

Linen Hall Library

1. Troubled Images
Exhibit
2. “Divided Society”
Project

Museum of Free Derry

1. Bloody Sunday
Justice Campaign
2. Kids Kollections

1. Telling the story of the
Troubles through political
posters
2. Digitizing over 6,000
political posters
1. Undo the Widgery
Report and tell the true
story of Bloody Sunday
2. Bring children together
from loyalist and republican
communities for projects

In terms of the practical applications of this analysis, my research provides a range
of archival social justice approaches from which others might draw. Archival missions
and mandates vary widely, and each archivist must decide the most appropriate and
ethical way to incorporate social justice into his or her own work. Codes of ethics,
colleagues, and theoretical models help archivists reconcile their professional
responsibilities with civic and moral obligations. As this research shows, social justice
can be accomplished in a variety of ways depending on the archive’s purpose and
resources. The spectrum of approaches to civil rights—and by extension social justice
generally—on display in this dissertation reveals how archives of varying national and
institutional contexts can contribute to social justice. Furthermore, my research also
shines light on the middle ground of socially conscious engagement, which is sometimes
forgotten between the extreme poles of striving for apolitical balance or neutrality and
fully employing the archive for committed activism.

250

VIII. B. Interconnections

As the continuum shows, approaches to civil rights collections often overlap, even at
institutions with differing mandates and missions. In fact, the continuum could be broken
down further to examine the various elements that inform each archive’s overall approach.
While useful, the poles of neutrality and activism do not fully convey how research sites
approach different facets of their work. How, for instance, does the Linen Hall Library’s
“engaged neutrality” feature in its educational work? And are some archives more
activist-oriented in digital rather than physical spaces? Answering such questions would
likely reposition archives along the social justice continuum, with their placement
depending on the particular issue being addressed. While analyzing each archive’s
approach to social justice, I noted three threads that ran through every archive in the study:
education, digital spaces, and reconciliation. Examining these themes in greater detail
clarifies how and why archives in Northern Ireland and the American South intersect and
diverge when addressing social justice issues.
Civil rights archives on both sides of the Atlantic prioritize education and
incorporate it into their overall approaches to civil rights materials. MDAH, for instance,
developed lesson plans that incorporated their civil rights collections while the BCRI and
Museum of Free Derry host many students and school groups throughout the year. BCRI
explicitly focuses on education with one illustrative example being its legacy youth
leadership project, which teaches high school students to “look at leadership through the
eyes of the movement” and “trains them to know the material upstairs and they become

251

docents.”809 Though education is perhaps less emphasized at the Linen Hall Library, it
hosts school groups visiting its NIPC and is looking to further its education potential by
hiring an Educational Outreach Officer “to engage with the community; to let them know
what’s in the Political Collection; to let them have a say what we should be putting in the
exhibitions and what we should be concentrating on with the digitization.”810
Each archive conceives of education’s role within their institution in different
terms. As previously mentioned, the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute views education
as a core part of the its mission and mandate. From inception to the present day, BCRI
works, in the words of current President and CEO Andrea Taylor, to “enlighten each
generation about civil and human rights.”811 Lawrence Pijeaux, BCRI head from 1995 to
2014, reflects on how he interpreted BCRI’s mission as a fundamentally educational
endeavor: “I truly believe that we all want to provide greater access to our collections to
educate better the people we serve: it is an ethic embedded in our mission. To some
degree or another, the mission of libraries, archives, and museums all involved the
fostering of educational experiences through access to information.”812 While not
explicitly mentioning education, the Linen Hall Library’s mission statement also shares a
similar aim “to increase knowledge and understanding.”813 The recent hiring of the
Educational Outreach Officer is indicative of the institution’s commitment to turning that
abstract aim into concrete educational deliverables.

Ward, interview with author, November 2, 2015.
Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Andrea L. Taylor, “A Teachable Moment,” October 20, 2017, https://www.bcri.org/a-teachablemoment-by-andrea-l-taylor-president-and-ceo-of-bcri/
812
Lawrence J. Pijeaux, Jr. “The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute: A Case Study in library, Archives,
and Museum Collaboration,” RBM 8, no.1 (Spring 2007): 56.
813
The Linen Hall Library, 2016 Annual Report, 3.
809
810
811

252

Archives also vary in terms of how they translate their educational philosophies
into actual projects. In at least two incidences, archival initiatives were designed to
correspond to school standards. Both MDAH and the Linen Hall Library have created
educational materials based on the general curriculum for students in their respective state
and nation. As previously mentioned, MDAH offers lesson plans and teaching units for
teachers of grades 4-12 to draw on. The materials are based on state education
frameworks and the Common Core Curriculum—a standard used in many US states to
ensure students are adequately trained in English language arts/literacy and mathematics
to pursue a college education or enter the workforce. Along with lesson plans and film
activity packets, MDAH also offers online teaching units such as, “Civil Rights in
Mississippi.” In this instance, the unit explicitly shows connections between itself and
“Mississippi Social Studies” and “Common Core Language Arts.”814 In the unit
subsection entitled “Protesting Violence without Violence,” the lesson plans meets
nineteen common core standards for grades 9-10, including RH: Reading in
History/Social Studies and SL: Speaking and Listening.
Formal educational standards also factored into the design of the Linen Hall
Library’s educational resource, Troubled Images—The Northern Ireland Troubles and
Peace Process 1968-2016. The iBook, created in conjunction with Derry’s Nerve Centre,
targets key stage 3 pupils. In Northern Ireland, key stage 3 applies to students aged 11-14
and is based on curriculum objectives that aim to develop students in three ways: “as an
individual,” “as a contributor to society,” and as “a contributor to the economy &

814

“Civil Rights in Mississippi,” accessed December 12, 2017, http://www.mdah.ms.gov/new/wpcontent/uploads/2014/08/Curricular-Connections.pdf

253

environment.”815 The interactive resource addresses the first two objectives particularly
well by drawing on political posters, questions, and activities to promote “a greater
understanding of our shared history.”816 Though the iBook shows an attention to
educational standards and the practical needs of Northern Irish students, it also
encapsulates the Library’s own approach of “engaged neutrality.” Julie Andrews, the
Library’s director, announced the iBook to be a “resource for younger people to help
understand our past from a nonbiased viewpoint,”—a sentiment very much in keeping
with the Library’s mission, mandate, and approach to social justice.817
Digital spaces provide a second point of interconnection between research sites.
Naturally, each archive’s approach to social justice is not limited to physical surroundings
and analogue materials. Blogs, digitization projects, online community projects, and even
websites provide critical avenues for reaching users. Each archive studied has some type
of digital presence, which often serves to extend and amplify its work. It provides a
means for furthering interactions with existing patrons and an opportunity to reach
potential new users. At other times, however, digital outputs serve as alternative
platforms for archives to experiment with more direct outreach and overtly political
stances. In these instances, it frees institutional staff from the constraints of official
messaging and allows for more straightforward communication between archivists and
their users. Some archives engage in both forms of online and/or digital outputs—formal,

815

“Overview of the Key Stage 3 Curriculum,” accessed December 16, 2017,
http://ccea.org.uk/curriculum/key_stage_3/overview.
816
“Political Posters Become a Digital Resource for the Post-Conflict Generation,” accessed December
16, 2017, http://www.culturenorthernireland.org/features/heritage/political-posters-becomedigital-resource-post-conflict-generation.
817
“Linen Hall’s Powerful Political Posters Now Accessible as Free Educational iBook,” accessed
December 16, 2017, https://www.linenhall.com/news/214.

254

on-message with the entire institution and informal, wherein individual staff broadcast
events and opinions.
The Museum of Free Derry’s revamped website provides an example of the
importance of an official online presence. The new website serves as an extension of the
Museum’s updated facility in that it offers a fresh and more sophisticated presentation of
the archive’s work and resources. The original website had become dated and offered
little in terms of content beyond the important textual histories of Free Derry, Bloody
Sunday, and related events. The updated version makes better use of gallery images and
features more information on the Museum’s educational and social justice activities.
Along with being more visually appealing, professional, and easier to navigate, the new
website displays both the Museum’s Twitter feed and an interactive Google map of its
location. It also offers digital versions of booklets and other publications for users to
download. By offering a more multifaceted and welcoming interface, the website moves
beyond being simply informative to provide a representative look inside the Museum for
potential visitors and others interested in its history and ongoing mission.
Blogs, on the other hand, have created spaces for informal takes on the archive’s
mission and work. MDAH’s A Sense of Place blog, for instance, provides an alternative
way to “explore historic documents, photographs, artifacts, and sites that tell the story of
our state.”818 By focusing on specific objects and stories from within MDAH’s
collections, the blog is both informative and conversational—providing another avenue for
MDAH to share its state’s history. While the BCRI’s The Struggle Continues blog is also
informal and informative, its take on history is much more subjective and often untethered
from specific historical objects within the museum and archive. The blog provides a
818

“A Sense of Place: About,” accessed January 3, 2018.

255

forum for staff and guest contributors to make connections between present social justice
issues and their historical antecedents. It also allows its authors to discuss and express
personal opinions about a variety of topics related to civil and human rights. Topics range
from racist Halloween costumes to Sickle Cell Anemia to the rise of Donald Trump. A
June 22, 2016 post, for instance, ends by explicitly calling on readers to recognize the
country’s “history of racial injustice” and “reject Trump.”819 A 2014 Ahmad Ward post in
the wake of the shooting of an unarmed black man in Ferguson, Missouri, recounts the
“programming” of himself and other Black men to avoid police violence. 820
While The Struggle Continues blog allows for contributors to express their own
opinions on topics directly or indirectly related to the archive’s work, it misses an
opportunity to foster online conversations between staff and users. As previously
mentioned, most if not all comments on blog posts appear to be generated by spambots,
which leaves no clue as to actual readership. By comparison, MDAH’s A Sense of Place
garners more comments from readers who often share their thoughts on and appreciation
for various posts. Along with providing an opportunity for feedback and affirmation,
comments also provide a means for readers to alert MDAH to errors and inaccuracies. In,
for instance, a September 9, 2015 post looking back on the Historic Preservation
Division’s work on historical homes damaged by Hurricane Katrina, Jeff comments
“[v]ery informative post. One minor correction, I believe the first image is of 1012 W.
Beach Biloxi, rather than Beauvoir.”821 The blog administrator responds to his comment

819

Josh Cannon, “From Talk Radio to Trump” The Struggle Continues (blog), June 22, 2016 (12:46
p.m.), http://strugglecontinues.org.
820
Ahmad Ward, “The Programming,” The Struggle Continues (blog), August 18, 2014 (7:50 a.m.),
http://strugglecontinues.org/?page=3
821
Jeff, September 15, 2015 (6:53 am), comment on Timothy, “Time and Tide: Documenting Disaster,”
A Sense of Place (blog), September 9, 2015,

256

by thanking him and noting the correction of the image identification. This example of a
reader response and corresponding administrator action highlights the potential of blogs to
aid in both communicating and refining the historical record.
Other institutional digital spaces are more focused and bounded by the parameters
of a specific project. Though dissimilar in some respects, online community projects like
Kids in Birmingham 1963 and digitization projects such as the Linen Hall Library’s
‘Divided Society’ and MDAH’s release of the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission
records are first and foremost information resources. These digital outputs offer unique
and invaluable insight into topics foundational to each archive’s mission. Not only are
these projects sometimes releasing previously unseen records, the experiences are curated
in ways that provide context for the people, events, and implications of the collections.
“Divided Society”, for instance, couples its extensive digital archive of print, video, and
audio materials with a range of educational tools for understanding the Troubles.
Downloadable toolkits for students, exclusive academic essays on key themes, and an
introduction by Senator George J. Mitchell, Chair of the Peace Process talks, are
indicative of how the Linen Hall Library has not only digitized records but provided a
multifaceted digital resource for the public to understand and engage with materials.
Released in January 2018, “Divided Society” provides a glimpse into how engaged
neutrality works in a digital environment.822 As a digital outgrowth of the Northern

http://www.mdah.ms.gov/senseofplace/2015/09/09/time-and-tide-documentingdisaster/#comments
822
For more information about the official release of “Divided Society”, see: “Internationally
Renowned Journalist Kate Adie OBE to Launch LHL’s New ‘Divided Society’ Digital Resource,” Linen
Hall Library, last modified January 17, 2018, https://www.linenhall.com/news/251. Robbie
Meredith, “Nineties ‘Divided Society’ archive opened,” BBC, last modified January 22, 2018,
http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-northern-ireland-42768231. Cate McCurry, “Kate Adie Launches
Troubles Archive and Praises Northern Ireland’s ‘tolerance’.” Belfast Telegraph, last modified January
23, 2018, https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/kate-adie-launches-troubles-

257

Ireland Political Collection, “Divided Society” retains the Collection’s focus on
objectivity, inclusiveness, and accessibility. The Heritage Lottery Fund’s [HLF]
announcement of its funding for the project included the following statement from HLF
Northern Ireland Community Member, Mark Glover: “The Northern Ireland Political
Collection captures a key period in our history as viewed by a diverse range of voices.
This project will help to protect this archive, securing its future and providing increased
access to it for more people to learn from and enjoy.”823 Like the Library itself, “Divided
Society” is a project designed to accommodate both local and global visitors. As
evidenced by its pricing structure, however—free for the UK and Ireland, 300 pounds a
year for individuals outside of the UK and Ireland—the Library privileges users within
geographical proximity of the events recorded by the NIPC. In this respect, the project
reflects the Library’s commitment to its community, city, and nation while also cultivating
an international reputation and scope.
Reconciliation, at both local and international levels, provides the third major point
of interconnection between research sites. By reconciliation, I am referring to what is
more commonly called peacemaking in Northern Ireland and racial reconciliation in the
American South. Peacemaking, according to the International Coalition of Sites of
Conscience, entails “engaging local civil society organizations, survivors and governments
in a participatory and inclusive manner.”824 Similarly, the previously mentioned Winter
Institute describes reconciliation in terms of “racial equity,” “wholeness” and
archive-and-praises-northern-irelands-tolerance-36518060.html. Gerry Moriarty, “Kate Adie
Launches ‘Divided Society’ Archive of Troubles, The Irish Times, last modified January 22, 2018,
https://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/kate-adie-launches-divided-society-archiveof-troubles-1.3364592.
823
“Digitising a ‘Divided Society’ at Linen Hall,” accessed January 13, 2018.
824
“International Coalition of Sites of Conscience: Truth and Justice,” accessed January 26, 2018 and
“The Winter Institute: Mission,” accessed January 26, 2018.

258

“transcending all division and discrimination based on difference.” Reconciliation efforts
have focused chiefly on the community and national levels with an emphasis on repairing
relations between historically antagonistic groups and building bridges between divided
communities. Archives and other cultural heritage institutions contribute to broader
community building efforts by modeling open and inclusive programs and services, as
well as providing historical context on divisive issues often clouded by misinformation.
Local projects and partnerships at both MDAH and the BCRI have helped build
community trust and support. At the state and municipal level, respectively, both
institutions have earned reputations for being reliable and fair recorders of history. The
digitization and dissemination of the previously mentioned Mississippi Sovereignty
Commission records and the BCRI oral history project provide examples of how the
archives successfully stewarded sensitive materials and stories. In the case of MDAH, the
undertaking improved a broken relationship between the state and its African American
citizens. For BCRI, it was a project to deliver on the promise of a civic institution
predicated on furthering social justice through the telling of the city’s civil rights history.
The approaches of the Museum of Free Derry and the Linen Hall Library share a similar
focus on community reconciliation. The Museum’s programing bridges Derry’s
historically antagonistic communities and the Library curates the definitive collection on
the peace process. Both undertakings serve as exemplars of how cultural heritage
institutions can further peacemaking. Moreover, the relationship between the two
institutions is likely to deepen when the Museum becomes linked to the Library and the
Conflict Archive on the Internet [CAIN] through new computer research points.825 At

825

Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.

259

which point, the institutions will begin sharing practical resources as well as guiding
principles and approaches.
The archives I studied also share a global dimension to their reconciliation work.
The Linen Hall Library, for instance, has become a hub for international students applying
the conflict resolution and peacemaking lessons of Northern Ireland to other nations.826 As
previously mentioned, the West Bank and Basque regions have hosted NIPC exhibits in
the past and scholars, students, activists and others from these and other conflict zones
have themselves travelled to Northern Ireland to learn more about the conflict and peace
process. While the Linen Hall Library promotes and builds the NIPC for researchers from
around the globe to access, the Museum of Free Derry itself draws visitor attention to
parallels between the community of Free Derry and other oppressed people around the
world. A mural in support of Palestine that was featured prominently on the original
Museum building and exhibit text drawing parallels between the British response to
Bloody Sunday and American atrocities during the Iraq war are visible markers of the
Museum’s transparent, active support of certain forms of international reconciliation.827
While the international connections across the Atlantic have not been as clear and
impactful, the archives studied in the American South have varying international
presences. The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, for instance, has a relationship with
South African cultural heritage institutes and the Mississippi Department of Archives and
History hosts frequent international scholars. As previously mentioned BCRI’s
relationship with South Africa is modest but multifaceted and dynamic, encompassing
exhibits on apartheid and an ongoing relationship with the Apartheid Museum in Soweto.

826
827

Cash, interview with author, June 1, 2016.
Kerr, interview with author, March 22, 2017.

260

On a spectrum of international work, MDAH is the only archive studied without a visible
direct collaboration or project international in scope. While international researchers have
long drawn on its unique and valuable civil rights collections, MDAH’s directors and staff
have focused their resources and attention on local and statewide undertakings. The
December 2017 opening of the new Civil Rights Museum, however, will likely lead to a
greater national and international presence, which might in turn spark global partnerships
and undertakings.

VIII. C. Methodological Models

Along with furthering our understanding of the interplay between archives and
transnational social justice, the dissertation provides a methodological model from which
future studies might draw. As previously mentioned, archival research has traditionally
tended towards single-site case studies. Comparative or multisite approaches, by
comparison, allow for new perspectives on established and emerging issues within
archival studies. My dissertation’s comparative structure has revealed much about the
differing national, historical, cultural, and institutional contexts of my research sites. By
analyzing four research sites spanning two continents, the study provides a path for other
exploratory archival studies to follow. Such an approach would likely provide new
insights into a range of theoretical and professional issues within archives, including such
topics as ethics, digital stewardship, advocacy, appraisal and many others. In fact, it is

261

difficult to imagine a deep understanding of any of these topics without case studies
exploring multiple examples from different social and political contexts.
Multisite case studies of archives and other cultural heritage institutions are
particularly relevant in today’s increasingly interconnected world. As Anne Gilliland
argues in her book, Conceptualizing 21st Century Archives, archival studies is shifting to a
“glocal” focus, wherein scholars and practitioners develop sound practices for exchanging
data “effectively and equitably across national, cultural, linguistic, and ideological
boundaries.”828 Gilliland calls on archivists “to move beyond single fixed perspectives”
and “think more strategically and systematically about why, when, and how they should
share professional or intellectual territory with other communities through
collaboration.”829 Due to this changing societal and technological landscape, local and
transnational collaborations have become a vital component of archival work. In order to
adapt, archival studies will need to be increasingly international in scope and open to
adopting something akin to the transnational comparative framework of my study.
The “glocal” shift in archival studies informed both my overall approach to coding
and the coding vocabulary I used on transcriptions. While coding interviews, I looked for
geographical partnerships, collaborations, and other interconnections. More specifically, I
looked to see if these intersections were happening at the local, national, and/or
international levels. The codes I used were sometimes general—“local collaborations”
and “international collaborations”—and other times targeted and specific, “collaborationsNorthern Ireland” and “international connections/ South Africa.” By using broad and
narrow codes, I was able to analyze both how archives approached local and global
828

Anne Gilliland, Conceptualizing 21st Century Archives (Chicago: Society of American Archivists,
2014), 5.
829
Gilliland, Conceptualizing 21st Century Archives, 257.

262

collaborations and what those undertakings looked like in practice. My codes tended
towards the use of general terms (e.g. “local,” “national,” or “international collaboration”)
with a follow-up memo providing more detail. For instance, the transcription of my
interview with the Museum of Free Derry’s Adrian Kerr included the code, “crosscommunity collaboration,“ followed by a memo clarifying that “school groups and
community groups learn Derry’s history only visiting both museums, as opposed to just
going to one central museum that tells both sides.” I found this an effective way to
analyze, organize, and draw on my interview data.
Furthermore, the dissertation shows archival scholars the value of an ethnographic
approach to data collection. As I mentioned in the methodology section, my study draws
on such ethnographic methods as field observation and artifact collection for data
collection. During my field work, I took meticulous notes of my observations in archival
reading rooms and other relevant spaces in order to gain some understanding of the
operations, management, and interpersonal exchanges between staff, patrons, and others.
Along with adopting methods more typically associated with ethnography, I also worked
under an overarching ethnographic philosophy of what educator Leah Shagrir describes as
an examination of the “human, interpersonal, social and cultural aspects in all their
complexity.”830 I viewed each archive as a multifaceted site—unique yet interconnected
with other local and global cultural heritage institutions.
A major limitation of the study, however, is the limited time I spent visiting each
research site. Due to geographical distances, a modest budget, and time constraints, each
research trip lasted two to three days. Visits were long enough for data collection but not
for the kind of immersion necessary for a proper ethnographic study. Though the
830

Leah Shagrir, Journey to Ethnographic Research (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017), 9.

263

timeframe was appropriate for my exploratory study, it would have been helpful to spend
at least two to three weeks at each site to better understand such complexities as
institutional culture, work relationships and processes, and patron interactions and services
among other things. Any study that emulates this research in the future should consider
allocating more time for each research visit even if that necessitates a paring down of the
study to two or three sites. Though such studies might lack the transnational scope of my
project, they would yield richer, more in-depth data. Such research would compliment
exploratory work like my own by providing a more in-depth analysis of the archive’s
approach to social issues, collaborations with other institutions, and potentially its impact
on social justice issues.

VIII. D. Future Directions in Research
As an exploratory study, my dissertation has opened multiple avenues of further research.
It provides, for instance, a foundation from which additional studies might expand
geographically by comparing other countries with civil rights collections. Furthermore,
future research might refine my results by studying more sites in Northern Ireland and the
American South. Also, as the political scientist Benedict Anderson points out, comparison
can be longitudinal with studies examining the same country over a period of time.831
While some future research could stem from the archival literature, other projects might
examine how archival social justice intersects with other social and cultural issues. The
interplay of early electronic records and the release of the Sovereignty Commission files at
Benedict Anderson, “Frameworks of Comparison,” London Review of Books 38, no.2 (January 21,
2016): 16.
831

264

the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, for instance, points to other potential
ways of focusing the research on socio-technological issues. Given that my dissertation
research was both multisite and international, there are many ways that researchers might
shift the sites and data collection to build on this study.
Expanding the study to include alternative countries and/or civil rights archives
would enrich our understanding of archival social justice interventions. Even
reconfiguring or adding a few more sites could help to complicate or clarify my
conclusions regarding archival approaches to civil rights materials. Comparing additional
countries would illuminate whether my results are unique to archives in Northern Ireland
and the American South or whether my conclusions are more universal and apply to
multiple contexts. It would be particularly illuminating if additional sites included
alternative types of repositories and institutions. The previously mentioned Conflict
Archive on the Internet [CAIN], for instance, would provide a fascinating look at how a
digital, hub-like repository approaches and potentially employs its civil rights materials.
Furthermore, a study including the Southern Poverty Law Center [SPLC], as a legal
advocacy institution devoted to combatting hate groups and racism, would shift the
research in rich and productive directions. The controversy surrounding the SPLC and its
work would raise the political stakes of the research, as well as add complexity to how
archivists and scholars interpret social justice.
Future studies might also focus on some of the secondary issues that arose during
my research. As previously mentioned, the Mississippi Department of Archives presents
an opportunity to investigate how the history and evolution of technology impacts social
justice. The timely advent of electronic records created new opportunities for the access

265

and digital preservation of the contentious Sovereignty Commission records, which has
had ongoing technological, ethical, and legal implications. The Linen Hall Library
provides another example of how unexpected themes and topics arose during my research.
Issues related to gender and the archival profession were raised both by research into the
Library’s female staff during the Troubles and its present-day all female administration.
Potential research questions might explore what part women have played in archival social
justice interventions. It might also ask how gender inequality has affected or otherwise
shaped that role in the past and the present.
Finally, future research might shift the focus from archival social justice
interventions to social justice impact. Researchers could draw on the social justice
framework developed by Wendy Duff and her co-authors in the previously mentioned
article, “Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary Investigation.”832 The research
would provide a useful complement to the dissertation since impact—as opposed to intent
and practice—fell outside of its scope. A study of archival impact would entail
interviewing users, staff, and external partners for information on the success of joint
projects. Researchers would analyze the archive’s own statistical data if available, as well
as examine how its materials have been used within secondary sources, popular culture,
social initiatives, or any other potential conduit of social justice. The research would be
difficult and time-consuming but immensely valuable to our understanding of the
relationship between archives and social justice.

Duff, et al., “Social Justice Impact of Archives: A Preliminary Investigation,” Archival Science 13
(2013): 317-348.