ANALYSIS OF FAMILY-HEALTH-RELATED TOPICS ON WIKIPEDIA

by

Yanyan Wang

New concepts, terms, and topics always emerge; and meanings of existing terms and
topics keep changing all the time. These phenomena occur more frequently on social media
than on conventional media because social media allows a huge number of users to generate
information online. Retrieving relevant results in different time periods of a fast-changing topic
becomes one of the most difficult challenges in the information retrieval field. Among
numerous topics discussed on social media, health-related topics are a major category which
attracts increasing attention from the general public.
This study investigated and explored the evolution patterns of family-health-related
topics on Wikipedia. Three family-health-related topics (Child Maltreatment, Family Planning,
and Women’s Health) were selected from the World Health Organization Website and their
associated entries were retrieved on Wikipedia. Historical numeric and text data of the entries
from 2010 to 2017 were collected from a Wikipedia data dump and the Wikipedia Web pages.
Four periods were defined: 2010 to 2011, 2012 to 2013, 2014 to 2015, and 2016 to 2017.
Coding, subject analysis, descriptive statistical analysis, inferential statistical analysis, SOM

ii

approach, and n-gram approach were employed to explore the internal characteristics and
external popularity evolutions of the topics.
The findings illustrate that the external popularities of the family-health-related topics
declined from 2010 to 2017, although their content on Wikipedia kept increasing. The emerged
entries had three features: specialization, summarization, and internationalization. The subjects
derived from the entries became increasingly diverse during the investigated periods.
Meanwhile, the developing trajectories of the subjects varied from one to another. According
to the developing trajectories, the subjects were grouped into three categories: growing
subject, diminishing subject, and fluctuating subject. The popularities of the topics among the
Wikipedia viewers were consistent, while among the editors were not. For each topic, its
popularity trend among the editors and the viewers was inconsistent. Child Maltreatment was
the most popular among the three topics, Women’s Health was the second most popular, while
Family Planning was the least popular among the three.
The implications of this study include: (1) helping health professionals and general users
get a more comprehensive understanding of the investigated topics; (2) contributing to the
developments of health ontologies and consumer health vocabularies; (3) assisting Website
designers in organizing online health information and helping them identify popular familyhealth-related topics; (4) providing a new approach for query recommendation in information
retrieval systems; (5) supporting temporal information retrieval by presenting the temporal
changes of family-health-related topics; and (6) providing a new combination of data collection
and analysis methods for researchers.


1. INTRODUCTION

1.1.

Background & Rationale

With the development of computer technology and Internet technology, the volume of
information and data keeps increasing. Concepts and terms regarding certain topics are always
changing. Not only the meanings of concepts and terms, but also the concepts and terms
relevant to certain topics change over time. With the improvement of social media, the amount
of user-generated content on social media grows and the changing of concepts, themes and
topics are much quicker than before. These changes cause problems in information retrieval.
For instance, the term “cloud” has existed for hundreds of years. Several decades ago there was
no relation between the term cloud and the term computer. However, with the generation of
cloud computing, cloud and computer often occur in one document together. Therefore, it is
necessary to explore the temporal features of concepts, terms, and topics.
In the past decade, the use of social media kept increasing globally (Boyd & Ellison,
2007; Moorhead et al., 2013). It was reported by the eBizMBA Rank that popular social media
platforms had millions of users. Facebook had 900 million unique monthly visitors and Twitter
had attracted 310 million unique monthly visitors by October 2015. Meanwhile, the volume of
user-generated content on social media grew rapidly. For example, Twitter users had
broadcasted more than 500 million tweets per day by 2014 (Matta, Doiron, & Leveridge, 2014).
Since the information on social media is generated by a great number of individuals, the usergenerated content on these platforms reflect the general public’s perceptions and consensus to
some extent. A good example is Wikipedia. Being the largest online knowledge collaboration,
1

Wikipedia allows users to create, revise, and delete entries. Statistics offered by Wikipedia
indicate that more than 900 thousand content creators generated nearly 5 million articles.
Given these numbers, it is reasonable to assume that the content entries on Wikipedia reflect a
consensus of the general public. Examining content on social media is necessary for researchers
to gain insight into the general public’s perceptions. To explore how certain topics change on
social media will show the evolution of the general public’s understanding of these topics.
There are challenges for examining content on social media. One of the challenges is
that the amount of data to be collected is tremendous and the another is that information on
social media is dynamic. Most social media platforms do not record historical versions of
information or the historical data are unavailable for researchers. Different from other social
media platforms, Wikipedia stores all the historical versions and data of entries, and since
Wikipedia is a non-profit organization and all its content is created by users, the data on
Wikipedia are open to anyone and relatively easy to access and collect. Hence, to investigate
the evolution of topics on social media, Wikipedia is a valid data source.
Containing such a huge volume of information, social media is not only regarded as the
channel for information creation and diffusion, and connection building and maintaining, but
also a platform and source for seeking information online. As the quality of life of the general
public improves, people pay more attention to the health status of themselves and their family
members. Seeking health information on social media is becoming more common than in
previous years. It was reported that 23% of social media users followed their friends’ health
experiences and updates and 15% of them sought and retrieved health information from social
media sites (Fox, 2011). In this situation, the content and quality of health information are
2

important for users, especially for patients and their families. Examining health-related topics
on social media can assist users in seeking and using health information.
The purpose of this study is to explore how family-health-related topics change on social
media. Wikipedia was selected for data collection because its historical data were
comprehensive and accessible. Temporal analysis was used to examine the evolution of healthrelated topics. This method has been used to explore changes and patterns of certain objects
and predict future trends of certain objects. In this study, the temporal analysis method was to
compare the internal characteristics and external popularities of a specific topic in different
time periods. Internal characteristics of a topic included the concepts relevant to the topic, the
subjects and themes hidden in the text of the concepts, and the relations among them. Each
Wikipedia entry contained information related to a specific concept. External popularity of a
topic is represented by the number of views and edits of the topics. To reveal relationships
among entries, open coding method and clustering approaches were employed to group them
into categories and clusters. A Self-Organizing Map (SOM) was utilized as the clustering
approach in this study. The SOM approach is a neural network method that measures
similarities among items of input data so as to form similarity graphs. This approach was
adopted in research in a variety of fields like biology, artificial intelligence, and finance, but it
has not been widely used in the information science. In this study this approach was applied to
the exploration of the selected topics’ internal characteristics.
This study has six chapters: Introduction, Literature Review, Research Methodology,
Results, Discussion and Implications, and Conclusion. The first chapter introduces the
background and rationale, the research problem and research questions, and the research
3

design of this study. The second chapter reviews the primary relevant literature of this study.
The third chapter presents the data collection procedures and analysis and provides a detailed
description of the methods and approaches used in the study. The fourth chapter presents the
results obtained for the research questions. The fifth chapter discuss the unique findings
presented in the Results chapter and compares the findings with those of previous studies
reported in the literature. The last chapter summarizes the previous chapters and presents the
conclusions of this study.
1.2.

Research Problem, Questions and Hypotheses

1.2.1. Research Problem Statement
Over the past several decades, the general public has focused increasing attention on
their health status as well as that of their families. In recent years the number of users who
seek health information online has continued to grow. These users seek health information not
only from online databases (e.g. PubMed) and Websites for the general public (e.g. WebMD
and MayoClinic) but also from social media platforms (e.g. Wikipedia, Facebook, and
Yahoo!Answers). Social media allows the general public to create, revise, share, and seek
information, and to communicate with each other. The user-generated content on social media
contains a variety of topics and health is one of the primary topics. As the health-related
content on social media increases, social media has become an important health information
source for the general public.
Among the different types of social media platforms, Wikipedia can be considered a
representative social media Website. It is a rapidly growing platform containing vast interlinked
4

information (Milne & Witten, 2013). Currently it is the largest online information collaboration
consisting of user-generated content. Since the health-related information on Wikipedia is
created by the general public, it reflects the general public’s interests and understandings of
health-related topics to a large extent. Therefore, the changes of this information over time
show the changes of the general public’s interests and understandings of health-related topics.
This study’s research problem is to investigate and discover the evolution of three
family-health-related topics derived from the social media website Wikipedia. The research
problem can be divided into three layers: (1) the internal characteristics and external
popularities of specific family-health-related topics on Wikipedia in certain time periods; (2) the
evolution patterns of the topics over time; (3) the commonalities and differences among the
evolution patterns of the topics. Accordingly, the research questions to be addressed are stated
below.
1.2.2. Research Question One
The first layer of the research problem examined the family-health-related topics and
their associated entries, themes, and subjects on Wikipedia. However, because of the time and
text length limitations, it was impossible to examine all the related topics on Wikipedia.
Therefore, several typical family-health-related topics and their associated entries on Wikipedia
were investigated. The research question and sub-questions are:
RQ1: What are the associated entries, emerged themes and subjects, and relations
among them in each of the selected family-health-related topics?

5

RQ1a: What are the associated entries and the main themes of the selected
family-health-related topics discussed on Wikipedia?
RQ1b: What are the subjects of each theme of the selected family-health-related
topics?
RQ1c: What are the relations among the themes, subjects, and entries?
Three family-health-related topics (Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and Women’s
Health) were selected for this study. The criteria for choosing the qualified topics included: (1)
the topics should be popular family-health-related topics widely discussed by the general
public; (2) the topics should cover different aspects of family health issues; (3) in order to
collect data from Wikipedia, there should be more than 100 relevant entries for each of the
topics on Wikipedia and the entries should contain sufficient data; (4) the lengths of the
selected topics’ history should be longer than 8 years. These criteria are described in detail in
the Methodology section.
Each family-health-related topic included one seed entry and a number of associated
entries on Wikipedia. These entries draw a picture of a specific topic from different aspects.
R1a intends to explore the different themes of every selected topic. Each theme stands for one
aspect of the specific topic. R1b aims to extract the subjects from the content of the entries
belonging to the specific themes, respectively. Based on the findings, the relations among the
entries, subjects, and themes are constructed in R1c. In other words, the internal characteristics
of every selected topic were examined.
1.2.3. Research Question Two
6

The second layer of the research problem explored the evolutions of the selected topics.
The evolution of the specific topics can be observed from two aspects: internal characteristics
and external popularity. Therefore, the second research question is divided into two subquestions: the evolution of the internal characteristics for each topic and the evolution of the
external popularity for each topic.
RQ2: What are the evolution patterns for each of the selected family-health-related
topics in terms of the internal characteristics and external popularity?
RQ2a: What are the new entries created in each investigated time period for
each theme of the selected topics? What subjects are emerging and disappearing in
each period for each theme of the selected topics? For each topic, what are the
evolution patterns of its internal characteristics during these time periods?
RQ2b: What are the evolution patterns for the selected topics in terms of their
associated entries’ number of views and number of edits? What are the evolution
patterns for the themes of each selected topic in terms of the associated entries’
number of views and number of edits?
H01: There were no significant differences among the investigated time
periods in terms of the number of page views of the entries relevant to each of
the topics.
H02: There were no significant differences among the investigated time
periods in terms of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to each of the
topics.
7

The second research question investigated the changes of the selected family-healthrelated topics over the past decade. The internal characteristics of a specific topic in different
time periods show the emergences, growths, and disappearances of entries, subjects, and
terms in each theme. Figure 1 presents the structure of entries, themes, and subjects for a topic
in a specific time period.

Figure 1. Concept Map
Figure 1 demonstrates that there could be multiple themes contained in one topic and
every theme relates to one to many entries. Each entry can only belong to one theme. The
content of the entries in different time periods were collected from the corresponding
historical versions of entries on Wikipedia. For one period, the subjects of a theme were
determined by the content of the entries within this theme. An entry may relate to one or more
than one subject, while different entries could relate to the same subjects. Therefore, according
to the entries included, a theme may have more than one subject.
It is possible that a subject is either broader or narrower than a theme, since a theme
was confined by a subject in the schema. For instance, the Child prostitution entry belonged to
8

the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme. Its content involved the definitions and
causes of child prostitution. The definition part was associated with the abuse and violence
subject and the cause part was associated with the social factor subject. The abuse and violence
subject was relatively narrower than the theme, while the social factor subject was broader.
In this study, the external popularity of an entry was measured by its number of page
edits and number of page views. The number of page edits reflects the popularity of an entry
among the Wikipedia editors and the number of page views reflects the popularity of an entry
among the Wikipedia viewers. Regarding one topic, the total number of page views of all the
entries associated with it reflects its popularity, and so does the total number of page edits. The
popularities of the themes in a topic can also be revealed by these two measures.
Since the revision data of Wikipedia entries are available from July 2006 and other data
are available from when entries were created, this study explored the internal characteristics
and external popularities of the selected topics from 2010 to 2017. Four periods were defined:
2010 to 2011, 2012 to 2013, 2014 to 2015, and 2016 to 2017. The detailed criteria for
determining these time periods are described in the Methodology section.
1.2.4. Research Question Three
The third layer of the research problem tends to compare the evolution patterns of
different topics and to explore the differences and commonalities among them. Similar to the
second research question, the internal characteristic evolution patterns and the external
popularity evolution patterns of the selected topics were compared.

9

RQ3: What are the differences and commonalities among the selected topics in terms of
their evolution patterns?
H03: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of
the number of the page edits of the associated entries.
H04: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of
the number of the page views of the associated entries.
After RQ1 and RQ2 explored the evolution patterns of three family-health-related topics
individually, this research question compared these evolution patterns to determine
commonalities and differences among them from both qualitative and quantitative
perspectives.
In order to clarify the connections among the research problem, research questions, and
hypotheses, Figure 2 displays their structure. There are three research questions under the
research problem. Research question one contains three sub-questions and research question
two contains two sub-questions. The first two hypotheses are related to the second subquestion of research question two. The third and fourth hypotheses are associated to research
question three.

10

Research Problem

RQ1

RQ2

RQ3

RQ1a

RQ2a

RQ1b

RQ2b

RQ1c

H03-H04

H01-H02

Figure 2. Structure of Research Problem, Research Questions, and Hypotheses
1.3.

Research Design

To address the research problem and answer the research questions, a mixed method
study was conducted. Three family-health-related topics were selected and the data of their
related entries on Wikipedia were collected. Main themes and subjects in different time
periods were identified by statistical methods, coding method, and subject analysis methods.
How and when the entries and the subjects emerged, grew, and disappeared were explored.
Important and popular themes and subjects in different time periods were observed. The
external popularity evolution of the selected topics and their themes were demonstrated by
temporal analysis methods. Additionally, the different topics’ evolution patterns were
compared and their commonalities and differences were investigated. To achieve the research
goals, both qualitative and quantitative methods, like coding, subject analysis, statistical
analysis, clustering analysis, text mining, and information visualization methods, were
employed in this study.

11

1.4.

Definitions of Terms

This section is an overview of the terms found in this study and the definitions of these
terms. Some of the definitions were proposed in previous research studies, while the remaining
ones were defined in this study. These definitions were created to understand how the
corresponding terms were considered in the context of this study.
z

Social media: A group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological and
technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange of User
Generated Content (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). There are different types of social media,
such as blogs, microblogs, RSS feeds, wikis, and so on (Xie & Stevenson, 2014).

z

Wikipedia: “Wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia created and edited by volunteers
around the world.” (Wikipedia, 2017)

z

WHO Website: The WHO Website is the official Website of the World Health Organization
(WHO). The primary goal of WHO is to “build a better, healthier future for people all over
the world” (WHO Website, 2017).

z

Temporal analysis: Analysis where temporal data or temporal text play an important role.
In this proposal, the concept of temporal analysis includes longitudinal analysis, time-series
analysis and trend analysis, but excludes spatial-temporal analysis.

z

Temporal information retrieval: An emerging research area which aims to bring temporal
relevance into information retrieval. Temporal information retrieval considers temporal
relevance as important as document relevance in information retrieval.

12

z

Health information: Information that refers to general health, drugs and supplements,
specific populations, genetics, environmental health and toxicology, clinical trials, and
biomedical literature (National Library of Medicine, 2016).

z

Consumer: People who “seek information about health promotion, disease prevention,
treatment of specific conditions, and management of various health conditions and chronic
illnesses” (Lewis, Eysenbach, Kukafka, Stavri, & Jimison, 2006, p. 1). In this proposal,
consumer only stands for the consumer of health information.

z

Consumer health information: “Any information that enables individuals to understand
their health and make health-related decision for themselves and their families. This
includes information supporting individual and community-based health promotion and
enhancement, self-care, shared (professional-patient) decision-making, patient education,
patient information and rehabilitation, health education, using the healthcare systems and
selecting insurance or healthcare provider.” (as cited in Suess, 2001, p. 41-42)

z

Consumer health vocabulary: The health terms and phrases used by consumers. Health
scientists try to develop consumer health vocabularies to fill the language gap between
health professionals and consumers.

z

Family health: “A dynamic, changing state of well-being, which includes the biological,
psychological, spiritual, sociological, and culture factors of individual members and the
whole family system” (Kaakinen, Coehlo, Steele, Tabacco, & Hanson, 2014, p.5).

z

Concept: An abstract or generic idea generalized from particular instances. In this study,
the title of every Wikipedia entry represents a concept and the main body of the Wikipedia
13

entry introduces the corresponding concept. For example, the “Cluster analysis” entry on
Wikipedia is a concept related to data mining topic.
z

Theme: A specific and distinctive concern of a group of concepts. In this study, the concepts
collected were assigned to several categories and every category had its own theme. For
example, the theme of the data-mining-related concepts “cluster analysis”, “odds
algorithm”, and “genetic algorithm” is “data mining methods.”

z

Subject: In this study, the subject of an article is the focus of it. Every Wikipedia entry could
have one or more than one subjects. For example, after reviewing the content of the datamining-related concept “stellar wind”, the subjects of this concept are “security” and
“information collection and analysis.”

z

Number of page views: The number of times a Wikipedia entry is viewed by users. These
data reflect the popularity of an entry. Daily number of page views is the number of times a
Wikipedia entry is viewed by users in one day. Monthly number of page views is the
number of times a Wikipedia entry is viewed by users in one month.

z

Number of page edits: The number of times a Wikipedia entry is edited by users. These
data reflect the popularity of an entry. Monthly number of page edits is the number of
times a Wikipedia entry is edited by users in one month.

z

Neural network: “A system composed of many simple processing elements operating in
parallel whose function is determined by network structure, connection strengths, and the
processing performed at computing elements or nodes” (Widrow, 1988).

14

z

Self-Organizing Map: Self-Organizing Map (SOM) is a popular unsupervised learning
approach that projects high-dimensional data on to low-dimensional output (Kohonen,
1990). It is a widely used neural network method which measures similarities between
items of input data so as to form similarity graphs.
1.5.

Chapter One Summary

This chapter presented the background and rationale of the study. The research
problem, research questions, hypotheses, and research design were described and addressed in
detail. To make this study clear for the reader, the concepts appearing in this study were
defined and the connections among them were illustrated in a concept map.

15

2. LITERATURE REVIEW

In this day and age, because of the development of Web 2.0 technology, the general
public is able to create, revise, share, and delete information and communicate with each other
on a variety of social media platforms. Being environments for generating user-generated
content, social media platforms are not only regarded as the place for information creation and
sharing, but also the source for seeking information. For example, YouTube is recognized as the
largest video sharing platform for the general public to watch videos. Thousands of entries
created on Wikipedia attract users to look for certain knowledge on this Website. Due to the
importance of social media, research studies focusing on social media have been increasing in
the past decade. Research topics tend to focus on user behaviors on social media, social media
content, and social network analysis.
The development of information technology and Internet techniques enables the
general public to search health information online. In the early years of Internet use, online
health information was mostly posted by health specialists; this is different from the situation
today. In recent years, social media platforms serve as a useful channel for general users,
patients, and patients’ relatives and friends to access information from each other, as well as
create health information online. Therefore, social media platforms are becoming more and
more important for online health information seeking and the studies which talk about health
information on social media have increased. These research studies cover diverse research
topics and consumer health and family health are two important topics.

16

A number of methods have been applied to social media studies and health-related
studies. Among the various methods, temporal analysis has played an important role in those
research studies. Both qualitative and quantitative research methods have been employed in
temporal analysis. As the volume of data increased, data mining methods and text mining
methods have been frequently used in temporal analysis. SOM is a widely used method applied
to data mining and text mining. This chapter reviews the literature about temporal analysis,
health information, social media, and SOM.
2.1.

Temporal Analysis

For a long time, social science research relied on cross-sectional analysis which allowed
researchers to measure variables and collect data on a single occasion (Fitzmaurice, Laird, &
Ware, 2012). Cross-sectional analysis is one of the observational study methods applied to
many research fields, especially in the heath and sociology fields (Rosenbaum, 2002). This
method provides a way for researchers to observe, compare and analyze certain samples from
different populations at one point in time with cross-sectional data. Also, various variables are
observed at the same time. As a result, the differences between multiple variables and sample
groups are revealed. However, since cross-sectional analysis only offers a snapshot of a single
moment, it is not possible to provide definite information of cause-and-effect relationships or
to reflect changes or trends of certain subjects. Therefore, in addition to the cross-sectional
data, temporal data are utilized in order to take time dimension into account.
As with the cross-sectional analysis, social science’s interest in temporal analysis has a
long history (Hannan & Tuma, 1979). The needs of exploring changes and patterns of certain

17

objects, uncovering the cause-and-effect relationships between certain objects, and predicting
future trends of certain objects has increased in the past decades. With the development of
science and technology, the world today is changing rapidly in all aspects of life (Tran, Gaber, &
Sattler, 2014). Accordingly, detecting these changes, describing the patterns, seeking the causes
of changes, and predicting the corresponding future trends are key issues in academic and
commercial research. In this sense, using temporal analysis in research studies is necessary.
2.1.1. Temporal Analysis
As it was mentioned before, temporal analysis enables researchers to collect data at
different time points. In other words, the snapshots of certain objects in different time periods
are recorded, analyzed and compared. One of the strengths of temporal analysis is that time
interval in temporal analysis is flexible. It means in one study, researchers could observe objects
across decades, years, or even seconds (Harzing, 2014; Naaman, Becker, & Gravano, 2011; St.
Jean, 2014). Therefore, when the time interval is long, the history and development of certain
objects in a long period will be demonstrated. When the time interval is short, changes and
patterns in a short time period will be illustrated. Hence, the second strength of temporal
analysis is that it reveals how certain objects change and develop over time. Based on detecting
the trends or patterns in the past, it is possible to predict the future trends or patterns of the
same objects, which is the third advantage. In addition, different from cross-sectional analysis,
temporal analysis characterizes the factors which influence changes (Fitzmaurice et al., 2012).
Thus, evidences of cause-and-effect relationships can be obtained by this method.

18

Every coin has two sides. Temporal analysis also has its weaknesses. First of all, to
conduct temporal analysis, temporal data need to be collected. This is time-consuming in some
cases. Secondly, since the length of the time interval is flexible, for the same research purpose,
different timescales might be selected by different researchers (Naaman, 2010). As a result,
even if the same data set is utilized, different findings could be obtained depending on
difference timescales. It is one of the main challenges for temporal analysis. Last but not least,
temporal analysis can only be applied to analyze the same objects with the same time interval.
This means it is only capable of capturing within-subject difference rather than betweensubject difference (Fitzmaurice et al., 2012). Alternately, using temporal analysis, researchers
cannot explore the differences between several sample groups or populations. To make up this
shortcoming, some researchers combine temporal analysis and cross-sectional analysis
together so as to gather the whole picture of the investigated items (Deursen & Dijk, 2015;
Efron, 2013).
Because of the strengths of temporal analysis, it is widely used in multiple research
fields, such as business, health, medicine, education, sociology and so on (Ghapanchi, 2015; J.
Lin, Wang, Wang, & Lu, 2013; Montiel-Overall & Grimes, 2013; Pivovarov, Albers, Hripcsak,
Sepulveda, & Elhadad, 2014). For instance, in the business field, temporal analysis helps to
investigate user behavior patterns and to detect product developing trends. In health and
medicine, this method allows researchers to figure out factors that cause health issues. In the
computer science field, the use of temporal analysis is widely accepted in one of its main
branches – data mining.

19

The applications of temporal analysis in the library and information science field are also
indispensable. Temporal analysis is employed in the studies of information retrieval,
information visualization, user behavior, informetrics, library science, and so forth. Among the
relevant studies of user behavior, temporal analysis provides ways to characterize user
behavior patterns and how the patterns change over time (Jain, Rajyalakshmi, Tripathy, &
Bagchi, 2013; Pelechrinis & Krishnamurthy, 2012). In informetrics studies that apply temporal
analysis, the long-term developing trends of studies, collaboration networks, and citations in
different fields are detected (Hossain, Karimi, Wigand, & Crawford, 2015; Peng, 2015; Taba,
Hossain, Atkinson, & Lewis, 2015). Regarding the studies in the library science area, temporal
analysis deals with both library services and use of library resources and services (Collins &
Quan-Haase, 2014; Radford & Connaway, 2013).
2.1.2. Temporal Analysis Applied to Information Retrieval
Both quantitative and qualitative research methods are frequently employed in
information retrieval studies. As a widely used research method, temporal analysis is frequently
utilized in information retrieval studies. The studies employing temporal analysis primarily focus
on search behavior and the information retrieval system. In addition, there is a newly emerging
research area, temporal information retrieval, associated with temporal analysis.
2.1.2.1.Information retrieval
Information retrieval is the sum of all ways to answer users’ information needs as
accurately as possible (Cooper, 1971; Manning, Raghavan & Schütze, 2008). Studies in this area
concentrate on either system-oriented or user-oriented aspects.
20

The research topics of the system-oriented studies usually focus on generating,
improving and evaluating information retrieval systems; and the models, algorithms, languages
and techniques which are related to them. Search engine, online database, digital library, and
online public access catalog are four primary types of information retrieval systems. Three
information retrieval models occupy important places among all the models. These are the
Boolean Information Retrieval Model, the Vector Space Model, and the Probability Information
Retrieval Model (Manning, Raghavan & Schütze, 2008). When the World Wide Web was
created, the needs for searching information online emerged along with strong demands of
improving search efficiency. New models and algorithms were proposed in the 1990s. PageRank
proposed by Brin and Page plays an important role in online information retrieval (Brin & Page,
2012; Page, Brin, Motwani, & Winograd, 1999). Recently, apart from retrieving text
information, studies of image retrieval, music retrieval and multimedia retrieval have increased.
To provide more user-friendly search systems, new techniques such as information visualization
techniques have been applied to optimize interface design. Meanwhile, the development of
social media also raises new questions in information retrieval, such as social tagging, temporal
information retrieval, and people search (Campos, Dias, Jorge, & Jatowt, 2014; Han, He, Yue,
Jiang, & Jeng, 2012; Li, Shan, & Lin, 2011; Wang, Clements, Yang, de Vries, & Reinders, 2010).
Other research studies have been conducted from a user-oriented perspective. By
analysis of users’ search behavior, two main information retrieval paradigms have been
proposed. They are query searching and browsing. User behavior studies have investigated
both searching and browsing behavior in different types of information retrieval systems. These
studies included users’ motivations, preferences, eye movement patterns, information literacy,
21

and so on (Granka, Joachims, & Gay, 2004; Julien, Tan, & Merillat, 2013; Ross et al., 2009). In
recent years, with the improvement of mobile devices, exploring user information seeking
behavior on these devices has become a hot topic in the information retrieval area.
2.1.2.2.Information search behavior
Exploring users’ information behavior is one of the research topics which most often
apply temporal analysis. A part of the studies observe and compare user behavior across a
number of years, while the remaining studies explore user behavior patterns within a relatively
short time period.
Deursen and Dijk (2015) investigated search skills across different user groups in a
longitudinal study. The participants’ search skills were examined every year from 2010 to 2013.
The results revealed that age and educational background made differences in users’ search
skills. From 2010 to 2013, search skills of the participants who were older than 65 years old
increased. Researchers from health science also conducted a number of studies referring to
search behavior. Consumer health information behavior is currently a hot topic in this area. For
example, St. Jean argued that combining longitudinal analysis and card-sorting technique was a
useful means for observing patients’ information behavior, including search behavior (St. Jean,
2014).
In addition, think-aloud protocol, transaction log analysis and eye-tracking method are
applied together with temporal analysis for user studies. These three approaches are capable of
capturing temporal data, or orders of actions. Thus, they are employed for exploring user’s
searching and browsing behavior patterns, especially transition patterns. Hölscher and Strube
22

(2000) utilized the think-aloud protocol to record users’ actions and orders of actions in Webbased information search. Based on the orders of actions, they built several transition models
for information seeking behavior, and interaction between users and search engines. Goodrum,
Bejune, and Siochi (2003) identified 18 states for online image search behavior. They gathered
transaction log data and coded each record with the identified states. Depending on the coding
results and the temporal data in transaction log, they detected the maximal repeating patterns
of state transition. Liu and Kešelj (2007), and Hassan, Jones, and Klinkner (2010) also modeled
navigation and search behavior by transaction log data and temporal analysis. Furthermore,
they applied the models for prediction. Eye-tracking devices record users’ eye movement data,
including time and position of fixations, saccades, blinks and clicks. Similar to transaction log
data, eye-tracking data are collected for investigating eye movement patterns in information
seeking. For instance, Puolamäki et al. (2005) gathered the eye-tracking data of scientific article
searching, and estimated relevance from eye tracking data. Then they performed the Hidden
Markov Model to detect eye movement and relevance judgment patterns. Moreover, the “scan
path” function embedded in eye-tracking software can present the entire process of eye
movements (Räihä, Aula, Majaranta, Rantala, & Koivunen, 2005).
Search queries contained in transaction logs reflect interactions between users and
information retrieval systems in online search. Search queries not only relate to user behavior,
but also associate with information retrieval systems. Temporal analysis of search queries
explores users’ query formation patterns (Wang, Berry, & Yang, 2003). The way users modify
the search queries reflects their mental models in information search. At the same time, the
changes of the vocabulary utilized in search queries show the evolution of language use.
23

These examples show that the use of temporal analysis helps researchers gain insights
into users’ information behaviors. User behavior patterns and changes of user behavior
patterns over time are both detected by this means.
2.1.2.3.

Information retrieval system

To improve the effectiveness of an information retrieval system, research studies
discussed the possibility of taking the time feature into account in information retrieval, and
proposed models and frameworks for extracting temporal information from documents,
metadata, social tags, and queries (Alonso, Gertz, & Baeza-Yates, 2007; Radinsky et al., 2013;
Ruocco & Ramampiaro, 2015; Uricchio, Ballan, Bertini, & Bimbo, 2013). Not only publication
time but also temporal information contained in the content was extracted. With a variety of
temporal information, information retrieval systems will be able to retrieve documents on
multiple time dimensions.
Evaluation of information retrieval systems is another main research topic. Harzing
(2014) explored the coverage of Google Scholar by retrieving studies in chemistry, economics,
medicine, and physics from 2012 to 2013. The findings reflected that the volume of documents
in each research field retrieved by Google Scholar increased at different paces over time. The
expansion of different information retrieval systems was also detected. Winter, Zadpoor and
Dodou (2014) reported that Google Scholar expanded faster than Web of Science, but the
quality of literature retrieved by Google Scholar was not as good as those retrieved by Web of
Science.

24

Information retrieval studies also strengthen temporal analysis methodology. Since one
of the shortcomings of temporal analysis is the variation of indices used in analysis and there is
no criterion for selection of these indices, comparing and evaluating the indices are meaningful.
Tseng et al. (2009) compared and evaluated a number of trend indices by information retrieval
measures. They reported that the linear regression slope performed better than the other
investigated indices. This study made a contribution to temporal analysis on both theoretical
and practical sides.
The applications of temporal analysis in information retrieval enhance both user
behavior studies and system-oriented studies. Conversely, information retrieval research
contributes in the methodology of temporal analysis.
2.1.2.4.

Temporal information retrieval

Since the volume of information increases quite rapidly in the digital age, new
documents, topics and terms emerge every day. The spelling and meaning of terms also change
over time. It means documents containing the same terms may refer to totally different
themes, and different terms used in queries and documents in different time periods may have
the same meaning. Therefore, vocabulary mismatch is a huge challenge for current information
retrieval systems. Also, as knowledge quickly updates, the value of documents and information
is not only content dependent, but also time dependent. Metzger (2007) considered that
timeliness was a key factor, beyond relevance, accuracy, objectivity and coverage, which
determines document quality. As a result, retrieving documents and information which match

25

users’ information needs from a time perspective is necessary. Thus, a new area, temporal
information retrieval, is generated to bring temporal relevance into information retrieval.
So far, some applications of temporal information retrieval have been created in
industry. For instance, YAGO2 provides an interface for searching the temporal and spatial
knowledge base from Wikipedia (Hoffart, Suchanek, Berberich, & Weikum, 2013). Time Explorer
allows users to search news over time and analyzes how news changes over time so as to
predict future news (Matthews et al., 2010). Google Ngram Viewer visualizes the historical
trends of the use of particular keywords in books stored in Google Book from 1800 to 2000
(Michel et al., 2011). In addition, Twitter, one of the most popular social networks, lists recently
popular hashtags and terms in the Trend panel in order to help users explore hot topics in time.
These applications reflect the interest of the public and industry which support the idea that
temporal information retrieval is a promising area.
Researchers in academia also show great interest in this area. Their focuses cover query
understanding and presentation, temporal ranking, future-related information retrieval, and so
on (Campos et al., 2014). Although Efron (2013) argued that cross-temporal search was similar
to cross-language retrieval, other researchers have different ideas and have proposed new
frameworks and algorithms. Information retrieval framework generally contains four steps,
including document processing, indexing, query processing, and ranking documents (Campos et
al., 2014). The studies in the temporal information retrieval area also pay attention to topics
relevant to these steps. For the document processing step, most of the study in this area is in
relation to Web crawling and Web archiving. Internet Archive, started in 1996, is one of the
most famous projects (Kahle, 1997). Another project, the Internet Memory Foundation, which
26

was launched in 2004, also provides open memory of Web pages. Some other studies focus on
the use of content of Web archives. These studies either propose methods to recover lost
online information or maintain the accessibility of Web pages (McCown & Nelson, 2008; Van de
Sompel et al., 2009). Regarding the indexing step, Arikan, Bedathur, and Berberich (2009)
suggested that two types of indexes should be created: one index to store text documents, the
other to store temporal data derived from the documents. Pasca (2008) proposed an index
which contains both dates and text in a fact repository. Different from the previous studies, the
two indexes proposed by Matthews et al. (2010) included one for each document and one for
each sentence. The studies of query processing could be assigned into two categories, the
recency-sensitive queries and the time-sensitive queries (Campos et al., 2014). The former
category aims to retrieve the latest documents that are topically relevant, while the latter one
attempts to search the documents from a particular time period. Similar to the query
processing step, the works of temporal ranking also concentrate on two aspects: recencysensitive ranking and time-sensitive ranking.
All these studies show that the utilization of temporal analysis provides ways to detect
users’ information seeking behavior overtime and enhances information retrieval systems by
(1) extracting more temporal information from documents and queries, and (2) introducing
temporal relevance into information retrieval and generating temporal information retrieval.
The implications of using temporal analysis cover both theoretical and practical sides. For the
theoretical implications, temporal analysis evokes the emergence of temporal information
retrieval, explores the features and development of information retrieval systems, strengthens
the studies of user behaviors, and inspires researchers to generate new research methods.
27

Most of the practical implications rely on the theoretical implications. Researchers propose
suggestions for improving effectiveness and efficiency of information retrieval systems by
taking temporal relevance into consideration, and modifying search functions and interface
design. A unique practical implication of temporal analysis is the invention of the scan path
function embedded in eye-tracking devices.
2.1.3. Temporal Analysis Applied to Data Mining
Hey (2012) asserted in his work The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery
that nowadays scientists are overwhelmed with data sets from various information sources.
These data sets are obtained by different instruments from many fields, which contain rich
information and knowledge. To extract knowledge from data and information is a vital topic in
scientific research. However, it is difficult to deal with huge data sets with traditional research
approaches. In such a situation, the data mining area emerged to extract hidden information
and knowledge from vast amounts of data.
2.1.3.1.

Data mining

Data mining is a method to reveal previously unknown and reliable insights from large
data sets (Elkan, 2001). Turban, Sharda, Delen, and Efraim (2007) defined data mining as ‘‘the
process that uses statistical, mathematical, artificial intelligence and machine-learning
techniques to extract and identify useful information and subsequently gain knowledge from
large databases” (p. 305). A similar definition proposed by Berson and Smith (2002), Lejeune
(2001) and Ahmed (2004) regards data mining as the process of extracting or detecting hidden
patterns or information from large databases. Since the massive volume of data from different
28

fields keeps growing, useful analysis methods and techniques are urgently needed. Therefore,
data mining has become an increasingly important research field (Liao, Chu, & Hsiao, 2012).
With the development of data mining techniques, lots of methods from other fields
have been introduced to the data mining area, such as generalization, characterization,
classification, clustering, data visualization, and database technology (Aggarwal, Kumar,
Khatter, & Aggarwal, 2012; Liao, Chu and Hsiao, 2012). At the same time, data mining has been
applied to many research fields such as education, medicine, finance, product design, business
intelligence, and so on (Aliev, Aliev, Guirimov, & Uyar, 2008; Borghini, Crotti, Pietra, Favero, &
Bianucci, 2010; Gregori et al., 2011; Trafalis & White, 2003).
2.1.3.2.

Data mining studies applying temporal analysis

Nowadays, the importance of temporal data is growing in various fields, like Web usage
monitoring, biomedicine, geography, and finance (Yoo & Shekhar, 2009). Hence, several
different types of databases are launched to store time-related data including temporal
database, sequence database and time-series database. Mining these data sets helps to reveal
the features of object evolution and illustrate the trend of their changes (Han & Kamber, 2006).
A few studies aim to explore evolutions of research objects during several periods. For instance,
Stevenson and Zhang (2015) studied the changes of institutional repositories from 1992 to
2013. They divided the data of institutional repositories into four periods, which were 1992 to
2001, 2002 to 2005, 2006 to 2009, and 2010 to 2013. For each period, the multidimensional
scaling method was employed to obtain term clusters, and the content analysis method was
applied to discover the theme of each term cluster. The themes of different time periods were

29

compared so as to reveal the evolution of institutional repositories from 1992 to 2013. More
studies analyze large amounts of ordered data with temporal features, such as time-series data
and sequence data. These studies are regarded as temporal data mining studies (Laxman &
Sastry, 2006). There are several tasks of temporal data mining, which are prediction,
classification, clustering, search and retrieval, and pattern discovery (Laxman & Sastry, 2006).
The first four tasks have been conducted in the traditional time-series analysis, while the fifth
task is of more recent origin. Since information retrieval was discussed in the previous section,
this section focuses on the remaining four tasks.
(1) Temporal clustering
Liao (2005) defined clustering as the ability “to identify structure in an unlabeled data
set by objectively organizing data into homogeneous groups where the within-group-object
similarity is minimized and the between-group-object dissimilarity is maximized” (p. 1857).
Accordingly, temporal clustering aims to cluster sequences or time series based on the
similarity among them (Laxman & Sastry, 2006). A number of different methods have been
proposed for sequence clustering such as the model-based sequence clustering methods (Law
& Kwok, 2000; Sebastiani, Ramoni, Cohen, Warwick, & Davis, 1999).
At the same time, time series clustering became popular. Liao (2005) reported that
there were three sets of time series clustering methods, including the raw-data-based methods,
the feature-based methods, and the model-based methods. These methods were developed
based on the original clustering methods like agglomerative hierarchical clustering, k-Means,
fuzzy c-means, Self-Organizing Map, and so forth (Liao, 2005).

30

Recently, temporal clustering has been applied to a variety of research topics,
particularly in event and trend detection and future prediction. Jatowt, Kanazawa, Oyama, and
Tanaka (2009) proposed a clustering method to extract and summarize future-related
information from text, including content and timestamps. By extracting information from a
reference text corpus, Jatowt and Yeung (2011) generated a model-based clustering algorithm
to predict future events. In addition, some researchers applied multiple clustering methods in
one research study. For instance, Liu, Jiang and Ma (2013) employed both keyword analysis and
citation analysis for exploring emerging trends in knowledge networks. Because citation
analysis has an obvious time lag effect which may influence the results of temporal analysis,
they applied keyword analysis to strengthen their study. The results showed that the approach
utilized in this study could also be performed for predicting future emerging trends.
Furthermore, topic trends and emerging events on social media are also detected by temporal
analysis. Researchers detected trends and events by clustering blog posts, tweets, hashtags,
email messages, photographs, and so on (Petrović, Osborne, & Lavrenko, 2010; Rattenbury,
Good, & Naaman, 2007; Sayyadi, Hurst, & Maykov, 2009; Zhao, Mitra, & Chen, 2007).
(2) Temporal classification
As a traditional data mining task, classification is a primary task of temporal data mining
as well. However, due to the nature of temporal data, special methods and approaches need to
be employed for temporal classification (Fu, 2011). Two main topics of temporal classification
are sequence classification and time series classification. Certain examples of sequence
classification are speech recognition, demarcating gene and non-gene regions in a genome
sequence, on-line signature verification, and so on (Laxman & Sastry, 2006). Several methods
31

and algorithms have been proposed and utilized in time series classification. For instance,
Zhang, Ho, and Lin (2004) proposed a nearest neighbor classification algorithm to automatically
select parameters from time-series data. Xi, Keogh, Shelton, Wei, and Ratanamahatana (2006)
created semi-supervised time series classifiers for small data sets.
This paper mainly investigates the studies focusing on temporal text classification, which
is an important and popular current research topic. The temporal information embedded in text
can be divided into two categories: (1) timestamp, which is the time when the text was created,
published or modified; and (2) focus time, which is the time that the content refers to (Campos
et al., 2014). Toyoda and Kitsuregawa (2006) and Nunes, Ribeiro, and David (2007) first studied
timestamps of documents. They estimated the Web page creation date by the scores of linking
Web pages. Nunes et al. (2007) extracted three features from Web pages - incoming links,
outgoing links, and HTML src attributes. They utilized link structure analysis to analyze these
data to estimate the last-modified date of Web pages. However, it is unclear whether the
results are reliable or not (Campos et al., 2014). To overcome this problem, Web archives, LastModified HTTP response header, time when last crawled by Google, and time when first tweets
of the investigated documents were collected and utilized to further date these documents
(Jatowt, Kawai, & Tanaka, 2007; SalahEldeen & Nelson, 2013).
A few studies aim to determine focus time of documents. Jatowt and Yeung (2011) first
detected events from related news by clustering methods and estimated the time when these
events took place. Then they compared these events with the events which occurred in certain
Web pages in order to estimate focus time of these Web pages. Kawai, Jatowt, Tanaka,
Kunieda, and Yamada (2010), and Strötgen, Alonso, and Gertz (2012) presented approaches to
32

extract the most relevant temporal expressions from text. After the timestamp and focus time
of a document was determined, it could be assigned into one or several time periods because
different parts of a document were probably associated with different time periods.
(3) Pattern discovery and prediction
Pattern discovery has its root in data mining (Laxman & Sastry, 2006). In temporal data
mining, it tends to identify frequent patterns and surprising patterns by using time-series data
(Fu, Chung, Ng, & Luk, 2001; Keogh, Lonardi, & Chiu, 2002). Clustering methods are usually
employed for pattern discovery, such as distance-based clustering, SOM, and so on (Fu et al.,
2001; H. Wang, Wang, Yang, & Yu, 2002). Apart from analyzing temporal sequences of raw
data, there is a growing trend of analyzing the results of temporal data mining (Lingras, Hogo,
Snorek, & West, 2005). In other words, these studies aim to mine the changes. Change mining
monitors models and patterns overtime, compares them, and detect their changes (Böttcher,
Höppner, & Spiliopoulou, 2008). Incremental mining methods were generated for investigating
the updating of patterns or models.
The studies cited indicate that the five temporal data mining tasks are usually associated
with each other in academic research. In Fu’s (2011) work, pattern discovery and clustering
were considered one task. Actually, clustering methods are frequently applied for pattern
discovery. In some cases, temporal clustering supports temporal classification, while clustering
and classification both support pattern discovery. In general, prediction is the purpose of
pattern discovery. Meanwhile, classification, clustering, pattern discovery and prediction also
contribute to information retrieval. Temporal analysis enhances data mining from different

33

perspectives. First of all, temporal data, such as sequence data and time-series data; are
primary information resource for all five tasks. To analyze this type of data for different tasks,
old methods are modified while new methods are created. By these methods, researchers are
able to extract temporal data from text, cluster and classify items with temporal features,
discover patterns, and predict future trends relying on temporal data. Temporal analysis
strengthens all five tasks of data mining.
In data mining, temporal analysis has both theoretical and practical implications. Its
contribution to research methodologies of data mining studies consists of two aspects: (1)
introducing temporal analysis methods generated in other fields, and (2) generating new
temporal data mining methods. It also reveals emerging events, detects current trends, predicts
future trends, and explores changes of certain research objects over time. Regarding the
practical implications, temporal analysis improves the effectiveness and efficiency of
information retrieval systems. On one hand, it enhances temporal information search by
extracting temporal information from documents. On the other hand, it detects and presents
trending topics and events in social media applications, which strengthens information
browsing functions embedded in these applications.
2.2.

Social Media Studies

The use of social media is increasing globally (Boyd & Ellison, 2007; Moorhead, Hazlett,
Harrison, Carroll, Irwin, & Hoving, 2013). The eBizMBA Rank reported that by October 2015,
Facebook had 900 million unique monthly visitors, Twitter had 310 million unique monthly
visitors, and the number of LinkedIn visitors had reached 255 million. The volume of content

34

increased as the number of users grew. It was reported that Twitter users had broadcasted
more than 500 million tweets per day by 2014 (Matta et al., 2014). The statistics offered by
Wikipedia presented that currently it has more than 900 thousand content creators generating
nearly 5 million articles. In addition to content creation, diffusion, and utilization, social media
is the platform for social connections. Social media users connect with each other by becoming
friends, following, commenting, tagging and so forth.
The large number of users and the huge volume of content on social media attract
attention from different research fields such as business, health, sociology, education,
anthropology and so on (Bredl, Hünniger, & Jensen, 2012; Joseph, 2012; Kietzmann, Hermkens,
McCarthy, & Silvestre, 2011; Moorhead et al., 2013). Studies focus on users, content, and
relationships between users and content on social media.
2.2.1. Social Media
Academic and industry researchers have proposed many notions for the description of
the emergence of Websites and applications of user-generated content. For instance,
“commons-based peer production” and “produsage” represent the new content creation mode
(Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006; Bruns, 2008). Notions such as social software, social networking,
crowd-sourcing, wisdom of crowds, Wikinomics, and collective intelligence also illustrate the
phenomenon from different perspectives (Benkler, 2006; Boyd & Ellison, 2007; Coates, 2003;
Hermida, 2010; Malone, Laubacher, & Dellarocas, 2009; Surowiecki, 2005; Tapscott & Williams,
2008). However, “social media” is one of the most widely accepted notions.

35

Ahlqvist, Bäck, Halonen, and Heinonen (2008) defined social media as the way people
generate, share information and communicate in virtual communities and networks. Kaplan
and Haenlein (2010) gave their definition, which defined social media as “a group of Internetbased applications that build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and
that allow the creation and exchange of User Generated Content” (p. 61). Recently, Xie and
Stevenson (2014) stated that “social media is a means of communication through the Internet
that enables social interaction” (p. 502). All of these definitions indicate that (1) social media
depends on the Internet and Web 2.0 technologies, and (2) social media is the platform for the
general public to generate content and communicate spontaneously.
Under the big umbrella of social media, social media sites and applications vary a lot.
For example, Twitter, which is regarded as a microblog, allows users to communicate and
create posts less than 140 words (Kwak, Lee, Park, & Moon, 2010); Wikipedia provides
opportunities for collaborative information and knowledge production (Bruns, 2006); and
YouTube is a multimedia broadcasting Website (Burgess & Green, 2013). Although hundreds of
social media sites and applications have been created, new social media applications emerge
every day. With the development of mobile devices, geo-mapping tools (e.g. Google Maps) and
self-tracking applications (e.g. Qualified Self) have been invented. Each kind of social media has
its own features.
The diversity of social media causes difficulty in classifying them. Kaplan and Haenlein
(2009) suggested that social media should be classified into six groups according to: (1) “the
degree of self-disclosure it requires and the type of self-presentation it allows” (p. 62); and (2)
“the richness of the medium and the degree of social presence it allows” (p. 61). The six groups
36

include blogs, collaborative projects (e.g. wikis), social networking sites, content communities
(e.g. YouTube), virtual social worlds (e.g. Second Life) and virtual game worlds (e.g. World of
Warcraft). However, Shi, Rui, and Whinston (2013) argued that social media like Twitter should
be classified as social broadcasting technology. Two new categories, social bookmarking and
social news, were introduced by Agarwal and Yiliyasi (2010). Later on, Xie and Stevenson (2014)
reviewed the previous literature and proposed their classification of eight categories. This
paper adopts Xie and Stevenson’s classification and definitions of different social media
applications. Table 1 displays these eight categories, their definitions, and the corresponding
examples.
Types
Blogs

Micro
blogs
Photo
sharing

Definitions
Allows a user to share thoughts and opinions on subjects in a diary
like fashion in a series of posts. Creates discussions or an
informational site published online and consisting of discrete entries
or “posts.”
Allows users to communicate with a handle or username that the
user creates, and can write short messages, typically 140 characters
that are sent to the user’s followers.
Online image and video hosting site that allows users to share,
comment, and connect through posted images.

Example
Blog

Twitter
Facebook;
Flickr;
Pinterest;
Twitter

Multimedia digital file that is stored on the Internet and is available
Podcasts to download, similar to a radio broadcast that is available freely
Podcast
online.
Rich Site Summary or Really Simple Syndication is frequently updated
Web feed that indicates news, events, blog entries that a user can
RSS
subscribe to and follow. RSS takes current headlines from different
RSS feeds
feeds
Websites and pushes those headlines down to your computer for
quick scanning.
Facebook,
Social
Online platform, for users to communicate and connect via interests,
Twitter;
networks backgrounds and activities, which are part of a large social network.
Reddit
Video
Content distribution of videos, typically available for free to the
YouTube
sharing
public.
37

Allow users to create and edit Web page content online. Hyperlinks
Wikis
and crosslinks connect between pages. Users are allowed and
Wiki
encouraged to edit wikis.
Table 1. Definitions of Different Types of Social Media (Xie & Stevenson, 2014, p. 504)
The definition of each category reveals the specific functionalities of the social media
within it. Social media applications in one category, like social networks, share a set of similar
characteristics. In each kind of social media, users, their behaviors and their connections are
complex. Numerous users play various roles on social media so that their behaviors vary a lot.
The users can generate, edit, and delete content, interact with other users or content, and
create connections with other users. These behaviors generate huge volumes of data, including
numeric data, text data, multimedia data, and so on. The relationships between the data
obtained from social media are also complicated, because an action may create several
different types of data, a piece of data may relate to more than one object, and different types
of data may associate to the same object. Due to complexity of social media users, users’
behaviors, users’ connections, and data, the research studies concentrating on social media are
complicated. A variety of data collection and data analysis approaches are employed in the
studies about social media.
2.2.2. Data Collection on Social Media Studies
Social media provides users with opportunities for generating, sharing, seeking, and
receiving information in the context of multiuser communication (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010;
Maness, 2006; Moorhead et al., 2013). In the context of social media, user status and activities
are complicated. Both quantitative and qualitative research methods have been applied to the
social-media-related studies (Bolton et al., 2013). Generally speaking, in quantitative studies,
38

there are four different types of measurement scales including nominal, ordinal, interval and
ratio, while in qualitative studies, verbal data, observation data, document data and visual data
are collected (F. Gravetter & Forzano, 2015; Maxwell, 2012). In the social-media-related
studies, specific types of data are collected and utilized, including interval data, ratio data,
nominal data, ordinal data, text, and multimedia.
2.2.2.1.

Data integration

In general, different types of data reflect characteristics of research objects from
different aspects. As mentioned before, different types of data, including numeric data, nonnumeric data, text and multimedia, are usually integrated in one study.
The nature of social media calls for the combination of different types of data, because
in social media different types of data are created together regularly (e.g. online product
reviews, videos on YouTube, and online maps). For instance, in order to detect the factors that
impact the helpfulness of product reviews, Mudambi and Schuff (2010) selected six products on
Amazon.com and captured all the reviews. They collected: (1) the star rating (1 to 5) the
reviewer gave the product; (2) the total number of people that voted in response to the
question, “Was this review helpful to you (yes/no)?” (p. 191) (3) the number of people who
voted that the review was helpful; and (4) the word count of the review (Mudambi & Schuff,
2010). Different data were used as different variables. In addition, product type was another
independent variable. Then all these variables were utilized in the Tobit regression. This study
implies that different types of data can be analyzed by the same approach. Sometimes, the data
obtained need to be transformed for data analysis. Gilbert and Karahalios (2009) extracted

39

users’ education background from their Twitter profile and categorized those data into three
categories. For some studies, one data collection approach or one data analysis method is not
enough. For example, He, Zha, and Li (2013) manually saved the data (both textual and numeric
data) from Facebook and Twitter about three pizza chains. Both SPSS Clementine text mining
tool and NVivo 9 were adopted for content analysis in the study.
In addition to data obtained from social media applications, data collected from
participants by survey, questionnaire or interview are also utilized. For instance, Gilbert and
Karahalios (2009) collected survey data to supplement the findings concluded from data
obtained from Twitter. They recruited 35 participants and collected the data of their friends on
Facebook, such as the number of messages, intimacy words, mutual friends, groups in common,
and so on. Meanwhile, the participants were asked to rate the strength of their friendships on
Facebook. Based on those two data collection approaches, they identified 74 predictors of tie
strength. The results showed that those predictors successfully predicted strong and weak ties
over 85% of the time with a certain data set containing more than 2000 Facebook posts. Ross,
Terras, Warwick, and Welsh (2011)investigated in what ways an academic community made
use of Twitter. They analyzed more than 4000 tweets with open coding and text mining to
detect user conventions. At the same time, they undertook a small qualitative survey so as to
ascertain users’ attitudes towards using a Twitter enabled backchannel in conference. In this
study, the data for both quantitative and qualitative analyses were integrated. These studies
show that although data collected directly from social media applications reveal some
characteristics of certain research objects; usually they do not reflect participants’ perceptions
or motivations accurately. Traditional research methods such as questionnaire and interview
40

allow researchers to gain insights into participants’ perceptions and motivations. Therefore, to
ensure the validity and reliability of research findings, various data collection approaches are
applied, and different types of data are integrated.
All these examples indicate that different types of data complement each other in
research studies. There are a variety of approaches available for collecting different types of
data from social media applications.
2.2.2.2.

Data collection methods

(1) Publicly available datasets
So far, a good deal of datasets containing social media data is accessible for researchers
(Paltoglou, 2014). These datasets contain various types of information, such as reviews,
comments, tweets, and so on. A particular example is the ICWSM Spinn3r Dataset (Burton et
al., 2009; Burton & Soboroff, 2011). This dataset contains several million blog posts scraped by
Spinn3r. In addition, in Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira’s (2007) paper, they offered a new dataset
including Amazon product reviews for four types of products. The four types were books, DVDs,
electronics and kitchen appliances (Blitzer et al., 2007). Paltoglou, Thelwall, and Buckely (2010)
provided two datasets for textual sentiment analysis in their paper. One dataset consisted of
the information from the BBC Message Boards which contains users’ opinions about “ethical,
religious and news-related issues” (Paltoglou et al., 2010). The other dataset includes
information from a social network site, Digg. Both datasets were used in research studies
(Chmiel et al., 2011; Mitrović, Paltoglou, & Tadić, 2011; Thelwall, Buckley, & Paltoglou, 2011).
(2) Unique data collection approaches
41

A lot of unique tools have been created for collecting social media data. Some of the
tools are browser extensions or plugins. Particular examples can be seen in the Firefox
extension Greasemonkey and the Chrome plugin NCapture. Gilbert and Karahalios (2009)
utilized the Firefox extension Greasemonkey to randomly select participants’ Facebook friends.
Furthermore, the Greasemonkey enabled the researchers to add survey questions on user’s
personal Facebook homepages. In this way, the researchers guided them to rate the tie
strengths between themselves and their friends. The NCapture provides ways to capture
Facebook wall posts and comments, Twitter content, and LinkedIn group discussions. However,
this tool needs to be utilized with NVivo for content analysis and cannot work independently. In
addition to extensions/plugins, there is a variety of software available. NodeXL, an add-on to
Excel, offers another approach to obtain social media data. It is capable of accessing and
gathering data from Outlook, Twitter, Facebook, Flickr and YouTube (Hansen, Shneiderman, &
Smith, 2010). For Facebook, it is able to collect fan lists, group discussion content, and timeline
data of certain users. For Twitter, it can capture the data of both user networks and tweets.
Apart from user networks, video information on YouTube and tags on Flickr can be obtained by
NodeXL as well. This tool is widely applied to social network analysis.
Facebook, Twitter, Yahoo! Answer, and some other social media allow researchers to
access and obtain the data in their databases by using APIs (Jansen, Zhang, Sobel, & Chowdury,
2009; Li, Lei, Khadiwala, & Chang, 2012). In addition to these social media applications, some
online services also provide accesses to data on social media. Jansen et al. (2009) used the
Summize4 to collect tweets. The Summize4 was a service for searching tweets, and it also
provided an API for data collection.
42

APIs are required to be employed with tools like Python or r (Meyer, Hornik, & Feinerer,
2008; M. A. Russell, 2013). Python and r are two of the most popular open source tools which
are frequently utilized to create scripts for collecting data from social media. For example,
Lipizzi, Iandoli, and Ramirez Marquez (2015) created a Python script to download tweets over
time and store them in their own database.
Browser extensions/plugins and software such as NodeXL have more user-friendly
interfaces, and are easier for researchers to use than Python and r. However, they are not as
flexible and powerful as the latter. APIs also have limitations. For instance, Twitter only allows
one hundred API calls per hour for one account. Therefore, all the approaches have their own
strengths and weaknesses.
2.2.3. Data Mining Applied to Social Media Studies
Both qualitative and quantitative methods have been employed in social media studies.
For instance, descriptive statistical methods and inferential statistical methods (e.g. t-test,
ANOVA, Pearson’s correlation) are frequently applied to these studies. Among the various
quantitative methods used, data mining methods occupy an important position.
2.2.3.1.

Web mining

Web mining as a branch of data mining is playing an increasingly important role in
research. Web mining can be classified into three different types, Web content mining, Web
structure mining and Web usages mining (Singh & Singh, 2010). Web content mining analyzes
the content of Web resources and deals with knowledge and information discovery from Web
pages. For example, Hosseini and Abolhassani (2007) used Query-ERL co-clustering to group
43

queries and URLs. Web structure mining aims at generating a structural summary about
Websites and Web pages. Moussiades and Vakali (2009) extracted the implicit structures
hidden in the Web hyperlink connectivity with graph clustering algorithm. Web usages mining
explores user behaviors online, especially users’ interactions with Websites (Singh & Singh,
2010).
2.2.3.2.

Social Web mining

Social Web mining is one of the primary components in the studies related to social
media. The methods applied to these studies are mostly based on information diffusion in
social networks and semantic analysis of content published on social media sites (Lipizzi et al.,
2015; Passmore, 2011; Saif, He, & Alani, 2012). The methods and approaches in the former
category are created for social network analysis. The latter category includes applications like
sentiment analysis and text mining (He et al., 2013; Saif et al., 2012). In the investigated
research studies, sentiment analysis and text mining are interconnected and usually utilized
together.
(1) Social network analysis
Social network analysis has its root in network science, and tries to reveal human
relationships and connections (Hansen et al., 2010). With the wide spread of social media, the
ways for creating and maintaining connections among family members, friends, classmates,
colleagues and other people have changed in the past decades. Social media enables users to
manage social connections easier than before. The use of social media generates large volumes
of social network data. These data have high value in both academic research and practice
44

(Smith et al., 2009). In recent years, various tools have been invented to analyze and visualize
social networks.
NodeXL UCINET, Pajek, and Gephi are popular social network analysis tools (Bastian,
Heymann, & Jacomy, 2009; Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002; Hansen et al., 2010; Kolaczyk &
Csárdi, 2014; Nooy, Mrvar, & Batagelj, 2011). All of these tools allow users to import data,
visualize networks, change the layout of networks, and calculate metrics of networks. In this
way, roles and importance of nodes in networks, interactions between nodes, and properties of
whole networks are revealed. Meanwhile, the tools also enable users to cluster nodes in
networks. These tools have user-friendly interfaces, and are easy to use. However, the
algorithms embedded in these tools are pre-determined and cannot be changed by
researchers. In addition, these tools can only visualize static social networks.
Other tools, such as NetworkX in Python and igraph in r, are embedded in programming
environments (Kolaczyk & Csárdi, 2014). These tools provide opportunities for users to
manipulate the visualization of social networks and the calculation of metrics. Moreover, they
offer means to draw and manipulate dynamic social networks (Kolaczyk & Csárdi, 2014).
Therefore, these tools are more flexible in social network analysis, but using them requires
knowledge in programming. The more a user knows about programming, the better s/he can
use these tools.
(2) Sentiment analysis and text mining
Text mining aims to solve the crisis of information overload (Feldman & Sanger, 2007). It
is widely utilized in multiple fields like business, sociology, health sciences, and so on (Bansal &
45

Koudas, 2007; Eynon, Schroeder, & Fry, 2009; Jansen et al., 2009). Techniques in the areas of
data mining, machine learning, natural language processing and information retrieval are
combined and applied to text mining (Feldman & Sanger, 2007; Wiebe, Wilson, & Cardie, 2006).
In general, text mining includes several steps: tokenizing, filtering, lemmatizing, and creating
matrix (Lipizzi et al., 2015). Sentiment analysis is known as opinion mining, which is related to
text mining (Thelwall et al., 2011). Therefore, methods for text mining are also employed in
sentiment analysis.
Sentiment analysis aims to predict opinion or emotion from content by consistent,
repeatable, algorithmic approaches (Hill, Dean, & Murphy, 2013). It focuses on both sentiment
polarity and sentiment strength of content (Thelwall et al., 2011). Currently, several commercial
platforms conduct sentiment analysis to assess customers’ judgments by analyzing their tweets
(Cognizant, 2014; Crimson Hexagon, 2014). Social media also provides means for users to seek
content based on the emotion embedded. For instance, Twitter allows users to search tweets in
positive or negative mode; Amazon.com asks consumers to rate their satisfaction by a fivepoint scale and enables users to filter results by customer reviews. Additionally, a number of
tools are available for automatically extracting opinions and emotion. For instance, the
Summize4 analyzes tweets and rates them by a five-point Likert scale, from wretched to great
(Jansen et al., 2009). The SAS Text Miner can automatically uncover and place into categories
hidden themes from large document collections and group documents (Miner, 2012).
Identifying opinion-expressing terms in texts is one of the major tasks in sentiment
analysis. In the past, the General Inquirer lexicon was created by Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown
(1997) to retrieve semantic orientation information. The Multi-perspective Question Answering
46

(MPQA) Opinion Corpus, which focused on questions and answers, was described by Wiebe et
al. (2006). Based on previous studies, Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2005) proposed the
OpinionFinder lexicon to determine the emotion (neutral or polar) of an expression and
disambiguate the polarity of the polar expressions. Recently, several dictionaries, for example,
the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary, have been compiled for sentiment
analysis (Gilbert & Karahalios, 2009). The lexicon-based classifiers were established based on
these lexicons and dictionaries (Paltoglou, 2014).
Moreover, machine learning algorithms and natural language processing approaches are
applied to sentiment analysis. Tools like LingPipe, Mallet and ApacheOpenNLP are available for
opinion mining (Alias-i, 2008; McCallum, 2002). Open source tools like Python, Weka and r not
only offer opportunities for data collection, but also contain functionalities of machine learning
and natural language processing (Paltoglou, 2014). To strengthen the power of these tools and
to make them easier to use, thousands of researchers have created “packages” for these tools.
For example, among the packages for r, the “tm” and “Textir” packages focus on text mining,
while the “rattle” package provides a number of approaches for hypotheses testing, clustering
and modeling (Meyer et al., 2008). The machine learning algorithm extensions of Weka also
provide functions for text mining.
Although many algorithms have been proposed for detecting sentiment polarity, only a
few studies focus on sentiment strength detection (Pang & Lee, 2005; Strapparava & Mihalcea,
2008; Wilson et al., 2005). Neviarouskaya, Prendinger, and Ishizuka (2007), and Strapparava
and Mihalcea (2008) proposed their own algorithms for detecting sentiment strength in text.
Thelwall, Buckley, Paltoglou, Cai, and Kappas (2010) presented the SentiStrength algorithm to
47

detect sentiment strength of short text. Since the content on the majority of social network
sites is short, this algorithm is widely applied. The SentiStrength classifies text for both positive
and negative sentiment on a scale of 1 to 5. However, the accurate detection of sentiment is
domain-dependent (Thelwall et al., 2011). It means the same term may represent various
sentiment polarities or sentiment strength in different domains or contexts. Thus, using the
same lexicons or algorithms for data obtained from different domains or contexts will cause
bias in findings.
Approaches invented in other areas have also been introduced to sentiment analysis.
For instance, the action-object pair approach was utilized to analyze textual data such as tweets
and posts (Jansen et al., 2009). This approach was proposed by Zhang and Jansen (2008), who
originally aimed to extract the relationships between users and actions from the transaction
log.
2.2.4. Coding Methods Applied to Social Media Studies
Coding is the main categorizing strategy for qualitative data analysis (Maxwell, 2005a). It
intends to segment data, rearrange them into different categories, and compare those
categories in order to develop theory. Several computer-assisted tools have been invented for
coding, such as NVivo, ATLAS/ti, MAXQda, Cassandre and Transana (Bazeley & Jackson, 2013;
Seale, Gobo, Gubrium, & Silverman, 2004). NVivo is one of the most popular tools. It allows
researchers to analyze different types of data, including Web pages, images, videos, tweets on
Twitter, posts on Facebook, and so on. Furthermore, users can import and export data, create

48

and organize nodes and categories, visualize coding results, and produce reports of results
(Bazeley & Jackson, 2013).
The investigated social media studies reveal that different types of data have been
collected from social media and manifold data analysis methods have been adopted for various
research purposes. Coding and data mining methods are the representative data analysis
method utilized in the social media studies.
2.3.

Health Information Studies

According to the official Website of US National Library of Medicine, the range of health
information covers seven categories, including general health information, drugs and
supplements, specific populations, genetics, environmental health and toxicology, clinical trials,
and biomedical literature. Each category contains plenty of health topics and the information
associated to these topics is recognized as health information no matter if it is posted on
traditional media or social media platforms. During the past decades, health information has
held the general public’s attention as the quality of people’s life improves. A new concept
emerged in response to this situation, which is consumer health information.
2.3.1. Consumer Health Information
Consumers of health information are defined as the people who “seek information
about health promotion, disease prevention, treatment of specific conditions, and management
of various health conditions and chronic illnesses” (Lewis, Eysenbach, Kukafka, Stavri, & Jimison,
2006, p. 1). This definition shows that not only the patients or their families and friends, but
also other people who have interests in health information and seek health information are the
49

consumers of health information. Therefore, the consumer group of health information is quite
huge. Deering and Harris (1996) proposed several dimensions, such as age, disability, race and
ethnicity, and gender, for identifying different consumer groups.
On the other hand, Patrick and Koss proposed the definition of consumer health
information as “any information that enables individuals to understand their health and make
health-related decision for themselves and their families” (as cited in Suess, 2001, p. 41). In
their opinion, consumer health information includes “information supporting individual and
community-based health promotion and enhancement, self-care, shared (professional-patient)
decision-making, patient education, patient information and rehabilitation, health education,
using the healthcare systems and selecting insurance or healthcare provider” (as cited in Suess,
2001, p. 41-42). Agreeing with Patrick and Koss’s work, Deering and Harris (1996) further
summarized that there are three broad purposes of consumer health information: personal
health, medical treatment, and public health.
2.3.2. Health Information on Social Media
According to Tu’s (2011) report, the proportion of people among all the consumers, who
sought health information online increased from 2001 to 2010. This report presented that in
2001 the proportion was 15.9% and it rose to 31.1% in 2007 and finally reached 32.6% in 2010.
To the contrary, the proportion seeking health information through book, magazines, and
newspapers dropped from 32.9% to 18.2% from 2007 to 2010. Similarly, the proportion seeking
health information through TV or radio reduced from 15.6% to 10.0%. A survey in 2013
reported that 87% of US adults use the Internet and among them 72% stated that they sought

50

health information online during the past year (Street, NW, Washington, & Inquiries, 2013).
These statistics reveals that the use of Internet for seeking health information increased rapidly
in the past sixteen years.
The emergence of Web 2.0 advocated the creation of social media, which changed the
way of health care interaction between health organizations and individuals (Moorhead et al.,
2013). Conceptions like Health 2.0, Medicine 2.0, and Science 2.0 were generated thereby
(Eysenbach, 2008). Eysenbach (2008) identified five aspects of the Web 2.0 in health, health
care, medicine, and science. These were social networking, participation, apomediation,
collaboration, and openness.
With the broad adoption of social media applications, the general public, patients, and
health professionals started to communicate about health issues via this new channel (McNab,
2009; Thackeray, Neiger, Hanson, & McKenzie, 2008). About 45% of the hospitals in Norway
and Sweden use LinkedIn and 22% of the hospitals in Norway use Facebook (Heidelberger,
2011). The purposes that health professionals use social media include facilitating
communication, increasing skills, and increasing knowledge (Hamm et al., 2013). The
information sources used by patients for seeking health information are diverse but less
authoritative than those used by health professionals. Dawson (2010) reported that according
to his survey, Facebook was ranked the fourth health information source and YouTube and
Twitter were also prevalent sources. Additionally, 81% of European consumers and 63% of US
consumers trust the health information on social media applications. Wikipedia is the most
popular health information source with Italians and Spanish consumers.

51

The health-related information on social media covers a wide range of topics, including
diseases and treatments, nutrition, health care and insurance, healthy lifestyle, and so forth.
Furthermore, social media allows users to develop their own health stories, interact with each
other, and search for health topics online. Family-health-related topics are a main category
among the various health-related topics online.
2.3.3. Family Health Studies
The health risks faced by the general public are numerous. In the latter age of the
twentieth century, health-related research studies focused on the treatment of illnesses,
injuries, and infectious diseases (Halfon, Larson, Lu, Tullis, & Russ, 2014). As the evidences of
the influence of social factors and behavior on human health accrued, new determinants of the
general public’s health emerged, such as lifestyle, families, social services, and environment
(Fuemmeler et al., 2017; Halfon et al., 2014). Among these determinants, the role of families is
crucial because they are considered as a unit of health care (Kaakinen et al., 2014).
Kaakinen et al. (2014) defined family as “two or more individuals who depend on one
another for emotional, physical, and economical support” (p. 6). According to the previous
literature, the concept of family health is used interchangeably with the some terms such as
family functioning, familial health, resilient families, and balanced families and therefore, the
definition of family health various (Kaakinen et al., 2014; Kim, Kim-Godwin, & Koenig, 2016).
Based on the definition of health given by the WHO, Craft-Rosenberg and Pehler (2011) defined
family health as “the state of physical, mental, and emotional wellness of the family system and
its individual members” (p. xxxii). Kaakinen et al. (2014) proposed a similar definition which

52

centers on some family-health-related factors. Their definition is that “family health is a
dynamic, changing state of well-being, which includes the biological, psychological, spiritual,
sociological, and culture factors of individual members and the whole family system” (p.5).
From another perspective, Bomar (2004) defined this term as “a holistic state referring to the
complex process of negotiating and solving day-to-day family life events and crises and
providing for a quality life for its members” (p.10). In this study, the definition of family health
references the definition from Rosenberg and Pehler’s book.
Worldwide health agencies have conducted plenty of surveys to collect family health
data and information. For example, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of India
designated the International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) to conduct the National
Family Health Survey for India from 1992. The purposes of the survey are (1) collecting health
and family welfare data for policy formulation and (2) seeking information of emerging health
and family welfare issues (IIPS, 2017). Other countries like Iraq, Philippine, and Syria conduct
their own family health surveys for similar purposes. Additionally, there are specific
organizations providing technical assistance for family health survey, such as the Demographic
and Health Surveys Program, which has supported family-health-related surveys in more than
90 countries. In the United States, some statewide surveys were completed by state level
departments. For instance, the Wisconsin Department of Health Services surveys the Wisconsin
residents every year and reports key findings of the surveys.
The surveys mentioned before usually contain data and information of household
characteristics, fertility, infant and child health, family planning, family health insurance,
poverty status, and so forth; topics which refer to various health-related topics. The family
53

health research studies also cover a wide range of research topics. A number of studies explore
the factors that influence family health. The Circumplex Model of Marital and Family
Functioning proposed by Olson (2000) has three dimensions: marital and family cohesion,
flexibility, and communication; whether or not a family is healthy can be assessed by the three
dimensions. Olson argued that a family with balanced levels (neither too high nor too low) of
the three dimensions was healthier than that with unbalanced levels. Moreover, the traits of a
healthy family are proposed by other researchers, like communicating and listening, affirming
and supporting each other, developing a sense of trust, sharing a religious core, and so forth
(Kaakinen et al., 2014). Black and Lobo (2008) emphasized optimal growth, functioning, and
well-being of families and the interactions among these factors.
Apart from the factors influencing family health, the family-health-related studies often
center on particular groups like infants and children, adolescents, women, and so on.
Fuemmeler et al. (2017) reviewed the literature related to child health and provided
recommendations for ensuring good health of children. They found that childhood obesity and
childhood trauma and violence, two outstanding issues, influence child health at the population
level and potentially impact health over the life course. Childhood obesity is caused by prepregnancy obesity and gestational weight gain, tobacco use during pregnancy, and contextual
factors such as home and school environment. Moreover, evidences show that breastfeeding
protects against childhood obesity (Hansstein, 2016). Childhood trauma and violence is caused
by prenatal maternal stress, adverse childhood events, and family and school context.
Regarding adolescent health, DiClemente, Hansen, and Ponton (2013) listed 12 health
risks: tobacco use, disordered eating, alcohol use, drug use, suicide and suicide behavior,
54

unintentional injury, delinquency, adolescent violence, adolescent pregnancy, sexually
transmitted diseases, runaway and homelessness, and academic underachievement and school
refusal. They concluded that family is a crucial factor impacting those health risk behaviors.
Most adolescents have close relations with their parents and are influenced by their parents
when determining whether to engage in risk-taking behavior or not. For instance, adolescents
who receive more emotional support and acceptance from parents are less likely to abuse
substances and have sexual activities (Turner, Irwin, Tschann, & Millstein, 1993). Family
structure also influences adolescents’ behaviors. Flewelling and Bauman (1990) presented that
adolescents from single-parent families tended to abuse substances more than those from
intact families.
Women are another particular group which gains attentions from the family health
researchers. According to Kotch’s (2005) book, age at first marriage and age at first pregnancy
for women both increase from 1970s. The proportion of single parent (mostly female) families
grows because of high divorce rate and the increase of unmarried mothers. These phenomena
lead to the family-health-related research on pregnant women and single mothers. Pregnant
women face various health risks, including virus infections (e.g. dengue and ZIKA), physical
issues (e.g. overweight and obesity), psychological issues (e.g. depressive symptoms), and so on
(Brasil et al., 2016; Marcus, Flynn, Blow, & Barry, 2003; Oteng-Ntim, Tezcan, Seed, Poston, &
Doyle, 2015). Compared with married mothers, single mothers face higher risks of physical and
mental disorders (Subramaniam, Prasad, Abdin, Vaingankar, & Chong, 2017). Furthermore,
since single mothers generally have less work experience and education than their peers, they
are less competitive in the labor market (Damaske, Bratter, & Frech, 2017). This shortcoming
55

increases the single-mother household poverty rate. During 2006 to 2008 the single-mother
household poverty rate was 45% in the United States (DeNavas-Walt, 2010). Lack of education
and poverty both lead to poor access to health care resources, which will cause potential health
risks for single mother families (Cohen et al., 2014).
Different groups of people face different health problems, including mental and
physical, and internal and external problems. Therefore, plenty of research topics emerge for
the family health researchers to explore the factors that cause the problems and suggest the
solutions to the problems.
2.4.

SOM Studies

2.4.1. SOM History, Theories, and Algorithms
The initial idea of self-organization was proposed by Willshaw and Malsburg (1976) for
explaining the formation of neural connections during ontogenesis. Their theory was extended
by Takeuchi and Amari (1979) and the convergence properties and dynamic stability of the
previous model were improved. Then Kohonen (1982) revised the previous models and
proposed a simpler and more practical SOM algorithm. A number of SOM models were
developed based on the theories and original models; these include the Growing Neural Gas
model and the Evolving SOM model (López-Rubio & Díaz Ramos, 2014).
The SOM introduced by Kohonen (1982) is an unsupervised learning approach which
transforms a set of high-dimensional data to a low-dimensional feature map. It is a widely used
neural network method that measures similarities among items of input data so as to forms
similarity graphs. The whole procedure of this approach is a recursive regression process
56

(Kohonen et al., 2000). Zhang (2007) reviewed the history and improvement of the SOM
approach in his book, as well as the SOM theories, models, and algorithms.
There are two basic learning algorithms for SOM, which are sequential learning and
batch learning (J. Zhang, An, Tang, & Hong, 2009). After comparing these two algorithms, Fort,
Letremy, and Cottrell (2002) concluded that advantages of the batch learning algorithm are
“simplicity of the computation, quickness, better final distortion, no adaptation parameter to
tune”, and “deterministic reproducible results”, while the disadvantages include “bad
organization, bad visualization, too unbalanced classes”, and “strong dependence of the
initialization”. Another advantage of the batch learning algorithm is that it is not impacted by
the convergence problem (Ding & Patra, 2007).
Regarding the output of the SOM approach, the Unified Distance Matrix (U-matrix)
display and the component plane display are two prevalent types of SOM displays (An, Zhang, &
Yu, 2011). The U-matrix display proposed by Ultsch and Siemon (1990) aims to reveal the
differences and similarities among the weight vectors in the output display. The values of a Umatrix represent the Euclidean distances among the weight vectors. Low values stand for
clusters, while high values stand for cluster boundaries. The U-matrix is visualized in the final
display to show the clusters. Component planes are signiﬁcant visual representations in the
SOM literature (Kohonen, 1995). A component plane reflects the contribution of a specific
variable of the input matrix and reveals the features of the items in the matrix and the
connections among the items in terms of this variable. The component plane can also be
converted to various colors in the final display.

57

2.4.2. Applications of SOM
As it is stated in Chapter One, the SOM approach has been used in many fields, such as
finance, industry, and biology. Apart from the fields mentioned before, health science is
another research field that adopts this approach frequently. The health-related research
studies usually apply the SOM approach to data clustering. For instance, Carboni and Russu
(2015) collected the wellbeing and life quality data of different regions in Italy and clustered the
regions in terms of the data obtained by the SOM approach. The findings show that regional
differences in wellbeing exist in Italy. Chakraborty et al. (2006) analyzed life-style data and
found that sleep, exercise, and mind are related to each other for people’s health status.
In the field of library and information science, the SOM approach is mainly employed for
user behavior exploration, information system optimization, and information extraction. An
example of an information extraction tool is the framework SOFIE, which extracts new
information from text documents (Suchanek et al., 2009).
For the user-oriented studies, Stenmark (2008) analyzed the search engine log data with
a clustering method which was based on self-organizing maps in order to group search engine
users into three groups: casual seeker, users applying more holistic approach, and informationseeking savvy employees. Ding and Patra (2007) proposed a user modeling method which
revealed users’ preferences by clustering their search queries. These methods and models
provide ways to developing personalized Web searches for information retrieval systems.
For the system-oriented studies, the SOM approach is usually used for visualization and
algorithm optimization. When used for document cluster analysis, the SOM approach is able to
58

demonstrate and visualize the distributions of documents in a collection (Zhang, 2007). For
instance, Lagus, Honkela, Kaski, and Kohonen (1996) generated WEBSOM for visualizing
similarity relations among documents. VisualLink, created by White, Lin, and Buzydlowski
(2004), is an information visualizer for presenting bibliographic records. To optimize positioning
systems, Takizawa et al.(2006) proposed a self-organizing location estimation method. Compare
with other location estimation methods, this method avoids using a large number of sensors
and is more accurate.
Some research studies are helpful for improving library service. An et al. (2011)
employed the SOM approach to cluster journals in library and information science in terms of
their indexed subjects; he obtained 19 clusters for the 60 investigated journals. Based on the
findings, they suggest that both quality and subject coverage of journals should be considered
when librarians are determining which journals to purchase.
Zhang, An, and their colleagues conducted a series of studies relevant to both health
and information science. They focused on health subject directory and users’ traversal activities
and explored the association between health subject directory Web pages in terms of users’
browsing activities (J. Zhang & An, 2010; J. Zhang et al., 2009). They collected subjects and path
data among them from a health subject directory. The path data recorded how users browsed
subjects one after another. The path data of all the investigated subjects were analyzed by the
SOM approach and they revised the U-matrix algorithm so as to achieve the best results. The
new U-matrix algorithm performed well in distinguishing irrelevant subjects. The findings of
these studies demonstrated that the users’ traversal activities can reveal the relations among
the investigated health subjects. All these studies show that SOM is not only used as data
59

analysis methods but also is regarded as a useful algorithm for system optimization and model
development.
2.5.

Chapter Two Summary

This chapter reviewed the previous research studies relevant to temporal analysis, social
media, health information, and the SOM approach. The literature review reveals that the needs
of health information have grown during the past decades. With the development of Internet
technology, more and more general users tend to seek health information online. Social media
sites are popular health information sources for the general public. In the large volume of
health information online, family health information is a major category.
Since social media sites contain huge user-generated content and users’ interaction
data, they are regarded as research objects and data sources for researchers. Different types of
data (e.g. numerical data, textual data, and multimedia data) have been collected from social
media sites (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Wikipedia) and various data analysis
methods have been employed to analyze the data. Both qualitative methods (e.g. coding) and
quantitative methods (e.g. statistical methods and data mining methods) are frequently used in
the social media studies. Among the quantitative methods, SOM is a unique unsupervised
learning approach for reducing high-dimensional data to low-dimensional presentations. This
approach has been widely used in information science, health science, biology, finance, and
many other fields.
Temporal analysis, a type of data analysis methods handling temporal data and
temporal text, is widely applied to research studies. This method can be used to analyze the
60

rich temporal data and text (e.g. data of Twitter trends and historical versions of entries on
Wikipedia) contained on social media. However, there are few research studies that employed
this approach to analyze Wikipedia temporal data and text. To fill the gap, this study explores
the temporal changes and evolution patterns of entries on Wikipedia.

61

3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

3.1.

Introduction

The volume of data in the world keeps growing (Manyika et al., 2011). With the
development of Web 2.0 technique, information increased more rapidly and was shared much
wider and faster than in previous decades. New terms emerged and meanings of existing terms
changed. For instance, “Google” was initially created as the name of a search engine, but
currently it is also used as “search”. Along with the change of a term, the concepts having
relations to it also changed. For example, the term “cloud” has been used for hundreds of years
to represent the weather phenomenon and its related concepts are mist, coalescence, weather
lore, and so forth. In the past decades, with the advance of computer science, “cloud
computing” became a popular topic in computer science. Meanwhile, terms such as
information security and Web computing became related to “cloud”. The changes of relevant
concepts cause problems in information retrieval. Returning relevant results in different time
periods of a fast-changing topic in various information retrieval systems becomes one of the
biggest challenges in the information retrieval field. To solve this problem, it is necessary to
explore how topics and concepts change overtime.
Social media, generated and based on the Web 2.0 technologies, plays an important role
in information creation and dissemination. Thousands of users from all over the world create,
share, and seek information on social media. The information of certain topics on social media
platforms reflects the general public’s interests and perceptions of those topics. The changes of
specific topics and concepts on social media are much faster than on those in conventional

62

media. Therefore, changes of topics are more apparent on the former than the latter. It makes
social media a proper place for observing and detecting how topics change. Moreover, since
users who seek information on social media usually tend to satisfy their temporal information
needs, it requires the information retrieval functions embedded in some social media
applications to combine the time dimension into relevance judgment. Exploring temporal
features and evolution patterns of terms, concepts, and topics will contribute to information
retrieval. In addition, the evolution patterns of concepts and topics on social media reveal the
changes of the general public’s perceptions.
In recent years the public pays more attention to health issues than in the previous
years. The improvement of Internet techniques leads to increasing use of online information by
the public. The proportion of people who seek health information online has grown during the
past sixteen years. As a platform for user-generated content, social media applications provide
a new way for health professionals, patients, and general users to create, revise, share, and
seek health information online, and communicate with each other. Currently social media is an
important health information source for the public.
The health information on social media covers a variety of topics. Family health is a
popular topic among the public because family is now considered as a crucial factor affecting
human health. This study aims to examine and uncover the evolution patterns of family-healthrelated topics on social media Wikipedia. The research questions are:
RQ1: What are the associated entries, emerged themes and subjects, and relations
among them in each of the selected family-health-related topics?

63

RQ1a: What are the associated entries and the main themes of the selected
family-health-related topics discussed on Wikipedia?
RQ1b: What are the subjects of each theme of the selected family-health-related
topics?
RQ1c: What are the relations among the themes, subjects, and entries?
RQ2: What are the evolution patterns for each of the selected family-health-related
topics in terms of the internal characteristics and external popularity?
RQ2a: What are the new entries created in each investigated time period for
each theme of the selected topics? What subjects are emerging and disappearing in
each period for each theme of the selected topics? For each topic, what are the
evolution patterns of its internal characteristics during these time periods?
RQ2b: What are the evolution patterns for the selected topics in terms of their
associated entries’ number of views and number of edits? What are the evolution
patterns for the themes of each selected topic in terms of the associated entries’
number of views and number of edits?
RQ3: What are the differences and commonalities among the selected topics in terms of
their evolution patterns?
3.2.

Assumptions

Since Wikipedia allows all the users to create and revise entries and the number of the
Wikipedia users is vast, this study assumes that the entries on Wikipedia reflect the perceptions
64

and opinions of a large number of the general public. In other words, the information on
Wikipedia stands for the consensus of a great number of people. Based on this assumption,
using the information on Wikipedia enables researchers to detect the change of topics over a
broad scope.
It is also assumed that the number of page edits and views of an entry stands for its
popularity, and the popularity of an entry reflects the popularity of the corresponding concept.
Although the click-through rate or the number of edits does not equal the number of readers or
editors, it is in proportion to the number of these two groups of people. The number of page
views reveals the interests in the specific concepts from the readers, while the number of edits
reflects the number of people who have the knowledge of the specific concepts to some extent.
The more readers viewing an entry, the more popular is the topic or concept discussed in the
entry. Based on the monthly and yearly numbers of views and edits of an entry from when it
was created, the evolution of its popularity can be revealed.
Text mining approaches and clustering approaches were applied to this study. The
vector space model was utilized when using these approaches. There are assumptions about
text mining approaches, clustering approaches, and the vector space model in previous
research studies. One of the implicit assumptions of text mining is the bag-of-words
assumption, which assumes that the order of words in a document does not matter (Miner,
2012). Based on this assumption, breaking text into tokens becomes reasonable. Tokenizing is
the basis of lemmatizing and counting term frequency. Since texts need be tokenized, it is
difficult to distinguish homographs. A homograph is a group of terms spelled the same but
having different meanings. It is difficult to identify the meaning of a single term without its
65

context. In this circumstance, another assumption is that homographs do not affect the results
of text mining (Miner, 2012). Hence, there is no need to distinguish the homographs and count
their frequencies separately. This assumption makes the data processing step for the vector
space model easier.
These assumptions lay the theoretical and practical foundations for both the data
collection and data analysis processes of this study. Based on these assumptions the research
problems and questions were solved.
3.3.

Data Collection

This section presents the whole procedure of data collection, including the selections of
a social media platform, topics, and entries; and the collection of the associated entries’ text
data, page views data, and page edits data.
3.3.1. Selection of a Social Media Platform
To explore the change of topics on social media, Wikipedia was selected as the data
source in this study. Milne and Witten (2013) argued that Wikipedia is a rapidly growing
platform containing vast interlinked information. It is the biggest encyclopedia consisting of
user-generated articles and the semantic relations between them (Milne & Witten, 2008,
2013). With the contribution of editors from all over the world, Wikipedia exhibits today’s
knowledge unsurpassed in breadth and actuality (Iba et al., 2010). The previous literature
declared the reliable accuracy and completeness of health-related information on Wikipedia
(Kräenbring et al., 2014). The richness and accuracy of its content makes it an important
resource for knowledge sharing and citation, and even for research.
66

In addition, the history of each entry on Wikipedia is accessible to users, which means
all the historical versions of the entry are recorded by Wikipedia and could be viewed and
collected by researchers. For each version of an entry, the time when it was created, the
content that was edited, and the editor are all recorded. Wikipedia also allows users to
compare any two versions of an entry. Furthermore, hourly and monthly page views data and
revision statistics (e.g. number of total revisions, number of editors, first edit time, and last edit
time) of every entry are provided by Wikipedia. Therefore, it is possible to track the temporal
changes in content and popularities of the entries on Wikipedia. The details of the entries on
Wikipedia are demonstrated in the Text Collection section.
Compared to other social media, Wikipedia has its own advantages in this research
study. Although social media platforms, such as social network sites and blogs, allow the
general public to create, edit, share, and delete information, they do not record every historical
version of topics. Moreover, in recent years, social network sites, like Facebook and Twitter,
block the way for researchers to collect historical data. For instance, Twitter only provides
researchers the APIs to retrieve the most recent tweets instead of the tweets created in a
specific time period. However, Wikipedia offers data dumps for researchers to collect data and
as mentioned before, all the historical data of entries are recorded. Another strength of
Wikipedia is that it provides large amounts of health information widely used by the lay public
and health professionals (Heilman et al., 2011). Studies have found that junior physicians used
Wikipedia as health information source more than other Websites except Google; and the
English Wikipedia was utilized more frequently than other health resources (e.g. WebMD and
NHS Direct) according to a search engine ranking in 2008 (Heilman et al., 2011; Hughes, Joshi,
67

Lemonde, & Wareham, 2009). Therefore, to the best of the researcher’s knowledge, Wikipedia
is the most proper social media application for data collection in this study.
3.3.2. Selection of Topics
In the Introduction chapter, three primary criteria were proposed for choosing the
qualified health-related topics in this research: (1) the topics should be popular family-healthrelated topics widely discussed by the general public; (2) the topics should cover different
aspects of family health issues; (3) in order to collect data from Wikipedia, there should be
more than 100 relevant entries of these topics on Wikipedia and the entries should contain
sufficient data; (4) the lengths of the selected topics’ history should be longer than 8 years.
This study aims to explore the evolution patterns of family-health-related topics.
However, because of the limitation of time and dissertation length, it is impossible to examine
all the important family-health-related topics. Thus, the topics selected should be
representative in the area. Because the data of the selected topics are supposed to be obtained
from Wikipedia, it is required that these topics should be widely discussed and attractive to the
general public; otherwise there won’t be enough associated entries on Wikipedia.
Topics referring to different aspects of family health were selected because the topics
about different aspects have different background, history, and characteristics and hence, it is
possible that these topics have different evolution patterns. Moreover, exploring evolution
patterns of these topics can reveal the developments of family health from different aspects.
Since the data were collected from Wikipedia, there should be associated entries of the
selected topics on the platform. For a selected topic, if no relevant entries are created on
68

Wikipedia, no data about the topics can be obtained from Wikipedia. If the relevant entries are
too few or correspond to specific themes, the data set collected cannot reflect the whole
picture of the topic. If the relevant entries do not contain sufficient data (e.g. historical
versions, page views data, and page edits data), the data set obtained would be incomplete and
the results obtained would be biased. Therefore, the selected topics should have more than
100 relevant entries containing sufficient data on Wikipedia.
In addition, to explore the evolution pattern of a topic, it should have a relatively long
history. If the history of a topic is too short, the potential drawbacks of it include: (1) if there
are not enough associated entries or historical versions of the entries on Wikipedia then the
data might be insufficient for this study; and (2) if the content of the associated entries do not
change a lot from the corresponding original versions then the evolution of a topic is not
obvious.
The family-health-related topics examined in this study were selected from the World
Health Organization (WHO)’s official Website. The WHO is “the designated agency on
worldwide health matters” and its tasks cover “setting norms and standards, articulating policy
options, providing technical support to countries, monitoring and assessing health trends, and
shaping the global health research agenda” (Chorev, 2012, p.2). As one of the largest health
agencies, the WHO has more budget and responsibilities and establishes more programs than
other agencies (Chorev, 2012, p.13). The WHO official Website posts health news, data,
publications, and programs for both general public and experts. There is a visible “health
topics” tab on the Website and the Web page of this tab contains some of the most important,
popular, and influential health topics.
69

All the health topics on the WHO Website were examined and three topics that met the
previous criteria were selected for this study, which were Child Maltreatment, Family Planning,
and Women’s Health. Table 2 displays the definitions and creation time of the corresponding
entries of these topics on Wikipedia. The corresponding entry of Child Maltreatment was Child
abuse.

Topics

Definition

Entry Creation
Time

Child
Maltreatment
(Child abuse)

Physical, sexual, or psychological mistreatment or
neglect of a child or children, especially by a parent or
June 2nd, 2002
other caregiver
The practice of controlling the number of children in a
family and the intervals between their births,
Family Planning
May 21st, 2003
particularly by means of artificial contraception or
voluntary sterilization
Women’s Health The health of women
May 15th, 2004
Table 2. Definitions and Attributes of the Three Selected Topics
3.3.3. Selection of Entries
According to the criteria for the topic selection, three family-health-related topics were
investigated and the corresponding entries of these topics on Wikipedia were regarded as the
“seeds” for seeking the associated entries of these topics. A seed was the starting point for data
collection. The seed entry was the first level entry in data collection. In the “See also” section of
this entry there were several links connecting to associated entries which were called the
second level entries. Similarly, in the “See also” sections of the second level entries, there were
links connecting to relevant entries as well. These relevant entries were named the third level
entries. According to a pilot study which explored the internal characteristic of the data-miningrelated concepts on Wikipedia, its data collection process revealed that most of the fourth level

70

entries were irrelevant to the seed entry. Therefore, the entries on the fourth level were not
examined, only the associated entries on the first, second and third levels were collected in this
study.
Another means for seeking related entries was query search offered by Wikipedia. The
search results returned were ranked by relevance. The selected topics were used as search
terms and the top 100 search results returned were examined by the researcher. The
associated entries which were not the same as the entries obtained by the first means were
collected. Whether the entries obtained were relevant to the selected topics or not was judged
by the researcher based on her domain knowledge. For every selected topic, more than 100
qualified entries were obtained by the two means.
3.3.4. Selection of Time Periods
Since Wikipedia was created in 2001, the time periods to be investigated should be later
than 2001. Moreover, the beginning of the time periods should be later than the corresponding
entries of the selected topics created on Wikipedia. The historical versions and the page edits
data for Wikipedia entries were accessible from the date the entries were created. However,
the page views data of Wikipedia entries were available from December 2007. Since the data
before December 2007 were incomplete, this study explores the internal characteristics and
external popularities of the selected topics after this time point.
To determine the time periods, several criteria were proposed: (1) The time interval
should be long enough, otherwise the analysis on changes of internal characteristics or external
popularities might not be sufficient; (2) There should be several time periods that reflect
71

different developing stages of the selected topics; (3) The lengths of time periods determined
for different topics should be equal so that the evolution patterns are comparable in a fair way;
and (4) The total length of the defined time periods should be long enough to observe the
evolutions of the selected topics from both internal and external perspectives. In this case, the
total length of the time periods was from 2010 to 2017 because eight years was long enough to
observe the evolutions for the selected topics. Four time periods were defined for the selected
topics, which were 2010 to 2011, 2012 to 2013, 2014 to 2015, and 2016 to 2017. Table 3
presents the four periods and the corresponding time spans. The time interval in this study was
two years, long enough to reveal the changes of topics; and the number of time periods was
four, which was able to reveal the topics’ internal characteristics and external popularities in
different developing stages.
Time Period Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Time Span 2010-2011 2012-2013 2014-2015 2016-2017
Table 3. Four Time Periods and the Corresponding Time Spans
3.3.5. Text Collection
Every entry on Wikipedia contains several sections, such as content, main text,
reference, and so on. Although not all entries consist of the same sections, certain sections are
included in almost all entries. They are title, other entry/entries associated to this entry, a short
description of the entry, content, main body, “See also”, and reference. The content section
includes the content table of an entry; the main text or main body of an entry; and the
reference section which consists of references and URLs of references of an entry.

72

Figure 3 and Figure 4 are the screenshots of the “Gene flow” entry on Wikipedia. Figure
3 shows the top half of the Gene flow’s article page. There are five tabs on the top of the page,
which are Article, Talk, Read, Edit, and View history. The Talk page is the place where the
Wikipedia editors discuss the improvements of the entry’s content and the Edit page is the
place for editing the content. The View history page provides the links to the historical data and
historical versions of the entry. The current version of the entry, which is presented in Figure 3,
is displayed under the Article and Read tabs. The title “Gene flow” is on the top of the page and
beneath the title is the text of the entry. The first several paragraphs are a brief introduction of
gene flow and a table of contents is listed after them. Beneath the table of contents is the main
body of the entry. On the right side of the page are two figures relevant to the entry.

73

Figure 3. Top half of the Gene flow Entry on Wikipedia
Figure 4 presents the bottom half of the Gene flow Article page. After the main body of
the entry, there are three sections: See also, References, and External links. The See also
section contains eight Wikipedia entries related to the Gene flow entry, while the External links
section contains three relevant Web page links. The References section lists the literature cited
in the content. The table under the External links section displays some evolutionary-biologyrelated concepts, including Gene flow. However, this kind of index table does not frequently
occur in Wikipedia entries. Apart from these sections, there are some other common sections

74

which often occur in entries, like Bibliography sections and Further readings sections. In this
study, the text of all the sections of each entry were collected.

Figure 4. Bottom half of the Gene flow Entry on Wikipedia
For each entry, the text data of the last version generated in 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2017
were collected based on the time periods determined. Figure 5 illustrates the top part of the
View history page for the Gene flow entry. This page allows users to search historical versions
of the entry by a search box and to browse all the historical versions. Six external tools
displayed on this page provide revision statistics, editor information, number of watchers, and
75

page view statistics to researchers and the general public. The historical versions and their
attributes (e.g. time when the revision was made and editor) are all listed in reverse
chronological order under the external tools. Users are able to view any historical version and
compare any two historical versions.

Figure 5. Top Part of the View History Page of the Gene flow Entry on Wikipedia
The WikipediR package run on r was adopted for text data collection (Keyes, 2017). It
enables the researcher to retrieve and gather the text content of an entry’s current and
historical versions.
3.3.6. Page Views and Edits Data Collection
The page views data during 2010 to 2017 were collected from Wikimedia Downloads.
This Website provides the Wikipedia data dumps that store all the historical page views data of
all the Wikipedia entries. Wikipedia data dump stores the hourly page views data from January
76

2010 to November 2011 and the monthly page views data from December 2011 to December
2017 for each entry. These data sets were downloaded and r and RStudio were adopted to
extract the page views data for the associated entries from the data sets. Then the monthly and
yearly numbers of page views were calculated based on these data.
As it was shown before, the View history page of an entry displays its revision history.
The data of the revisions (e.g. revision time, revision ID, and the page links of revisions) during
2010 to 2017 were collected by r and RStudio from the View history page of each associated
entry. The monthly and yearly numbers of page edits were calculated based on the revision
time data.
After collecting the numerical and textual data by the methods mentioned before, data
cleansing and transformation were conducted. The r and RStudio tools are open source
software for data analysis. RStudio is an integrated development environment for r. It offers a
productive user interface for r and supports direct code execution, debugging, workspace
management, plotting, and so on. A bunch of packages have been created for r and RStudio to
enrich their data collection, analysis, presentation, and visualization functionalities. These two
tools were applied to text data cleansing and transformation in this study.
3.3.7. Ethic Issue
There are always concerns about collecting data from people in academic research
(Oliver, 2010). Guillemin and Gillam (2004) suggest that there are procedural and practical
dimensions of ethics in research studies. The procedural ethics requires seeking approval from
a research ethics committee and the practical ethics refers to important ethical moments when
77

conducting research studies, such as “when participants indicate discomfort with their answer,
or reveal a vulnerability” (Guillemin & Gillam, 2004, p265). In general, research ethic issues
usually occur in human subject research studies.
The data collected for this study include historical versions of specific Wikipedia entries
and page edits and page views data of these entries. These data are all published online open
to the public so they are not confidential. Secondly, since this study does not focus on
Wikipedia users or editors, no information (e.g. names, emails, and addresses) about people
were viewed or collected and the researcher did not interact with or observe people in person
or online. Therefore, this study is not human subject research and the data collected are not
about individual persons.
3.4.

Data Analysis

This section describes the whole data analysis procedure of this study. Coding, subject
analysis methods, statistical methods, text mining approaches, clustering approaches, and
visualization tools were utilized for data analysis and presentation.
3.4.1. Categories and Themes
The entries obtained related to the topic on different aspects; in order to explore the
relations among the entries, they were grouped into several categories in terms of their
content. Since there are no existing categories of these entries, the content analysis method is
not proper to utilize in this case. This study is not concerned with language usage so that the
discourse analysis method is not suitable. The open coding method allows researchers to
develop concepts and categories from data, which met the researcher’s research requirements
78

(Pandit, 1996). Therefore, this method was employed to analyze the associated entries and
group them into several categories.
The first step of coding was to identify the concepts in the data. In this study because of
the features of the text data collected, the concepts had already been extracted from the
entries. For each selected topic, the related concepts were manually compared one by one and
labeled according to their properties. With more and more concepts labeled, the labels were
refined. The concepts with more similarities were grouped together, while those containing
more different properties were separated. Finally, all the concepts obtained for a topic were
categorized into several categories based on their content, and the concepts in the same
category had common properties. According to the properties, the theme of each category was
generated by the researcher. In this research every category had one theme. To ensure the
reliability of the coding results, an expert with health background was invited to code a part of
the entries and the Cohen’s kappa coefficient was 0.629 which means a substantial agreement
was obtained between the two coding results (Viera & Garrett, 2005).
3.4.2. Text Data Organization
The open coding method classified the entries into different themes in each selected
topic. The historical versions generated in 2017 obtained for the entries were accordingly
assigned into the corresponding themes. The subjects of every theme were extracted from the
entries belonging to it by clustering approaches and text mining approaches. To apply these
approaches, the text data obtained for the themes were cleansed and transformed first.

79

The open source software r and RStudio were adopted for text data cleansing and
transformation. The tm package offered by r assisted to process the text data. This package
removed the punctuations and stop words from the text data, stripped the white spaces, and
stemmed the terms. Stop words were some of the most common, short function words, such as
prepositions and articles. The obtained words were stemmed so that the words with same
roots were combined into one term. Furthermore, some meaningless words were excluded
from the terms obtained, such as numbers, dates, equations, formulas, special symbols, and so
on. Then a matrix of the vector space model was presented for each theme.
Each theme formed a document-term matrix where its columns were the terms, and its
rows were the entries. The frequencies of all the terms in each entry in the theme were
counted. All the entries were ranked alphabetically and numbered from 1 to m. A matrix is
presented in Eq.1. As this equation displays, the matrix has m rows and n columns. The value of
the cell (aij) in the matrix represents the frequency of the term j in the entry i.

M

§ a11
¨
¨ a 21
¨ ..
¨
¨
¨a
© m1

a12
a 22
..
am2

..
..
aij
...
..

.. a1n ·
¸
.. a 2 n ¸
.. .. ¸ (Eq. 1)
¸
¸
.. a mn ¸¹

Since the text data of several hundred entries were gathered for each theme, the
matrices were huge. Terms whose frequencies were less than 4 were removed from the final
document-term matrices.

80

The final document-term matrices were then transformed to Term Frequency × Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF) matrices. Each value of the TF-IDF matrices (wij) was calculated
based on Eq.2. In this equation, m is the number of the entries of a matrix and ej represents the
number of the entries containing the term j in the matrix. The TF-IDF matrices obtained were
the input matrices for the following clustering process.
‫ݓ‬௜௝ ൌ ܽ௜௝ ൈ ‫݃݋ܮ‬൫݉Τ݁௝ ൯ (Eq. 2)
3.4.3. SOM Approach
To cluster the entries in the themes, the Self-Organizing Map (SOM) approach was
employed in this study. As first introduced by Kohonen (1990), the SOM approach is a popular
unsupervised learning approach. It is a widely used neural network method that measures
similarities among items of input data so as to form similarity graphs. The whole procedure of
this approach is a recursive regression process (Kohonen et al., 2000). The SOM has an input
layer and an output layer. As was mentioned before, the input matrix is described in Section
3.4.2 and each row is an entry, which is defined as:
‫ܦ‬௜ ൌ ሾܽ௜ଵ ǡ ܽ௜ଶ ǡ ܽ௜ଷ ǡ ‫ ڮ‬ǡ ܽ௜௡ ሿǡ ݅ ൌ ͳǡ ‫ ڮ‬ǡ ݉
Many of the outputs of the SOM are two-dimensional and are in grid structure. A grid
contains many nodes, which are also known as neurons. A neuron in the grid is related to a
weight vector:
‫ܯ‬௜ ൌ ሾ݉௜ଵ ǡ ݉௜ଶ ǡ ݉௜ଷ ǡ ‫ ڮ‬ǡ ݉௜௡ ሿ ‫ ܴ ؿ‬௡ ǡ ݅ ൌ ͳǡ ‫ ڮ‬ǡ ݇ (Eq.3)

81

In Eq.3, ܴ ௡ stands for an n-dimensional vector set and n represents the number of
attributes of each vector; and  is the number of neurons in the corresponding grid. The weight
vectors in the grid were initialized and small values (near zero) were randomly assigned to all of
their elements. In the training and learning process, all neurons competed for a winning neuron
of a randomly selected input vector. This step repeated many times until the training and
learning process ended. If ‫ܦ‬௜ was a selected vector, the corresponding winning node would be:
ሺ‫ܦ‬௜ ሻ ൌ ݉݅݊൛ሺσ௡௥ୀଵሺܽ௜௥ െ ݉௟௥ ሻଶ ሻଵȀଶ ൟǡ ݈ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ ‫ ڮ‬ǡ ݇ (Eq.4)
When the winning nodes emerged, the whole grid converged. Learning rate is another
mechanism that ensures the convergence. The learning rate decreased as time goes by. When
this rate was zero, the training and learning process ended and the grid converged. After the
grid converged, all the entries were projected to the final display map based on the same
algorithm. The algorithm found their wining nodes and assigned them to the corresponding
nodes. As a result, similar entries were assigned to the same node on the output display map.
Several toolboxes in Matlab contain the functions of SOM, such as the nnet toolbox.
MatLab is a computing environment for solving engineering and scientific problems. It offers an
interface and toolboxes for users to process, present, analyze, and visualize data.
In this study, the SOM toolbox created by Himberg, Alhoniemi and Parhankangas (2000)
was utilized. This toolbox provides functions for data input, normalization and training, SOM
creation, and visualization. Multiple algorithms and visualization functions have been proposed
for SOM. In order to achieve sound visualization results, the batch learning algorithm and the
U-matrix technique were applied to this case. The batch learning algorithm was applied in the
82

training process of SOM and U-matrix was used for projecting the clustering results to SOM
displays. The algorithm and function intended to reveal the distribution of the entries of each
matrix on the SOM display. Every entry was projected to the SOM display as a number.
Numbers with shorter distances among them were more similar than those with longer
distances. Moreover, the similarity among entries was indicated by color of a SOM output. The
color projected to the SOM display background was determined by a U-matrix (Ultsch &
Siemon, 1990). Higher values of the U-matrix stood for cluster borders, while lower values
represented clusters.
According to the distances between numbers and the colors on background, the entries
of each matrix were clustered. The criteria for clustering the numbers are: (1) the numbers
locate in a same SOM node were grouped into one cluster; (2) if the numbers locate in two or
more nodes, and the nodes are adjacent, or separated by only one empty node, and at the
same time, the numbers locate in the same area where the U-matrix values were lower than
half of the highest U-matrix value of the matrix, then these numbers will be grouped into one
cluster. In this way, the entries of each theme were assigned into several clusters. Then the
subjects of each cluster were extracted from the entries by subject analysis. Similar to the
coding process, the subjects were reviewed by the health science expert.
3.4.4. Subject Analysis
To identify the subjects of the clusters and themes, the n-gram approach was employed.
The n-gram package offered by r extracts the n-word phrases in unstructured text files. The n-

83

gram package was developed based on the n-gram model which predicts the next word of an
existing word or string in a specific text file.
In this study, the historical revisions of the entries in one cluster were merged into one
document. For each theme, the historical revisions in a specific period of its entries were also
merged into one document. The most used 2-word, 3-word, and 4-word phrases in each
document were extracted by the n-gram package. The set phrases (e.g. “as long as”) and
meaningless phrases (e.g. “of the” and “the study is a”) were removed from the data set. If a
phrase was a part of another one and the two phrases had the same meaning, then they were
regarded as one phrase and their frequencies were added together (e.g. “child development
index” and “the child development index”). After data processing, a list containing phrases and
frequencies was obtained for each document.
The researcher manually reviewed the lists to summarize the subjects of each
document. One phrase could relate to more than one subjects and different phrases could
relate to the same subjects. In this way, the subjects of each cluster were generated and the
subjects in each period of each theme were generated.
To find the increasing and decreasing phrases in each theme, the differences of the
frequencies obtained from the adjunct periods for a phrase was calculated. For example, the
frequency of the phrase “human trafficking” obtained from Period 2 minus the corresponding
frequency obtained from Period 1 was the frequency difference between Periods 1 and 2. The
frequency differences between Periods 2 and 3, and Periods 3 and 4 were also calculated for
the “human trafficking” phrase. After all the frequency differences were obtained for each

84

theme, the researcher reviewed the most increasing and most decreasing phrases and
generated the subjects from them.
3.4.5. Inferential Analysis
Inferential statistical tests allow the researcher to gain insights into the differences
among the objects. In addition to descriptive statistical methods, inferential statistical analysis
was applied to test the differences among the determined periods for each investigated topic,
and the differences among the selected topics. The hypotheses are:
H01: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in terms
of the number of page views of the entries relevant to each of the topics.
H02: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in terms
of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to each of the topics.
H03: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of the
number of the page edits of the associated entries.
H04: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of the
number of the page views of the associated entries.
For the first two hypotheses, since the independent variable (time period) was
categorical, the dependent variables (number of page views and number of page edits) were
continuous with repeated measures, and the distributions of the dependent variables did not
follow the normal distribution, the Friedman’s Test was applied to test the differences among
the periods. To explore the difference among every two periods, a series of pairwise

85

comparisons were conducted. Because the distribution of the differences among every two
periods was not symmetrical, so the Sign Test was used.
To test the third and fourth hypotheses, because the independent variable (topic) was
categorical and had more than two levels, and the dependent variables (number of page views
and number of page edits) were numeric but did not follow the normal distribution, so the
Kruskal-Wallis H Test and its post-hoc pairwise comparisons in SPSS were utilized.
These tests helped the researcher solve the RQ2b of the second research question and
the third research question. SPSS, one of the most popular statistical analysis and reporting
software in scientific research, was used for inferential analysis. In this study, the significant
level of the inferential statistical test was 0.05.
3.4.6. Temporal Analysis
Temporal analysis is the analysis where temporal data or temporal text play an
important role. In this study, the internal characteristics of each topic in the four defined
periods were compared. The hypothesis testing examining the differences between the four
periods was another kind of temporal analysis.
To explore the evolutions of external popularities for the selected topics, the yearly
number of page views and the yearly number of page edits were analyzed. For each topic and
theme, the data of their associated entries were added up. For example, to show the popularity
of Child Maltreatment in 2017, the numbers of page views in 2017 of all the associated entries
of Child Maltreatment were added up, and as well as the numbers of page edits of these
entries. These data reflect the external popularities of the topics and themes. After the data of
86

the topics and themes acquired, descriptive statistical methods and line charts and bar charts
were employed to demonstrate how the popularities changed over time.
3.5.

Validity and Reliability

3.5.1. Validity
Gravetter and Forzano (2011) defined the validity of a study as “the degree to which the
study accurately answers the question it was intended to answer” (p.167). Maxwell (2005b)
explained more straightforwardly that validity refers to “the correctness or credibility of a
description, conclusion, explanation, interpretation, or other sort of account” (p.106). Internal
validity is concerned with the explanation of results. A valid study allows only one
interpretation of the results. To ensure internal validity of the results, both quantitative and
qualitative research methods were utilized in this study. The results obtained by qualitative
research methods support those obtained by quantitative research methods, and vice versa.
Using multiple research methods helped avoid bias in the results.
External validity concerns whether the results obtained could be generalized to other
“populations, settings, times, measures, or characteristics” (Gravetter & Forzano, 2011, p.168).
Although only three family-health-related topics were investigated in this study, the selected
topics were representative topics for family health and several hundreds of their associated
entries were examined. In this case, the evolution patterns obtained could be generalized to
other family-health-related topics, and even other health-related topics.
This study collected data from Wikipedia, one of the largest collaborative projects. The
content on Wikipedia is generated by the public, which is same as other social media platforms.
87

Accordingly, the evolutions of the topics, themes, subjects, and terms on Wikipedia can reveal
the general public’s understandings and perceptions and these evolutions could be generalized
to other social media platforms.
The research methods used in this study could be applied to other similar situations. In
this study, the textual and numeric data collected from Wikipedia were analyzed by coding,
clustering approaches, text mining approaches, and statistical methods. It confirmed the
applicability of the mixed methods. Therefore, the same methods could be applied to other
similar situations, such as data mining and text mining studies on social media.
3.5.2. Reliability
Reliability means the stability and consistency of data collection and analysis processes
(Gravetter & Forzano, 2011). To avoid the instability and inconsistency of data collection,
automatic data collection methods were utilized instead of manual data collection. To ensure
data integrity, all the historical data during 2010 to 2017 of the related entries were gathered
by the approaches mentioned in the Data Collection section. Moreover, several rounds of data
collection were conducted in order to avoid the lack of data.
Two means were applied for seeking relevant entries of the selected topics on
Wikipedia. One means was to locate a seed concept and seek relevant entries through its “see
also” section. As it was mentioned before, three levels of entries were collected. The other
means was to retrieve relevant entries by query search on Wikipedia.
A relatively unstable step in this study was coding the entries. To ensure the reliability of
this study, two independent coders participated in the open coding process. They were asked
88

to code a part of the entries with the same coding scheme. After that the Cohen’s kappa intercoder reliability was calculated to examine whether they agreed on the coding results.
3.6.

Chapter Three Summary

This chapter expands the whole picture of this study. The research background, research
problem and questions, assumptions, and research methodology are all demonstrated in this
chapter. Particularly, the data collection and analysis procedure and the methods and
approaches used in these two steps are illustrated in detail.
Table 4 presents a summary of this study, including the research questions and subquestions, data collection methods and the data collected, and data analysis methods. For each
of the sub-questions, their corresponding data collection and analysis methods and approaches
are listed in the same row. This table shows that different types of data were collected in this
study, such as text data and numerical data. These data can reveal the characteristics of the
selected topics from different aspects. The data obtained were integrated and both qualitative
and quantitative methods and approaches were adopted in data analysis. In Table 4 the
qualitative methods are coding and subject analysis, while the quantitative methods include the
SOM approach, the n-gram approach, the descriptive statistical methods, and the inferential
statistical methods.
Research
Questions
RQ1: What are
the associated
entries,
emerged

Sub-Questions
RQ1a: What are the associated entries
and the main themes of the selected
family-health-related topics discussed
on Wikipedia?

89

Data Collection
Text of entries
collected from
Wikipedia

Data
Analysis
Coding

themes and
subjects, and
relations among
them in each of
the selected
family-healthrelated topics?

RQ1b: What are the subjects of each
theme of the selected family-healthrelated topics?

Text of entries
collected from
Wikipedia

Entries collected
from Wikipedia,
RQ1c: What are the relations among the themes obtained
in RQ1a, clusters
themes, subjects, and entries?
and subjects
obtained in R1b
RQ2a: What are the new entries created
in each investigated time period for
each theme of the selected topics?
Historical
What subjects are emerging and
versions of the
disappearing in each period for each
entries collected
theme of the selected topics? For each
from Wikipedia
topic, what are the evolution patterns
of its internal characteristics during
these time periods?

RQ2: What are
the evolution
patterns for
each of the
selected familyhealth-related
topics in terms of RQ2b: What are the evolution patterns
for the selected topics in terms of their
the internal
characteristics
associated entries’ number of views and
and external
number of edits? What are the
popularity?
evolution patterns for the themes of
each selected topic in terms of the
associated entries’ number of views and
number of edits?

Historical page
views and edits
data collected
from Wikipedia

Historical page
views and edits
data collected
RQ3: What are the differences and commonalities among
from Wikipedia,
the selected topics in terms of their evolution patterns?
evolution
patterns obtained
from RQ2
Table 4. Summary of Research Questions and Methodology

90

SOM, ngram,
subject
analysis
Coding,
SOM, ngram,
subject
analysis

N-gram,
subject
analysis

Descriptive
statistical
methods,
Friedman’s
Test, Sign
Test

KruskalWallis H
Test and
post-hoc
pairwise
comparison

4. RESULTS

4.1.

Descriptive Results

4.1.1. Topics and Themes
According to the topic selection strategy presented in Chapter 3, three health-related
topics were selected in this study, which were Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and
Women’s Health. For each topic, its corresponding “seed” entries on Wikipedia were used to
collect related entries. The seed entries were same as the selected topics or were the synonyms
of the selected topics. For instance, the “Child abuse” entry was the seed entry of the Child
Maltreatment topic because child abuse was a synonym of child maltreatment; the “Family
planning” entry was the Family Planning topic’s seed entry.
As it was mentioned in the Data Collection section, query search was another approach
for collecting the relevant entries. The selected topics were utilized as the search queries to
retrieve the relevant entries on Wikipedia. After obtaining all the relevant entries for each
topic, the researcher manually reviewed and labeled the entries, and assigned them into
several categories in terms of their themes.
Table 5 lists the three selected topics, the themes of each topic, and the description of
each theme. It shows the related entries of the Child Maltreatment topic were assigned to four
categories, and the themes of the categories were Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination
(AVHS); Children, youth, families and friends (CYFF); Health problems and risks (CM-HPR); and
Support and protection (CM-SP), respectively. Three themes were generated for the Family

91

Planning topic, including Family planning and reproductive health (FPRH); Human and
environment (HE); and Population problems (PP). The themes of Women’s Health included
Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination (DVHS); Health problems and risks (WH-HPR);
Medical and interdisciplinary subjects (MIS); and Support and protection (WH-SP).
Selected
Topics

Themes
Abuse, violence, harm,
and subordination (AVHS)

Children, youth, families
and friends (CYFF)
Child
Health problems and risks
Maltreatment (CM-HPR)
Support and protection
(CM-SP)

Family
Planning

Women’s
Health

Family planning and
reproductive health
(FPRH)

Descriptions
Entries related to mental and physical abuse,
violence, and harm, and subordination to
children
Entries related to children and children’s social
relations
Entries related to health problems and risks,
including the causes of child abuse
Entries related to policies, laws, research
studies, literary and artistic work, treatments,
people, and organizations that support and
protect children, and prevent children from
being abused
Entries related to policies, laws, research
studies, methods, services, people, and
organizations about family planning and
reproductive health
Entries related to human rights, human life,
human society, and environment
Entries related to human population
Entries related to mental and physical violence
and harm, discrimination, and subordination to
women

Human and environment
(HE)
Population problems (PP)
Discrimination, violence,
harm, and subordination
(DVHS)
Health problems and risks
Entries related to health problems and risks
(WH-HPR)
Medical and
Entries related to medical subjects and healthinterdisciplinary subjects
related interdisciplinary subjects
(MIS)
Entries related to policies, laws, research
studies, literary and artistic work, treatments,
Support and protection
people, and organizations that support and
(WH-SP)
protect women, and improve women’s health
Table 5. Selected Topics and Themes of Each Topic
92

The total number of the relevant entries of the four selected topics was 578. Table 6
displays the numbers of entries of the topics and themes. Child Maltreatment, Family Planning,
and Food Safety had 241, 150, and 207 entries, respectively. The results reflect that Child
Maltreatment was the most popular among the three selected topics because more entries
were created for it than the other three topics. Accordingly, Women’s Health was less popular
than Child Maltreatment, but received more attentions than Family Planning.
Selected
Topics
Child
Maltreatment
Family
Planning
Women’s
Health
Total Entries

No. of
Entries

Themes

Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination
Children, youth, families and friends
241
Health problems and risks
Support and protection
Family planning and reproductive health
150
Human and environment
Population problems
Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination
Health problems and risks
207
Medical and interdisciplinary subjects
Support and protection
578
Table 6. Numbers of Entries Per Topic and Theme

No. of
Entries
118
28
33
62
95
28
27
37
25
46
99
-

Since the three selected topics were all about family health, it is possible that some of
their relevant entries were overlapped. The results of the entry collection process show that
there were a few entries related to different topics, so the sum of the numbers of the three
topics was larger than the number of the total relevant entries. For instance, the entry Abortion
was relevant to Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and Women’s Health three topics. The
entry Birth control was related to both Family Planning and Women’s Health.

93

The AVHS theme (118 entries) had the most entries among the four themes of Child
Maltreatment. The CM-SP theme, with 62 entries, achieved the second place, while CM-HPR
(33 entries) and CYFF (28 entries) occupied the last two positions among the four. These
findings reveal that the Wikipedia editors had more interests in the harms of child
maltreatment and the support and protection of children.
For the Family Planning topic, the FPRH (95 entries) outnumbered the other two
themes. The numbers of entries of HE (28 entries) and PP (27 entries) were much less than the
FPRH theme, but close to each other. It shows that people paid more attention on the policies,
methods, services, and organizations of family planning and reproductive health than the other
related themes.
Among the four themes of the Women’s Health topic, the WH-HPR theme (25 entries)
had the smallest number of entries. The DVHS theme (37 entries) and the MIS theme (46
entries) reached the third and second places, while the WH-SP theme (99 entries) became the
first, which reflects that the general public cared more about the protection of women’s health
than the other themes. Tables 5 and 6 provide the answers to RQ1a.
After retrieving and collecting all the relevant entries, the creation time, the historical
versions, the page edits data, and the page views data of each entry were collected. Table 7
presents the numbers of the entries created from 2010 to 2017 of each topic and theme, which
partially answers RQ2a. In general, the total number of the entries created each year increased
from 2010 to 2012 and decreased after 2012. A similar trend was found for the Family Planning
topic. In 2011 and 2012, new entries were generated more than the other investigated years.

94

This phenomenon was caused by the creation of new entries of the FPRH theme. Moreover,
this theme mainly accounted for the increase of entries of the Family Planning topic.
Topics

Child
Maltreatment

Family
Planning

Women’s
Health

Four Topics

Themes
Abuse, violence, harm, and
subordination
Children, youth, families and
friends
Health problems and risks

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

7

7

4

6

5

4

6

2

0

2

3

1

1

0

0

0

3

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

Support and protection

3

1

2

1

2

3

1

1

Total
Family planning and
reproductive health
Human and environment

13

11

9

9

8

8

7

4

2

9

13

2

2

2

2

5

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

Population problems

0

1

0

0

3

0

0

0

Total
Discrimination, violence, harm,
and subordination
Health problems and risks
Medical and interdisciplinary
subjects
Support and protection

2

10

14

2

5

2

2

5

1

1

1

1

2

1

0

1

0

1

0

2

0

3

0

1

1

0

1

4

2

1

0

1

7

4

5

4

3

8

3

3

Total

9
24

6
27

7
29

11
22

7
20

13
23

3
12

6
15

Total

Table 7. Number of Entries Created during the Investigated Time Periods
The number of new entries of the Child Maltreatment topic kept decreasing from 2010
to 2017. The AVHS theme had much more new entries than the other three themes from 2010
to 2017. In other words, it caused the growth of the Child-Maltreatment-related entries to a
large extent. The CM-SP theme also played a relatively important role in the growth of the
Child-Maltreatment-related entries compared with the remaining two themes.
The Women’s Health topic’s number of entries had a steady rise. The WH-SP theme
contributed to the entry increase the most among the four themes every year from 2010 to
2017. In 2010 and 2015, more new entries were created for this theme compared with the

95

other years. Another special case is that for the MIS theme, 4 new entries were generated in
2013, which was larger than the other years.
4.1.2. Descriptive Results of Page Edits
In addition to the creation time, the page edits data were collected for all the relevant
entries. The numbers of yearly page edits for each topic and theme were calculated based on
the page edits data obtained. The results presented in this section are associated with RQ2b
and RQ3. Table 8 displays the mean, standard deviation (SD), and minimum and maximum
numbers of yearly page edits for each topic and theme.

Themes

Mean

Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination

6457.25

Std.
Deviation
1426.682

Children, youth, families and friends

1202.88

Health problems and risks
Support and protection

Topics

Child
Maltreatment

All themes
Family planning and reproductive health
Family
Planning

Women’s
Health

Minimum

Maximum

5493

9615

259.243

941

1690

2037

613.105

1414

3125

1637

210.288

1458

2043

11334.13

2298.441

9391

16473

4403

1730.62

2787

8078

Human and environment

2164.13

557.573

1571

3043

Population problems

2472.25

515.704

1506

3044

All themes
Discrimination, violence, harm, and
subordination
Health problems and risks

9039.38

2213.684

6882

13653

2801.38

389.715

2257

3350

1911.25

373.024

1345

2362

Medical and interdisciplinary subjects

2219.38

325.985

1760

2648

Support and protection

3104

338.152

2655

3583

All themes

10036

725.487

9265

10994

Table 8. Descriptive Statistical Analysis Results of Yearly Edits for Each Topic and Theme
Figure 6 to Figure 9 show the changes of the yearly page edits from 2010 to 2017 for
each topic and theme. The X-axes of these figures represent the year and the Y-axes represent
the number of yearly page edits (NYPE). Figure 6 illustrates the NYPEs of the three selected

96

topics. This figure demonstrates that the Child Maltreatment topic (Mean=11334.13,
SD=2298.441) had higher NYPE than the other topics except 2011 and 2015, although its NYPE
declined during the investigated eight years. The Family Planning topic (Mean=9039.38,
SD=2213.684) occupied the second or third place among the three during the investigated eight
years except 2011 when it reached the first place, which was its first peak. The number of this
topic’s yearly page edits fluctuated from 2010 to 2017 and reached its second peak in 2015.
Similar to the Family Planning topic, the Women’s Health topic (Mean=10036, SD=725.487)
received the second or third place from 2010 to 2017 except 2015, but it did not fluctuate as
widely as the Family Planning topic, and its standard deviation was much smaller than Family
Planning’s.

18000
16000
14000

12000
10000
8000

6000
4000
2000
0
2010

2011

2012

Child Maltreatment

2013

2014

Family Planning

2015
Women's Health

Figure 6. Numbers of Yearly Page Edits for Each Topic
4.1.2.1.

The Child Maltreatment topic

97

2016

2017

Figure 7 illustrates the NYPEs of the four themes of the Child Maltreatment topic. This
figure reveals that the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme (Mean=6457.25,
SD=1426.682) always had the highest NYPE among the four themes, while the other three
themes each had less than half of the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme’s NYPE.
It reveals that the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme was the most popular
among the four for Wikipedia editors, while the remaining three themes attracted much less
attentions from the editors. The NYPE of the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme
decreased rapidly from 2010 to 2013 and dropped slightly after that. The NYPEs of the other
three themes fluctuated from 2010 to 2017.

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination

Children, youth, families and friends

Health problems and risks

Support and protection

2017

Figure 7. Numbers of Yearly Page Edits for Each Theme of Child Maltreatment
4.1.2.2.

The Family Planning topic

Figure 8 demonstrates the NYPEs of the three themes of the Family Planning topic. The
NYPE of the Family planning and reproductive health theme (Mean=4403, SD=1730.62) reached
98

its peak in 2011. The Family planning and reproductive health theme achieved the first position
among the four themes from 2010 to 2017, although in the last two years its NYPEs were close
to the NYPEs of the Population problems theme. The general trend of the NYPE of the Human
and environment theme (Mean=2164.13, SD=557.573) declined during the investigated periods.
The Population problems theme’s NYPE (Mean=2472.25, SD=515.704) decreased from 2010 to
2013, but increased after that. Its NYPE was smaller than the Human and environment theme’s
NYPE from 2010 to 2013, but was larger than that from 2014 to 2017.

9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
2010

2011

2012

Family planning and reproductive health

2013

2014

2015

Human and environment

2016

2017

Population problems

Figure 8. Numbers of Yearly Page Edits for Each Theme of Family Planning
4.1.2.3.

The Women’s Health topic

Figure 9 illustrates the NYPEs of the four themes of the Women’s Health topic. This
figure reveals that the Support and protection theme (Mean=3104, SD=338.152) received the
largest NYPEs six years (2010 to 2012 and 2015 to 2017) among the investigated eight years. In

99

2013 and 2014 the Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination theme (Mean=2801.38,
SD=389.715) surpassed Support and protection and occupied the first position. The NYPEs of
these two themes and Medical and interdisciplinary subjects (Mean=2219.38, SD=325.985)
fluctuated from 2010 to 2017 and no obvious ascending or descending trend was found for
them. The NYPEs of the Health problems and risks theme (Mean=1911.25, SD=373.024) rose
from 2010 and reached peak in 2012, and then began to drop and reached its trough in 2017.

4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination

Health problems and risks

Medical and interdisciplinary subjects

Support and protection

2016

2017

Figure 9. Numbers of Yearly Page Edits for Each Theme of Women’s Health
4.1.3. Descriptive Results of Page Views
Apart from the page edits data, the page views data were collected for all the relevant
entries. The numbers of yearly page views for each topic and theme were calculated based on
the page views data obtained. The results presented in this section are associated with RQ2b
and RQ3. Table 9 displays the mean, standard deviation (SD), and minimum and maximum
numbers of yearly page views for each topic and theme.
100

Mean

Std.
Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

14344791

4322007

8756682

19658107

3027738

1035425

1670939

4419021

6583360

2157364

3813014

9724321

Support and protection

3839355

1160124

2131875

5203632

All themes

27795244

8449141

16372510

38037718

Family planning and reproductive health

9219838

3274985

4686995

13168869

Human and environment

4517944

1007057

3070288

5883305

Population problems

6117393

985824.7

4886729

8113559

All themes
Discrimination, violence, harm, and
subordination
Health problems and risks

19855176

4744800

12644012

25124209

4817745

1599211

3193557

7613161

4841570

1940105

2296627

7122197

Medical and interdisciplinary subjects

6127769

1964491

3501912

8582655

Support and protection

8539977

2922811

4622018

11876762

All themes

24327061

8041988

13614114

34816639

Topics

Child
Maltreatment

Family
Planning

Women’s
Health

Themes
Abuse, violence, harm, and
subordination
Children, youth, families and friends
Health problems and risks

Table 9. Descriptive Statistical Analysis Results of Yearly Views for Each Topic and Theme
Figure 10 to Figure 13 show the changes of the yearly page views from 2010 to 2017 for
each topic and theme. The X-axes of these figures represent the year and the Y-axes represent
the number of yearly page views (NYPV). Figure 10 illustrates the NYPVs of the three selected
topics. This figure demonstrates that the Child Maltreatment topic (Mean=27795244.38,
SD=8449140.605) had higher NYPV than the other topics during the investigated periods. The
Women’s Health topic (Mean=24327061, SD=8041987.722) and the Family Planning topic
(Mean=19855175.5, SD=4744799.9) ranked the second and third places, respectively. The
NYPVs of all the three topics reduced slightly from 2010 to 2011, increased from 2011 to 2013,
and then decreased again from 2013. All the topics had their peaks in 2013.

101

40000000

35000000
30000000
25000000
20000000
15000000
10000000
5000000
0
2010

2011

2012

Child abuse

2013

Family planning

2014

2015

2016

2017

Women's health

Figure 10. Numbers of Yearly Page Views for Each Topic
4.1.3.1.

The Child Maltreatment topic

Figure 11 presents the NYPVs of the four themes of the Child Maltreatment topic. This
figure reveals that the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme (Mean=14344791.13,
SD=4322007.268) and the Health problems and risks theme (Mean=6583360.25,
SD=2157363.792) always had the highest and second highest NYPV among the four themes,
respectively. The Support and protection theme (Mean=3839354.88, SD=1160124.038) ranked
the third place most of the time except the first year (2010) when the Children, youth, families
and friends theme (Mean=3027738.13, SD=1035424.697) achieved the third place. The NYPVs
of the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme, the Health problems and risks theme,
and the Children, youth, families and friends theme increased from 2011 to 2012 and decreased

102

from 2013 to 2017. Different from the other three themes, the NYPV of Support and protection
climbed to the peak in 2014 and declined since then.

25000000

20000000

15000000

10000000

5000000

0
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination

Children, youth, families and friends

Health problems and risks

Support and protection

2017

Figure 11. Numbers of Yearly Page Views for Each Theme of Child Maltreatment
4.1.3.2.

The Family Planning topic

Figure 12 demonstrates the NYPVs of the three themes of the Family Planning topic. The
trend of the Family planning and reproductive health theme (Mean=9219838.13,
SD=3274984.835) was similar to the trend of the Family Planning topic and its NYPV was the
highest among the three themes from 2010 to 2015. In 2016 and 2017, the Population
problems theme (Mean=6117393.38, SD=985824.66) surpassed the Family planning and
reproductive health theme and reached the first place. The Human and environment theme’s
NYPV (Mean=4517944, SD=1007057.393) was always the smallest among the three except 2014

103

when the Population problems theme’s NYPV was even smaller. The overall trends of the three
themes were all decreasing.

14000000
12000000
10000000
8000000
6000000
4000000
2000000
0
2010

2011

2012

Family planning and reproductive health

2013

2014

2015

Human and environment

2016

2017

Population problems

Figure 12. Numbers of Yearly Page Views for Each Theme of Family Planning
4.1.3.3.

The Women’s Health topic

Figure 13 displays the NYPVs of the four themes of the Women’s Health topic. The
trends of the Support and protection theme (Mean=8539976.88, SD=2922811.285), the Medical
and interdisciplinary subjects theme (Mean=6127769.25, SD=1964490.902), and the Health
problems and risks theme (Mean=4841570, SD=1940105.038) were similar to the trend of the
entire Women’s Health topic. The first two themes ranked the top two places among the four
themes from 2010 to 2017. The third theme occupied the third place from 2010 to 2012, but
fell to the last place from 2013. The trend of the Discrimination, violence, harm, and
subordination theme (Mean=4817745, SD=1599210.84) was slightly different from the other
104

three themes because its NYPV increased rapidly from 2010 to 2013. However, the decreasing
of its NYPV from 2013 to 2017 was similar to the other themes of the Women’s Health topic.

14000000
12000000
10000000
8000000
6000000
4000000
2000000
0
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination

Health problems and risks

Medical and interdisciplinary subjects

Support and protection

2016

2017

Figure 13. Numbers of Yearly Page Views for Each Theme of Women’s Health
4.1.4. Descriptive Results Summary
Among all the three selected topics, Child Maltreatment was ranked the first place in
terms of the numbers of entries and page views, while Women’s Health and Family Planning
occupied the second and third positions. Considering the number of the page edits, the ranking
of the three topics changed frequently during the investigated time periods. For each topic or
theme, its NYPE trend differed a lot from its NYPV trend from 2010 to 2017. These two types of
the trends had different characteristics. It indicates that the user groups who created the page
edits and the page views had different characteristics.

105

In this study, if a theme of a specific topic occupied the first position in most of the time
according to the NYPE or the NYPV compared with the other themes, then it was named the
salient theme of the topic. The trends of the selected three topics were consistent when
looking at the yearly page views data. They rose and dropped in the same time periods. For
each topic, the trend of its salient theme was consistent with the entire topic’s trend. It implies
that the Wikipedia viewers’ interests in different family-health-related topics and themes
changed in certain patterns and the Wikipedia viewers focused more on the salient themes
than the other themes.
Different from the page views trends, the trends of the three topics and their themes
varied a lot in terms of the NYPE. In other words, no consistent trend was found among the
topics or themes. Among the three topics, only Child Maltreatment had a salient theme (Abuse,
violence, harm, and subordination) which had the highest NYPE during the whole investigated
time periods. These findings imply that the Wikipedia editors’ interests on different familyhealth-related topics and themes varied from one to another and changed in different ways.
4.2.

Results of Research Question One

Apart from the NYPEs and NYPVs of the selected topics, the changes of the text data of
the selected topics can also reflect their evolutions. The first research question of this study
aims to discover the associated entries and the emerged themes and subjects of each selected
topic, and explore the connections among them. The associated entries and the themes of the
selected topics were already demonstrated in Section 4.1. To discover the emerged subjects,
the content of the associated entries for each topic was collected and examined.

106

4.2.1. Topics, Themes, and Associated Entries
As it was presented in Section 4.1, several themes were generated from the associated
entries of each selected topic and the associated entries of each topic were collected. Appendix
A lists the associated entries of each topic and theme. The numbers in the first and second
column(s) of the table were the numbers of entries associated to the topics and themes. The
abbreviations of the themes were contained in the second column. The entries of a specific
theme were ordered alphabetically and numbered. The entries and their sequence numbers
were shown in the third column of the table in Appendix A.
The historical versions of the associated entries were collected via RStudio and
Wikipedia APIs. For each entry, its text of the last versions of 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2017 were
collected. A special case emerged among all the associated entries, which was the “Wenatchee
child abuse prosecutions” entry. All the versions created from May 2013 to November 2017 of
this entry were removed and the content was reverted to an older version created in April
2013. Since the text data of this entry were incomplete, this entry was not included in the
following subject analysis step.
4.2.2. Subjects Analysis Results
The SOM approach was applied to cluster the associated entries of each theme based
on the matrices obtained. Each matrix was created for one theme, and it was utilized to
generate one SOM display. Four, three, and four matrices were generated for the Child
Maltreatment topic, the Family Planning topic, and the Women’s Health topic, respectively.
Therefore, in total eleven matrices were created in this study. Because the number of entries of
107

each theme differed from one another, so the size of the matrix obtained varied a lot. For
example, the size of the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme’s matrix was
118×7570, while the size of the Children, youth, families and friends theme’s matrix was
28×2343. Since the sizes of these matrices varied a lot, it was reasonable to process different
matrices in different display sizes. Furthermore, the size of every SOM display was adjusted
repeatedly so as to achieve the most interpretable results. Consequently, the sizes of the SOM
displays obtained from the eleven matrices are different from each other.
Figures 14 to 24 are the SOM displays for the identified themes. The color bars on the
right side of the figures represent different values of the U-matrix. Lower value means higher
similarity. In the displays, every number stands for an entry, and the corresponding entry of
each number is presented in Appendix A. The entries were grouped according to the criteria
mentioned in Chapter 3. Every rectangle or polygon represents a cluster and the numbers in the
same rectangle/polygon represent the entries belonging to the same cluster. The numbers not
included in any rectangle/polygon stand for the isolated entries which were not grouped to any
clusters. The clusters with more than three entries were the large clusters, while those with
three or less entries were the small clusters. The large clusters were represented by purple
rectangles or polygons. The small clusters were represented by red rectangles.
Appendix B lists the top 15 high-frequency terms and phrases in each theme. The terms
and phrases in Appendix B illustrate that different themes had various high-frequency terms
and phrases, which implies that the corresponding subjects could be different. For example, the
terms/phrases in the Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination theme of Child Maltreatment
were relevant to abuse and violence, while the terms/phrases in the Children, youth, families
108

and friends theme were about family issues, child protection, and child development. To
further explore the subjects of each theme, the associated entries in each theme were
clustered by the SOM approach and the high-frequency terms/phrases and the subjects of each
cluster were extracted from the content of the entries.
Tables 10 to 20 display the high-frequency terms and phrases, and the subjects
discovered within each large cluster. The high-frequency terms/phrases were extracted from
the entries by the n-gram approach. This study only extracted the 2-word, 3-word, and 4-word
phrases from the entries in each theme and cluster. The high-frequency terms and phrases are
displayed in the second column of each table and the frequency of each term/phrase is
included in the brackets following the term/phrase. The researcher proposed the subjects of
each large cluster by examining the high-frequency terms and phrases of it. The small clusters
and isolated entries were not included in these tables.
4.2.2.1.

The Child Maltreatment Topic

(1) The Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination (AVHS) theme
Figure 14 presents the SOM display of the AVHS theme of Child Maltreatment. Seven
large clusters and three small clusters were generated according to the clustering criteria.
Cluster C2 was the largest cluster and Cluster C7 was the second largest one. Clusters C2, C3,
C5, C6, and C7 were close to each other in the figure and were all located in the blue area,
which implies that the entries in these clusters were relevant. Cluster C1 was a little far from
the previous clusters, but since it was also in the same blue area, the entries in C1 were also
relevant to those in the previous five clusters. Cluster C4 was far from the other large clusters

109

and there were yellow and red areas between it and the other large clusters. It implies that the
entries in C4 had relatively weak connections with the entries in the other large clusters. Table
10 shows the high-frequency terms and phrases of the seven large clusters, as well as the
subjects generated for them.

C4
C1

C2

C3

C5

C6

C7

Figure 14. SOM Display of AVHS
Clusters

C1

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
domestic violence (282), child abuse (145), corporal
punishment (123), violence against women (90), united
states (88), human rights (70), intimate partner (67),
partner violence (62), health organization (60), emotional
abuse (56), intimate partner violence (55), World Health
110

Subjects
Abuse and violence
(domestic violence,
physical abuse,
emotional abuse),

C2

C3

C4

C5

C6

C7

Organization (46), abuse and neglect (39), punishment of
children (34), Council of Europe (26)
sexual abuse (99), child abuse (94), social undermining
(74), parental alienation (52), child neglect (45), child
pornography (41), domestic violence (40), New York (36),
mental health (34), social support (30), United States
(24), child sexual abuse (19), the cruel mother (18),
abuse and neglect (17), power and control (15)

health issue
(organization)
Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse,
domestic violence,
emotional abuse),
social factor (social
problem),
Abuse and violence
sexual abuse (54), child sexual abuse (20), narcissistic
(sexual abuse,
abuse (16), domestic violence (16), physical abuse (11),
domestic violence,
breaking the cycle (10), child abuse (8), cycle of violence
physical abuse,
(6), child-on-child sexual abuse (6), family violence (5),
emotional abuse), child
stress disorder (5), mental health (4), abused children (4),
and youth protection,
narcissistic supply (4), abuse neglect (4), Alice Miller (4)
health issue (problem)
sex tourism (61), slave trade (59), child sex tourism (48),
united states (75), sexual exploitation (35), human
Abuse and violence
trafficking (32), sexual slavery (30), forced labour (29),
(sexual abuse), slaves
sex slaves (27), human rights (26), World War (25), New
York (24), child pornography (22), unfree labour (19), sex
trafficking (18)
domestic violence (13), control domestic violence (8), Jill Abuse and violence
and Rob (7), Vanessa Jackson (6), power and control (5),
(domestic violence),
attachment theory (4), Beth Thomas (4)
health issue (problem)
sexual abuse (36), sexual activity (20), US Conference of
Abuse and violence
Catholic (12), Child and Youth Protection (10), Fall River
(sexual abuse), child
(9), child sex abuse (9), BBC News (7), Catholic diocese
and youth protection
(6), abuse scandal (6), abuse cases (4), protection of
(news report)
children (4)
sexual abuse (118), Jimmy Savile (87), child abuse (82),
Abuse and violence
sexual exploitation (65), BBC News (57), child sex abuse
(sexual abuse), child
(55), abuse scandal (37), child sexual exploitation (36),
and youth protection
Daily Telegraph (35), North Wales (35), sexual activity
(news report,
(35), child sexual abuse (27), South Yorkshire Police (19),
organization)
child abuse scandal (16), child sex abuse ring (14)
Table 10. Subject Analysis of AVHS
The subjects listed in Table 10 shows that abuse and violence appeared in all the

clusters, which means it was the most popular subjects among all the subjects of the AVHS
theme. The abuse behaviors mentioned in this theme were mostly conducted to children. This

111

subject included several lower-level subjects, such as sexual abuse, domestic violence, physical
abuse, and emotional abuse. Among these different types of abuse and violence, sexual abuse
and domestic violence occurred in more clusters than the other types. Therefore, these two
types of child abuse attracted more Wikipedia editors and viewers’ attentions. For instance, the
story of Beth Thomas, who was sexually abused as a child, was mentioned in an associated
entry. Several entries were related to a series of the Catholic sex abuse cases or scandals, such
as the sexual abuse scandal in Fall River diocese. Domestic violence included both physical (e.g.
corporal punishment) and mental (e.g. neglect) abuse to children. Famous domestic violence
cases, like the Collingswood Boys, were also demonstrated in the relevant entries of this theme.
Social factors, such as social undermining, could be the potential cause of domestic violence.
Health issue and child and youth protection were other two popular subjects of the
AVHS theme. The health issue subject had two lower-level subjects, which were health problem
and health organization. Either physical or emotional abuse to children could cause health
problems, such as stress disorder. To improve health conditions in the children, various
organizations made their own contributions. The World Health Organization was one of the
largest organizations helping developing child health world-widely. There were also various
organizations for child and youth protection. The police (e.g. the South Yorkshire Police) and the
news media (e.g. BBC News and the Daily Telegraph) played an important role in protecting
children and youth. Usually the news media protected the children and youth by news reports.
The remaining subject, slaves, was relatively special among all the subjects of this theme,
because its associated entries were related to the history of specific countries. For instance, in
ancient Rome it was common to employ female slaves for prostitution. During the World War II,
112

the government of Japanese organized a system of “comfort women” which was a euphemism
of military sex slaves.
(2) The Children, youth, families and friends (CYFF) theme
Figure 15 presents the SOM display of the CYFF theme of Child Maltreatment, and two
large clusters and three small clusters are illustrated in the figure. The two large clusters
located quite far from each other and the orange, blue, and green colors filled the area
between them, which implies that the entries in these two clusters had no strong association
with each another. The high-frequency terms and phrases, and the subjects of the large clusters
are demonstrated in Table 11.

C1

C2

Figure 15. SOM Display of CYFF

113

Clusters

C1

C2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
United States (63), family members (24), immigrant families (16),
men and women (16), nuclear family (15), domestic violence (13),
gender equality (12), family issues (12), marriage and family (12),
middle class (11), legal status (11), child care (11), American
culture (10), family life (10), lower class (10), Journal of Family
Issues (10)
attachment styles (101), working models (53), attachment theory
(24), relational schemas (21), attachment figure (20), personal
relationships (18), adult attachment (16), Social Psychology (15),
Personality and Social Psychology (15), secure attachment (13),
attachment system (9), romantic relationships (8), child
development (8), changes in attachment styles (8), Mikulincer
Shaver (7), marital satisfaction (7)
Table 11. Subject Analysis of CYFF

Subjects

Social factor
(family issue)

Social factor
(interpersonal
relationship)

The subject of C1 was social factor, since all the high-frequency terms/phrases of Cluster
C1 were about the society and culture. To be more specific, most of those terms/phrases of C1
related to certain family issues, such as immigrant families, domestic violence, lower class, and
so on. These family issues might be caused by government policies, laws, economy status,
culture, and so on. The family issues would potentially cause abuse and health problems.
All the high-frequency terms/phrases of C2 were associated with a psychology concept,
attachment. The attachment theory is about interpersonal relationships. At first this theory
only studied the context of child and parents, but in the past decades it was extended to adult
relationships. Therefore, the subject of this cluster was also social factor, and to be more
specific, the entries in this cluster focused on interpersonal relationships. Interpersonal
relationship problems were potential causes of child maltreatment.
(3) The Health problems and risks (CM-HPR) theme

114

Figure 16 presents the SOM display of the CM-HPR theme and this figure shows three
clusters. Clusters C1 and C2 were in the same blue area and although C3 located in another blue
area, this area was connected to the C1 and C2’s area. Therefore, the entries in these three
clusters were relevant to each other. Table 12 displays the large clusters, the high-frequency
terms/phrases, and the subjects of the large clusters.

C1

C2

C3

Figure 16. SOM Display of CM-HPR
Clusters

C1

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
emotional dysregulation (12), emotional regulation (8),
mental health (10), personality disorder (7), traumatic
bonding (6), narcissistic parents (6), self psychology (6),
healthy narcissism (5), Geschwind syndrome (5), early
childhood (5), spiritual crisis (5), bipolar disorder (4),
borderline personality (4), spiritual emergency (4), narcissistic
parenting (4), posttraumatic stress (4), narcissistic personality
disorder (4), temporal lobe epilepsy (4)

115

Subjects

Health issue
(problem)

C2

C3

vulnerable adult (23), neglected children (12), psychosomatic
medicine (9), transactional analysis (8), child neglect (6), child
abuse (5), psychosomatic disorders (4), family systems (4),
Murray Bowen (4), stress disorder (4), posttraumatic stress
(4), Karpman drama triangle (4), posttraumatic stress disorder
(4), child abuse and neglect (4)
conduct disorder (100), borderline personality disorder (94),
people with BPD (61), domestic violence (56), attachment
disorder (52), emotion regulation (46), mental health (34),
reactive attachment (32), reactive attachment disorder (30),
traumatic stress (23), American Psychiatric Association (18),
child and adolescent (18), antisocial personality (17),
oppositional defiant disorder (17), posttraumatic stress
disorder (15)
Table 12. Subject Analysis of CM-HPR

Health issue
(problem,
research), social
factor (family
issue), abuse and
violence
(emotional
abuse)
Health issue
(problem,
organization),
abuse and
violence
(domestic
violence)

The most salient subject of the CM-HPR theme was health issue, since it appeared in all
the three large clusters. In all the three clusters, this subject had a lower-level subject, which
was health problem. Many health problems were mentioned in the associated entries of C1, C2,
and C3, including Geschwind syndrome, temporal lobe epilepsy, psychosomatic disorders,
conduct disorder, and so on. Some entries in the three clusters were causes of health problems.
For example, narcissistic parents and narcissistic parenting might affect children’s behaviors
and attitudes.
A lower-level subject of the health issue subject in C2 was research. It was found that an
entry was psychosomatic medicine which explored the influence of social, psychological, and
behavioral factors on humans and animals. The other two subjects of C2 were social factor and
abuse and violence. Family issue was the lower-level subject of social factor and the highfrequency terms “family systems” and “Murray Bowen” were both relevant to family issue.

116

Murray Bowen proposed the theory of triangulation which was a part of Bowen’s family
systems theory. The health problems and social factors included in this cluster could be either
the causes or results of child abuse.
The health issue subject of C3 had two lower-level subjects, health problem and health
organization. The American Psychiatric Association mentioned in the associated entries of C3
was the largest professional psychiatric organization in the world. This organization not only
trained psychiatrists but also published psychiatric journals and pamphlets so as to diagnose
disorders and provide treatments. Another subject of this cluster, abuse and violence, could be
the causes or results of disorders.
(4) The Support and protection (CM-SP) theme
Figure 17 presents the SOM display of the CM-SP theme and the clusters of this theme
are illustrated in this figure. Four large clusters and four small clusters were generated for this
theme. Cluster C1 and C3 were close to each other and located in the same blue area, which
indicates their entries were also associated with each other. Cluster C2 was close to Cluster C1,
but there was a small green area between them so that these two clusters were not quite
similar. Cluster C4 was relatively far from the other three clusters and it located in the light blue
area. Therefore, the entries in C4 had no strong connection with those in the other three
clusters. Table 13 lists the clusters and their entries, high-frequency terms and phrases, and
subjects.

117

C2
C1

C3

C4

Figure 17. SOM Display of CM-SP
Clusters

C1

C2

C3

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
child abuse (57), child sexual abuse (29), human rights
(28), child abuse and neglect (16), youth studies (15),
Public Law (14), protection of children (13), Abuse
Prevention and Treatment (12), Sexual Offences Act (11),
Child Abuse Prevention (9), abuse laws (8), Mountain
Goats (8), Save the Children (8), sexual abuse laws (8),
Prevention and Treatment Act (8)
corporal punishment (39), Prevention of Cruelty (23),
Cruelty to Children (14), abuse excuse (11), abuse defense
(8), vicarious liability (8), child protection (8), the Guardian
(7), United States (7), National Society (7), content
blocking (6), Supreme Court (6), ritual abuse (6), young
people (5), Irish Society (5), social services (5), United
Nations (5), criminal law (5), Internet Watch Foundation
(5)
child abuse (16), identified patient (8), mental health (7),
Lloyd deMause (7), sexual abuse (7), mental disorders (7),
118

Subjects
Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse,
emotional abuse),
child and youth
protection (law, work
of art)
Abuse and violence
(physical abuse,
sexual abuse), child
and youth protection
(law, organization,
technology, news
report)
Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse), child

C4

Journal of Psychohistory (7), trauma model (6),
attachment theory (6), black women (6), child abuse
investigation (6), traumatic experiences (5), personality
disorder (4), attachment disorders (4), mental health
professionals (4), Health and Human (4)
children’s rights (75), human rights (28), false allegations
(19), child sexual abuse (13), United Nations (12), child
development (11), United States (10), child abuse (9), child
wellbeing (9), parenting style (8), multisystemic therapy
(8), mental health (7), health care (7), child rearing (6),
child mortality (5), physical integrity (5), youth rights (5),
American communities (5), parenting styles (5), mortality
rate (5), child deprivation (5), Child Development Index
(5), Council of Europe (5)
Table 13. Subject Analysis of CM-SP

and youth protection
(organization), health
issue (research,
organization)
Child and youth
protection
(organization,
research), abuse and
violence (sexual
abuse), health issue,
social factor (family
issue)

The subjects, child and youth protection and abuse and violence, appeared in all the four
large clusters, while different clusters had their own focuses. Cluster C1 focused more on the
laws and work of arts relevant to child and youth protection. Some laws were enacted for
children, such as the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act, while some were not for
specific groups, such as the Sexual Offences Act. In addition, an entry of C1 listed the songs
about child abuse, including eight songs written by the Mountain Goats.
The child and youth protection subject of C2 was not only about laws, but also about
organizations, technology, and news report. Different countries had various organizations for
child and youth protection. For instance, there was an Irish charity (Irish Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children) that protecting the children and in the United States the
Supreme Court of the United States also helped protect the children and youth. Some
organizations like the Internet Watch Foundation provided technologies and information which
contributed to child protection. For example, the Cleanfeed content blocking system used the

119

child abuse image content URL list offered by the Internet Watch Foundation to block child
pornography. News media like the Guardian also made contributions to child and youth
protection by news reporting.
Cluster C3 more focused on the research and organization of the child and youth
protection subject. For instance, the child abuse investigation team in the United Kingdom was
responsible for investigating child abuse and offenses related to minors. This cluster also
referred to the health issue subject and this subject had two lower-level subjects, which were
health research and health organization. Health professionals working in certain health
organizations conducted research and published their findings (e.g. trauma model of mental
disorders) in journals, such as the Journal of Psychohistory.
Compared with the other three clusters’ subjects, C4’s subjects were more diverse. Its
entries were relevant not only to child and youth protection, but also to abuse and violence,
child development, health issue, and social factor. The child and youth protection subject
referred to both organizations and research. As it was mentioned before, the courts accused
persons who acted child abuse. However, there were also false allegations which caused by
revenge or other motivations. For the research perspective, the world’s independent children’s
rights organization proposed the child development index to improve the wellbeing of children.
Another subject of C4 was health issue and this subject related to the entries about health
services, health care, and therapies.
4.2.2.2.

The Family Planning Topic

(1) The Family planning and reproductive health (FPRH) theme

120

Figure 18 presents the SOM display of the FPRH theme and the clusters of this theme
are illustrated in this figure. Nine large clusters and three small clusters were generated for this
theme. Clusters C1, C2, C5, C6, C8, and C9 were close to each other and their locations were
connected by blue areas, which means the entries in these clusters were quite relevant. Cluster
C7 also located close to C6, C8, and C9, but there were yellow and green areas between C7 and
the other three clusters. Meanwhile, C7 was far from C3 and C4. Therefore, the entries in C7
were not quite relevant to those in the other clusters. Clusters C3 and C4 located near each
other but far from the remaining clusters. Therefore, the entries in these two clusters had
connections with each other but did not share a lot of commons with the entries in the other
seven clusters. Table 14 lists the large clusters and their high-frequency terms/phrases and
subjects.

121

C2

C4

C1
C3
C6
C7

C5

C8

C9

Figure 18. SOM Display of FPRH
Clusters

C1

C2

C3

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
female condom (47), reproductive health (40), sperm
donation (33), donor sperm (33), sperm bank (30), sperm
donor (21), birth control (21), human rights (19), potential
donors (17), domestic violence (17), artificial insemination
(15), teen dating violence (15), partner violence (13), United
States (13), donor insemination (12), family planning (12)
reproductive rights (81), human rights (37), family planning
(37), United States (33), oral health (29), health care (28),
maternal mortality (24), birth control (22), maternal health
(20), rhythm method (19), United Nations (19), health
organization (19), sexual and reproductive health (17),
maternal deaths (16), developing countries (14), calendarbased methods (14), standard days method (14)
John Paul (61), birth control (53), family planning (51),
Theology of the Body (39), Catholic Church (36), natural
family (29), Supreme Court (27), natural family planning
122

Subjects
Family planning and
reproduction
(method, device),
abuse and violence
(domestic violence,
dating violence)
Family planning and
reproduction
(method), health
issue (problem,
organization),
woman protection
(law)
Woman protection
(law), family
planning and

(22), United States (18), reproductive health (10), sexual
intercourse (10), Humanae Vitae (9), Quiverfull adherents
(9), periodic abstinence (8), the Bible (8), reproductive
rights (8)

C4

C5

C6

C7

C8

C9

birth control (364), United States (109), Margaret Sanger
(92), New York (88), family planning (50), Planned
Parenthood (36), reproductive health (35), health
organization (33), induced abortion (23), latex condoms
(18), first trimester (17), medical abortion (17), health care
(17), unsafe abortion (17), Woman Rebel (16)
family planning (116), Title X (57), Planned Parenthood (44),
health care (22), United States (22), reproductive health
(19), sexual health (19), baby bonus (17), Hong Kong (16),
family planning services (16), Family Planning Association
(15), International Conference (14), sexuality education
(14), Planned Parenthood Federation (14), sperm banks
(12), public health (12), birth control (12)
Planned Parenthood (22), family planning (21), United
Nations (18), father’s quota (16), parental leave (10),
paternity leave (8), United States (8), reproductive health
(7), Conservative Party (5), Population Fund (5), Nations
Fund for Population (5), Jens Stoltenberg (4), Trivers–
Willard hypothesis (4), coercive abortion (4), Democratic
Party (4), human rights (4), State Department (4)
family planning (63), domestic violence (32), sex education
(30), birth control (13), Billings Ovulation Method (12),
reproductive health (9), violence during pregnancy (9),
married women (8), cervical mucus (8), health survey (7),
public health (7), research and development (7),
development solutions (6), Family Planning Association (6),
Research and Development Solutions (6)
family planning (41), reproductive health (13), leave of
absence (12), Family Planning Commission (9), Population
and Family Planning (9), Health and Family Planning (8),
Rama Rau (6), commuted leave (6), Journal of Family
Planning (6), Commodity Security (5), reproductive
healthcare (5), contraceptive security (5), International
Development (5), National Population (5), Sexual and
Reproductive Healthcare (5)
reproductive health (44), family planning (39), Couple to
Couple League (16), Deutsche Stiftung Weltbevoelkerung
123

reproduction
(religion)

Family planning and
reproduction
(organization,
method, device),
health issue
(problem), woman
protection (law,
news report)
Family planning and
reproduction
(policy,
organization,
method), health
issue (service)
Family planning and
reproduction
(organization,
policy, method,
research),
population issue
(organization)
Family planning and
reproduction
(education, method,
policy), abuse and
violence (domestic
violence), health
issue
Family planning and
production
(organization,
policy, research,
technology), health
issue (service),
population issue
Family planning and
reproduction

(15), Essential Medicines (8), Iran’s population (7), United
Nations (7), fertility rate (7), population growth (7), birth
control (6), natural family planning (6), Reproductive Health
Supplies Coalition (6), growth rate (5), birth rate (5),
German foundation (5), sexual and reproductive health (5)
Table 14. Subject Analysis of FPRH

(organization),
health issue
(treatment),
population issue
(organization)

According to Table 15, the family planning and reproduction subject occurred in every
cluster of the FPRH theme, so it was the salient subject of this theme. The associated entries of
the family planning and reproduction subject covered information about the family planning
and reproduction methods (e.g. sperm donation and artificial insemination), devices (e.g.
condom), woman protection (e.g. reproductive rights), organizations (e.g. the Planned
Parenthood Federation of America), policies (e.g. the father’s quota), research (e.g. the TriversWillard hypothesis), religion (e.g. Catholicism), and technologies (e.g. the Strategic Pathway to
Reproductive Health Commodity Security). Religion was a relatively special lower-level subject
of the family planning and reproduction subject, since it only appeared in one cluster. Pope
John Paul II gave a series of lectures, named the Theology of the Body, talking about the
Catholic theology of sexuality. Technology was another special lower-level subject, which
emerged from the entries in C8. A certain example was the Strategic Pathway to Reproductive
Health Commodity Security tool that was developed to help countries improve contraceptive
security.
Woman protection was another subject that had not been found in the previous topic
and themes. This subject had two lower-level subjects, woman protection law (e.g. abortion
rights) and news report (e.g. the Woman Rebel). Abortion rights were a kind of women’s rights.
The spread of women’s rights showed the movements of woman protection. Furthermore,
124

news reporting played an important role in women’s rights movements. For instance, the
Woman Rebel was a newsletter that contained the discussion of contraception.
Apart from family planning and reproduction and woman protection, the entries of the
FPRH theme related to population issues. There was a lower-level subjects generated from
these entries, population organization (e.g. the United Nations Fund for Population Activities).
The population organizations’ goals included promoting population development, empowering
women, protecting children and young people, improving the quality of people’s life, and so
forth.
Another subject, health issue, appearing in five clusters was also popular for the FPRH
theme. Similar to the health issue subject of the themes for Child Maltreatment, this subject
had health problem (e.g. unsafe abortion), organization (e.g. clinics), service (e.g. reproductive
healthcare), and treatment (e.g. essential medicines) as the lower-level subjects. Moreover,
two clusters had abuse and violence as a subject and the abuse and violence subject covered
the information about domestic violence and dating violence. The generation of these two
subjects shows the connection between the Family Planning topic and the Child Maltreatment
topic: they had some common subjects.
(2) The Human and environment (HE) theme
Figure 19 presents the SOM display of the HE theme and the clusters of this theme are
illustrated in this figure. Two clusters were generated for this theme. Since there were yellow
and green areas between these two clusters, the entries of the two clusters did not have strong

125

connections. Table 15 displays these two clusters, the high-frequency terms/phrases and
subjects of these clusters.

C1

C2

Figure 19. SOM Display of HE
Clusters

C1

C2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
futures studies (94), planetary boundaries (67), Gaia
Hypothesis (62), climate change (46), tragedy of the commons
(45), United States (28), earth system science (27), United
Nations (21), carbon dioxide (16), global warming (14),
existential risk (14), catastrophic risks (12), existential risks
(11), artificial intelligence (11), population growth (11), human
extinction (11)
United States (80), forced marriage (75), identity politics (42),
financial crisis (35), fertility rate (31), human rights (25),
reserve army (24), political demography (24), World Bank (23),
men and women (23), maternity leave (22), people smuggling
(21), New Feminists (21), migrant smuggling (19), Latin
America (17)
Table 15. Subject Analysis of HE

126

Subjects
Futures studies
(technology),
environment
issue (research,
problem),
population issue
Social factor,
population issue,
economy,
military, politics

The subjects of the HE theme were quite diverse and were very different from the first
theme of Family Planning. There was only one common subject found for the two clusters of
the HE theme, which was population issue. Different population-related issues were mentioned
by the associated entries of this subject, such as population growth, people smuggling, and so
on.
In addition to population issue, Cluster C1 had two other subjects, future studies and
environment issues. A widely discussed topic of future studies was artificial intelligence. For the
environment issue subject, some entries were relevant to research (e.g. earth system science),
while the others focused on existed or possible environment problems, like global warming and
catastrophic risks. Cluster C2 had three special subjects, which were economy (e.g. World Bank
and financial crisis), military (e.g. reserve army), and politics (e.g. political demography). The
five subjects introduced in this paragraph were not found for any other themes, which indicates
the uniqueness of the HE theme.
(3) The Population problems (PP) theme
Figure 20 presents the SOM display of the PP theme and the clusters of this theme are
illustrated in this figure. Two large clusters and a small cluster were generated from this theme.
The two large clusters located in the same large blue area, but there are some green cells
between them, which means the entries of these two clusters were not quite relevant to each
other. The two clusters’ high-frequency terms and phrases, and subjects were shown in Table
16.

127

C1

C2

Figure 20. SOM Display of PP
Clusters

C1

C2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
population growth (75), world population (47), human
population (33), United Nations (29), population planning (25),
United States (21), birth control (16), family planning (16),
developed countries (14), birth rates (14), carrying capacity
(12), Club of Rome (12), developing countries (11), food
production (11), population density (11), population control
(11), international migration (11), human migration (11)
world population (100), sex ratio (91), population growth (63),
official population (54), data templates (44), United Nations
(29), country’s population (28), United States (25), official
sources (22), population density (22), manual calculation (22),
population is not accurate (22), automatically calculate today’s
population (22), human population (19), population prospects
(19), template without providing justification (19)
Table 16. Subject Analysis of PP

128

Subjects
Population
issue (problem,
cause), family
planning and
reproduction
(method)

Population
issue (statistics)

The subjects of the PP theme, population issue and family planning and reproduction,
had been found within the previous themes, but some of its lower-level subjects were special
and only appeared in this theme. For the population issue subject, the entries of this theme
involved not only the population problems, but also the causes of the problems. For instance,
the increase of food production and international migration could both cause population
growth. Different from Cluster C1, Cluster C2 concentrated on population statistics. The entries
in C2 related to data sources, calculation methods, and measures of population statistics, and
the prediction of population as well.
4.2.2.3. The Women’s Health Topic
(1) The Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination (DVHS) theme
Figure 21 presents the SOM display of the DVHS theme and the clusters of this theme
are illustrated in this figure. Four large clusters and two small clusters were discovered for this
theme. Clusters C3 and C4 were all located in the same blue area. Therefore, the entries in
these two clusters were relevant to one another. Table 17 lists the clusters and their highfrequency terms and phrases, and subjects.

129

C1

C2
C3

C4

Figure 21. SOM Display of DVHS
Clusters

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

C1

sex ratio (81), missing women (65), gender inequality
(47), gender gap (45), transgender people (43), men
and women (40), United States (39), Gender Gap
Report (25), sexual harassment (21), labor force (16),
gender identity (16), female children (15), wage gap
(15), World Economic Forum (15), birth sex (14)

C2

C3

rape culture (73), hegemonic masculinity (65), gay
men (34), horror films (23), sexual violence (22),
sexual assault (20), rape victims (17), sexual
orientation (15), rape myths (15), South Africa (15),
violence against women (11), slasher films (10),
United States (9), victim blaming (9), mass media (9),
LGBT people (9)
gender gap (22), law enforcement (20), female child
(20), police officers (14), Wikimedia foundation (13),
New York Times (13), Wikipedia editors (12), Silicon
130

Subjects
Inequality and
discrimination
(healthcare, work),
minority group (LGBT,
woman), abuse and
violence (sexual
violence)
Minority group (LGBT,
woman), abuse and
violence (sexual
violence, heterosexist
violence)
Inequality and
discrimination (work,
research), minority

C4

Valley (11), gender bias (9), British Airways (8), New
Zealand (8), black women (8), technology industry (7),
female officers (6), sexual harassment (6)
glass cliff (28), triple oppression (20), black women
(15), Communist Party (9), leadership positions (7),
women executives (6), Michelle K (5), United States
(5), black feminist (5), gender roles (4), occupational
sexism (4), Claudia Jones (4), Socialist Party (4),
reverse sexism (4), glass ceiling (4), Supreme Court
(4), men and women (4)
Table 17. Subject Analysis of DVHS

group (woman), abuse
and violence (sexual
violence)
Inequality and
discrimination (work),
minority group (black,
woman), woman
protection
(organization,
research)

Most of the subjects, except the woman protection subject, found within the DVHS
theme were not revealed in the previous themes. The minority group subject occurred in all the
four clusters of this theme, so it was the most dominant subject of the DVHS theme. The
minority groups mentioned in the entries associated to this subject contained the LGBT people,
women, and the black (African Americans).
The inequality and discrimination subject and the abuse and violence subject appeared
in three clusters. The former subject had three lower-level subjects, which were healthcare
inequality and discrimination, inequality and discrimination in work, and inequality and
discrimination in research. Healthcare inequality and discrimination was reflected by the
“missing women” phenomenon. As it was demonstrated in the “Missing women” entry, this
phenomenon indicated that the number of women in a region was smaller than the expected
number of women, which was caused by sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, and
inadequate healthcare and nutrition for female children. Inequality and discrimination in work
was revealed by the relatively low labor force participation rate of women. Ryan and Haslam
(2005) proposed the concept of “glass cliff” which described the phenomenon that women

131

were likelier to be assigned precarious positions than men and thus had a higher risk of failure.
Moreover, some research studies also focused on inequality. For example, a survey discovered
that the Wikipedia editors were predominantly male. A general criticism of Wikipedia was its
systemic gender bias that this platform provided less articles and information about women
compared with men.
The abuse and violence subject had two lower-level subjects, sexual violence and
heterosexist violence. The findings imply that these two types of violence were the most
attractive violence-related subjects in the Women’s Health topic. The associated entries of the
abuse and violence subject mentioned not only different types of violence, but also the causes
of the violence. For instance, rape culture was one of the main causes of high rape rates in
certain countries, like India.
Women protection was another subject of the DVHS theme. Its associated entries were
about the organizations (e.g. the Supreme Court of the United States) and research (e.g. the
triple oppression theory) of women protection.
(2) The Health problems and risks (WH-HPR) theme
Figure 22 presents the SOM display of the WH-HPR theme and the clusters of this theme
are illustrated in this figure. Two clusters were generated for this theme. These two clusters
were close to each other and in the same blue area, which indicates that the entries in the two
clusters shared some similarities. Table 18 presents the high-frequency terms/phrases and
subjects of the two clusters.

132

C1

C2

Figure 22. SOM Display of WH-HPR
Clusters
C1

C2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
blood pressure (20), high blood pressure (11), bacterial
vaginosis (7), passive partner (7), active partner (6), chronic
hypertension (5), diseases of affluence (5), sexually
transmitted infections (4)
mental health (70), health care (53), United States (42),
medical anthropology (39), public health (30), African
Americans (23), heart disease (22), World Health
Organization (19), gender equality (17), gender polarization
(17), mental illness (16), sub-Saharan Africa (16), social
class (15), men and women (15), women’s health (14)
Table 18. Subject Analysis of WH-HPR

Subjects
Health issue
(problem)
Health issue
(service, research,
organization,
problem), inequality
and discrimination
(research)

The WH-HPR theme only had two subjects, health issue and inequality and
discrimination. Cluster C1 mainly concentrated on health problems, such as high blood pressure
133

and sexually transmitted infections. In this cluster, a frequently-used synonym of high blood
pressure was found, which was hypertension. The term “hypertension” was often used by
health professionals and the terms “high blood pressure” were usually used by the lay people.
Since Wikipedia is a user-generated platform, these two expressions were both utilized in the
Wikipedia entries.
The health issue subject of Cluster C2 had four lower-level subjects, including health
service (e.g. health care), research (e.g. medical anthropology), organization (e.g. the World
Health Organization), and problem (e.g. heart disease). Another subject of this cluster was
inequality and discrimination and this subject had a lower-level subject, research. For example,
an entry of this subject was about the “gender polarization” concept proposed by American
psychologist Sandra Bem (1995).
(3) The Medical and interdisciplinary subjects (MIS) theme
Figure 23 presents the SOM display of the MIS theme and the clusters of this theme are
illustrated in this figure. Four large clusters and two small clusters emerged from all the entries
of this theme. Two of the four clusters were either not close to each other or had green areas
between them. These results show that the entries of the four clusters were not quite relevant.
Table 19 lists the clusters, high-frequency terms and phrases, and subjects.

134

C1

C2
C3

C4

Figure 23. SOM Display of MIS
Clusters

C1

C2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
health care (68), family planning (68), United States (37),
public health (32), health disparities (28), rural areas (24),
health outcomes (24), structural violence (22), social
determinants of health (21), World Health Organization
(19), health equity (18), living conditions (16), spirit level
(15), life expectancy (15), socioeconomic status (14),
medical care (14), birth control (14)
United States (22), sexually transmitted disease (14),
reproductive health (13), facial prominence (9), social
epidemiology (8), intrauterine contraception (8), birth
control (8), women’s health (13), health and human (8),
family medicine patients (8), hormonal contraceptives (7),
CDC exploratory research (7), family planning (6), human
services (5), reproductive age (5), bisexual women (5),
sexual health (5), health and human services (5)
135

Subjects
Health issue (service,
problem, research,
organization), family
planning and
reproduction, abuse
and violence
(structural violence)
Health issue
(problem, research,
service), family
planning and
reproduction
(method), minority
group (LGBT)

C3

C4

Whitehall Study (25), pelvic floor (23), reproductive health
(21), Whitehall II (16), health care (16), reproductive rights
(13), heart disease (13), Russian women (13), coronary
heart disease (10), reproductive law and policy (8), Center
for Reproductive Law (8), women’s health (7), civil
servants (6), social class (6), mortality rate (6), live births
(6), risk factors (6), social determinants (6), blood pressure
(6), pelvic floor muscles (6)
social determinants of health (44), health care (43),
population health (35), reproductive health (33), maternal
mortality (30), oral health (29), World Health Organization
(23), family planning (23), maternal health (20), public
health (16), maternal deaths (14), health services (14),
prenatal care (13), developing countries (12), United
Nations (12), United States (12)
Table 19. Subject Analysis of MIS

Health issue
(research, problem,
service), family
planning and
reproduction (law,
organization), social
factor
Health issue
(problem, service,
organization),
population issue
(problem), family
planning and
reproduction

The health issue subject and the family planning and reproduction subject appeared in
all the four clusters, but each cluster of the MIS theme had their own unique subject: C1 had
the abuse and violence subject, C2 had the minority group subject, C3 had the social factor
subject, and C4 had the population issue subject. All the subjects of this theme were discovered
within the previous themes, while there was only one lower-level subject emerged from this
theme, which was the structural violence subject. Different from the previous types of violence,
structural violence was caused by social structure or social institution.
(4) The Support and protection (WH-SP) theme
Figure 24 presents the SOM display of the WH-SP theme and the clusters of this theme
are illustrated in this figure. Eight large clusters and five small clusters were discovered for this
theme. Clusters C1 to C7 were all located in the same blue area, it means that their entries had
similarities to some extent. Cluster C8 stayed in another blue area, and the yellow and green
areas separated it from the other clusters, which means its entries had no strong connections
136

with the entries of the other clusters. The eight large clusters and their high-frequency
terms/phrases and subjects were displayed in Table 20.

C1

C3

C2

C4

C7

C5

C8
C6

Figure 24. SOM Display of WH-SP
Clusters
C1

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
healthy people (17), Department of Health (12), black
women (9), Health and Human Services (9), women’s health
(8), disease prevention (6), Health Promotion (5), Human
Services Office (5), Office of Disease Prevention (5)
137

Subjects
Health issue
(organization,
problem, service),

minority group
(black)

C2

C3

C4

C5

C6

C7

Women’s health (42), Center for Women’s Health (14),
Health Sciences (13), Health Centre (10), Women’s Hospital
(10), AnMed Health (7), health services (7), OHSU Center (6),
women and newborns (6), Christie Street (5), Cancer Centre
(4), World War (4), health care (4), St. Michael’s Hospital (4),
Honest Body (4), maternity hospital (4), The Huffington Post
(4), Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (4), obstetric and
neonatal nurses (4)
Women’s health (38), health care (11), women’s studies
(10), Journal Citation Reports (8), Care for Women (6),
healthcare journal (5), impact factor (5), women’s studies
journals (4)
health education (138), health literacy (105), health
disparities (83), public health (69), health system (44),
reproductive health (43), University of Michigan (33), health
care (32), Medical School (31), health promotion (28),
United States (25), New York (24), Performance Indicators
for Grades (24), school health (23), health supplies (23)
United Nations (60), women’s health (59), public health
(41), health care (29), Sutter Health (22), UN Foundation
(18), New York (15), health research (14), health network
(12), University of Pittsburgh (11), San Francisco (10),
Women’s Health Research (10), Society for Women’s Health
(10), Medical Center (9), United States (9), Pittsburgh
Graduate School (9), School of Public Health (9)
women’s health (98), United States (57), public health (40),
health care (39), health education (35), Women’s Health
Center (34), Health and Human Services (26), social security
(22), College Hospital (20), feminist health centers (20),
United Nations (17), Department of Health Education (16),
Federal Security (13), Our Bodies Ourselves (13), Health
Education and Welfare (11), Boston Women’s Health Book
(11)
Women’s health (24), Planned Parenthood (21), Heart Truth
(20), Red Dress Collection (17), Conference on Planned
Parenthood (10), American Medical Women’s Association
(10), United Nations (7), United States (7), New York (5),
National Organization (5), First Ladies (5), sexual health (5),
health policy (5), heart disease (5), National Organization for
Men (5), Institute of Women’s Health (5), Women’s Health
and Development (5)
138

Health issue
(organization,
service)

Health issue
(service, research)
Health issue
(education,
problem,
organization,
service)
Health issue
(service,
organization,
research,
education),
population issue
(organization)

Health issue
(service, education,
organization, law)

Health issue
(organization, law,
problem, research),
family planning and
reproduction
(organization)

C8

equity feminism (9), gender feminism (7), tobacco
companies (5), United States (4), female physicians (4), Hoff
Sommers (4), medical school (4)
Table 20. Subject Analysis of WH-SP

Woman protection
(activity, research)

Table 20 shows that the health issue subject appeared in the first seven clusters
(Clusters C1 to C7) of the WH-SP theme, more than any other subjects of this theme. Therefore,
the health issue subject was the salient subject of the WH-SP theme. This subject had several
lower-level subjects, including health organizations (e.g. OHSU Center for Women’s Health),
services (e.g. obstetric and neonatal nurses), research (e.g. women’s studies journals), problems
(e.g. heart disease), education (e.g. Performance Indicators), and laws (e.g. Social Security Act).
Although all the lower-level subjects except health laws were found in the previous themes,
these lower-level subjects were related to some different content compared with those lowerlevel subjects of the previous themes. For instance, the health education subject of this theme
covered the content about the performance indicators which were used for student
assessment. The health law subject, which only occurred in this theme, referred to the entries
of health-related laws and policies, such as the Social Security Act and the policies developed by
the European Institute of Women’s Health.
The minority group subject, the population issue subject, the family planning and
reproduction subject, and the woman protection subject only appeared in one cluster,
respectively. Different from the other three subjects, the woman protection subject did not
occur together with the health issue subject, which indicates that there was no strong
connection between C8 and the other seven clusters. The entries in C8 were relevant to woman
protection activities and research. For example, many theorists proposed a series of feminism
139

theories (e.g. liberal feminism and gender feminism) so as to fight against gender inequality. A
certain instance was the history of women fighting for equal smoking rights.
4.2.3. Research Question One Results Summary
According to the results, Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and Women’s Health had
241, 150, and 207 associated entries, respectively. After examining the associated entries and
their high-frequency terms/phrases of each theme, the subjects of each theme were generated.
Tables 21 to 23 list the subjects of the identified themes and show the relations between the
themes and subjects for each topic. Table 21 demonstrates that the AVHS theme and the CMSP theme had various subjects, while the other two themes only had one or two subjects,
respectively. The CYFF theme and the CM-HPR theme concentrated on specific subjects. Since
the AVHS theme and the CM-SP theme had four common subjects, these two themes shared
some similarities and their entries were relevant to each other.
Subjects
Themes
Abuse, violence, harm, and
subordination
Children, youth, families and friends
Health problems and risks
Support and protection

Abuse and
violence

Health issue

Social factor

Children &
youth protection

Slaves

√

√

√

√

√

√
√

√
√

√
√

√

Table 21. Subjects of Child Maltreatment
Table 22 shows that the FPRH theme and the HE theme had very diverse subjects,
respectively. These two themes had only one common subject, which means that they were
quite different from each other. Different from the other two themes, the PP theme had only
two subjects, which implies that the associated entries of this theme focused on these two
subjects. Among all the subjects, the population issue subject was the only one appearing in all
140

the themes. Therefore, population issue was the most popular subject of the Family Planning
topic.
Subjects
Themes

Family planning and
reproduction

Abuse and
violence

Health
issue

Woman
protection

Population
issue

√

√

√

√

√

Family planning and reproductive
health
Human and environment
Population problems
Family planning and reproductive
health
Human and environment
Population problems

Future
studies

√
Environment
issue

√

√

√
√
Social factor

Economy

Military

Politics

√

√

√

√

Table 22. Subjects of Family Planning
Table 23 shows that the DVHS theme, the MIS theme, and the WH-SP theme had more
diverse subjects compared with the WH-HPR theme. In other words, the entries’ subjects of the
WH-HPR theme were more centralized than those of the other themes. Among the four
themes, the MIS theme and the WH-SP theme had more common subjects. Meanwhile, every
two of the four themes had one or more subjects in common with each other, which indicates
that these themes were relevant to each other to some extent.
Subjects
Themes
Discrimination, violence, harm,
and subordination
Health problems and risks
Medical and interdisciplinary
subjects
Supports and protection
Discrimination, violence, harm,
and subordination
Health problems and risks
Medical and interdisciplinary
subjects
Supports and protection

Inequality and
discrimination

minority group

violence

woman protection

√

√

√

√

√

√

√
family planning and reproduction

Social factor

√
population issue

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

Health issue

√

Table 23. Subjects of Women’s Health
141

√

Comparing all the three family-health-related topics, the results illustrate that among
the three topics, Child Maltreatment had less subjects than the other two topics, which means
that its subjects were more centralized, while the other topics’ subjects were more diverse. The
health issue subject and the social factor subject occurred in all the three topics, which shows
the connections among the three selected topics. Meanwhile, the other subjects reveal the
special features of each topic.
4.3.

Results of Research Question Two

Research question two intends to explore the evolution patterns of the internal
characteristics and external popularities of each selected topic. The internal characteristics of a
topic in a specific period was illustrated by the associated entries, subjects, and themes in the
period. The external popularity of a topic in a specific period was presented by the total
number of edits and views of its associated entries, and themes in the period. To explore the
evolution patterns of a specific topic, its internal characteristics and external popularities in the
four defined periods (2010 to 2011, 2012 to 2013, 2014 to 2015, and 2016 to 2017) were
analyzed and compared.
4.3.1. Entry Growth in Each Period
As it was shown in Table 7 in Section 4.1, there were new entries created in each theme
during the investigated eight years (2010 to 2017). Since no investigated entry was deleted
from 2010 to 2017, the growth of the entries in each theme was revealed by the generation of
the new entries. Therefore, Table 7 shows that the numbers of the associated entries in AVHS,
CM-HPR, CM-SP, FPRH, DVHS, WH-HPR, MIS, and WH-SP increased in each defined period. The
142

number of the associated entries in HE kept the same in Period 1 (2010 to 2011). The numbers
of the associated entries in CYFF, HE, and PP did not change during the fourth period (2016 to
2017). The increases of the entries in the defined themes caused the increases of the associated
entries in the selected topics.
Appendix C displays the associated entries in each theme during each investigated
period. Each number in the last four columns represents an entry in a specific theme and the
corresponding entry is demonstrated in Appendix A. The data in Appendix C illustrates that the
entries in all the themes increased from 2010 to 2017. These findings show the increases of the
entries in all the selected topics. Therefore, both Appendix C and Table 7 reflect that the
number of the associated entries in each topic kept increasing during the four periods.
Appendix D demonstrates the new entries generated in each investigated time period. These
new entries reveal the Wikipedia editors’ new interests and focuses during each period.
4.3.1.1.

The Child Maltreatment Topic

After examining the AVHS theme of the Child Maltreatment topic, it shows that the
entries created during the first period mainly introduced different abuse types, such as
narcissistic abuse, domestic violence, disability abuse, and so on. The other entries created in
this period were related to child abuse cases or scandals reported in 2010 and 2011 or earlier
(e.g. Collingswood Boys).
During the second, third, and fourth periods, there were two types of new entries: (1)
the entries about child abuse cases or scandals reported in the three periods or earlier (e.g.
Kasur child sexual abuse scandal); (2) the entries demonstrating the child abuse and child
143

protection status in specific regions (e.g. Child abuse in New Zealand). The rest entries
presented some particular abusive behaviors (e.g. Isolation to facilitate abuse) or child abuse
types (e.g. Athletes and domestic violence).
Regarding the CYFF theme, four new entries were created in the second period, much
more than the other three periods. These four entries all concentrated on the attachment
theory and family-related problems. The research of attachment theory was first introduced in
1960s and this theory has been developing for more than fifty years. The psychology of religion
field adopted this theory in 1990 and subsequently its development expanded.
The CM-HPR theme had four new entries in the first period, and the rest three periods
only had one new entry, respectively. The new entries in the first period were all relevant to the
impacts of child abuse on children. The theories and knowledge included in these four new
entries were all proposed much earlier than the time these entries created.
The new entries created in the CM-SP theme referred to research (e.g. journals),
organizations (e.g. International Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect),
technologies (e.g. Child abuse image content list), works of arts (e.g. List of songs
about child abuse), and laws and policies (e.g. Karly’s Law) that protected children from being
abused, as well as the treatment (e.g. Multisystemic therapy) that aimed to help the chronically
violent youth. Among these entries, the “List of songs about child abuse” entry was special
because it was a summary of child-abuse-related songs. Another special entry was
National Child Abuse Prevention Month created in 2016. The National Child Abuse Prevention

144

Month was designated in 1983 and U.S. President Barack Obama issued a Presidential
proclamation in 2016 which recommitted the observance.
4.3.1.2.

The Family Planning Topic

Among the three themes of Family Planning, only the FPRH theme had relatively more
new entries (37 entries) created from 2010 to 2017, the HE theme and the PP theme had only
one and four new entries, respectively. For the PP theme, the entries created in the third period
summarized the organizations and researchers (e.g. List of people that have expressed views
relating to overpopulation as a problem, and List of population concern organizations)
concerning population problems.
Regarding the FPRH theme, most of the entries generated in the four periods were
about the family planning and reproduction organizations (e.g. Society for Family Health
Nigeria), research (e.g. Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care), policies (e.g.
Father’s quota), and techniques and methods (e.g. Fertility monitor), and the family planning
status in specific regions (e.g. Family planning in the United States) as well.
The background of the generation of the “Non-consensual condom removal” entry was
special. This entry was created in 2017, but its synonym “stealthing” had been used in the gay
community since 2014 or earlier. The concept and use of “non-consensual condom removal”
and “stealthing” spread on Websites and forums since then. However, the public were not
aware until an article about non-consensual condom removal was published and widely
reported by news and media outlets in 2016 (Brodsky, 2017). The news reporting of this article
triggered the generation of the Nonconsensual condom removal entry on Wikipedia.
145

4.3.1.3.

The Women’s Health Topic

Among the four themes of Women’s Health, the WH-SP theme had much more new
entries in the four investigated periods than the other three themes. The new entries in the
DVHS theme were related to sexism, like sexism in workplace (e.g. Women in law enforcement)
and sexism in specific regions (e.g. Discrimination against girls in India). The entries in the WHHPR theme and the MIS theme focused on women’s health issues, including the research of
women’s health issues (e.g. Women’s Health Issues), the determinants of health issues (e.g.
Social determinants of health in poverty), and women’s health status in specific regions (e.g.
Women’s reproductive health in Russia).
The new entries in the WH-SP theme concentrated on the techniques and methods (e.g.
Gynography), research (e.g. Black Women’s Health Study), organizations (e.g. EuroHealthNet),
training and education (e.g. Oregon Health and Science University Center for Women’s Health),
services (e.g. Midwife), and works of arts (e.g. The Honest Body Project) which aimed to
support and protect women and improve women’s health.
The generation of the “The Honest Body Project” entry was triggered by the creation of
a project. This project was created by photographer Natalie McCain and the creator of the
corresponding entry was NatalieRMcCain. The photographer’s name and the creator’s account
indicate that it was Natalie McCain herself who generated the “The Honest Body Project” entry.
4.3.2. Changes of Subjects
The internal characteristics of the three selected topics in Period 4 (2016 to 2017) were
demonstrated in Section 4.2. The entries in each theme were presented and the SOM display
146

and subjects of each theme were illustrated. To explore the internal characteristic evolution of
each selected topic, the changes of the subjects in the topic from one period to another were
explored. For each theme of a selected topic, the frequencies of its two-word/three-word/fourword terms and phrases were counted and the frequency difference of each term/phrase from
one period to next period was calculated. In other words, for each term/phrase, the difference
of its frequency in Period 2 and its frequency in Period 1, the difference of Periods 2 and 3, and
the difference of Periods 3 and 4 were all calculated. The terms/phrases of each theme were
ranked according to their frequency differences and the terms/phrases whose frequencies
increased or decreased the most from one period to next were extracted from the rankings.
Tables 24 to 34 display the top 20 terms/phrases of the rankings and only the terms/phrases
whose frequencies increased or decreased more than 4 are included in the eleven tables. The
subjects relevant to the terms/phrases were also included in these tables. The numbers in each
table show the frequency differences. If a term’s frequency decreased from Periods 1 to 2, its
frequency difference would be negative and vice versa.
4.3.2.1.

The Child Maltreatment Topic

(1) The Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination (AVHS) theme
Table 24 shows that although the frequencies of some terms/phrases (e.g. Catholic
sexual abuse scandal and corporal punishment) about abuse and violence decreased in specific
periods, the total frequency of the abuse-related terms/phrases increased rapidly during the
investigated periods in the AVHS theme. Among all the lower-level subjects of abuse and
violence, the total frequencies of the terms/phrases related to sexual abuse and child abuse
increased in all the four periods. Some terms, whose frequencies increased, were related to
147

both two lower-level subjects, such as child sexual abuse, child pornography, and child
prostitution.
Time
Period

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
human trafficking (-135), South America (-12),
Frequency
Eastern Europe (-9), West Africa (-8), domestic
Decreasing
violence (-7), Western Europe (-7), family violence
Terms
(-6), male victims (-5)
sexual abuse (126), sex ratio (119), child abuse
(110), BBC News (98), Penn State (89), sex abuse
(87), social undermining (70), United States (68),
Frequency child sexual abuse (66), sex trafficking (64), New
Increasing York (59), child sex (59), child pornography (37),
sexual exploitation (32), Daily Telegraph (32),
Terms
abuse cases (29), human rights (29), sex-selective
abortion (26), law enforcement (25), trafficking
victims (24), social support (24)
Catholic sexual abuse scandal (-9), social
undermining (-7), trafficking victims (-6), Catholic
Frequency
sex abuse cases (-6), coercive persuasion (-6),
Decreasing
forced labour (-6), New York Times (-5), Daily
Terms
News (-5), high rates (-5), school corporal
punishment (-5)
domestic violence (136), sexual abuse (131), child
abuse (85), corporal punishment (79), human
rights (71), violence against women (65), United
Nations (62), sexual exploitation (50), New York
Frequency
(48), BBC News (42), childhood experiences (41),
Increasing
partner violence (35), child sexual abuse (34),
Terms
family violence (33), adverse childhood
experiences (32), World Health Organization (31),
sex ratio (28), mental health (26), punishment of
children (26), parental alienation (26)
corporal punishment (-18), Rochdale sex
trafficking (-14), Taylor and Francis (-14),
termination of pregnancy (-12), sex trafficking (8), American Psychological Association (-7), abuse
Frequency of children (-7), National Council on Family (-7),
Decreasing Council on Family Relations (-7), sex gang (-6),
prisoners of war (-6), sex grooming (-6), human
Terms
rights (-5), Global Initiative (-5), Daily Mail (-5),
emotional abuse (-5), primary school (-5),
intimate terrorism (-5), Child and Youth
Protection (-5)
148

Subjects
Abuse and violence
(domestic violence),
human trafficking

Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse, child
abuse), children and
youth protection (news
reporting), social factor

Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse, emotional
abuse, physical abuse),
social factor, children
and youth protection
(news reporting)
Abuse and violence
(domestic violence,
sexual abuse, child
abuse, physical abuse,
woman abuse), children
and youth protection
(news reporting,
organization), social
factor (family issue)
Abuse and violence
(physical abuse, sexual
abuse, emotional
abuse), family planning
and reproduction
(method, organization),
health issue
(organization), children
and youth protection
(news reporting,
organization), social
factor (family issue)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

sexual abuse (156), child sexual abuse (62), Penn
State (35), sexual exploitation (33), United States
(32), sexual activity (26), Bryn Alyn (25), sexual
assault (23), indecent assault (20), BBC News (19),
child maltreatment (19), violence against children
(18), South Yorkshire Police (17), adverse
childhood experiences (15), abuse scandal (15),
child prostitution (15), child neglect (15), localised
grooming (15), human trafficking (14), sexselective abortion (14)

Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse, child
abuse, emotional
abuse), children and
youth protection (news
reporting, organization),
human trafficking, family
planning and
reproduction (method)

Table 24. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the AVHS Theme
Apart from the abuse and violence subject, the total frequency of children and youth
protection rose from Periods 1 to 4. This subject had two lower-level subjects, which were news
reporting and organization. The total frequency of the terms/phrases about news reporting
grew during all the periods. BBC News appeared in all the three comparisons, which means that
it played an important role in children and youth protection. These findings demonstrate that
the Wikipedia editors paid more attentions to child abuse, sexual abuse, and child and youth
protection from Periods 1 to 4.
(2) The Children, youth, families and friends (CYFF) theme
Table 25 shows that the total frequency of the terms/phrases about social factor,
especially family issue, kept increasing from Periods 1 to 4 in the CYFF theme. Comparing of
Periods 1 and 2, four of the frequency increasing terms were related to the attachment theory.
As it was mentioned before, these were three entries about this theory created in the second
period. The increases of the attachment-theory-related terms were caused by the generation of
the corresponding entries.
Time
Period

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

149

Subjects

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Oxford University (-11), antisocial behavior (-6),
Decreasing
marriage and family (-6)
Terms
United States (52), family members (17), child
support (16), Child Development (15),
Frequency attachment figure (14), attachment security
Increasing (13), extended family (11), domestic violence
(8), nuclear family (6), men and women (6),
Terms
attachment theory (5), family economics (5),
individual differences (5)
Frequency
Decreasing Terms
men and women (17), United States (15),
nuclear family (11), United Nations (11),
Frequency
domestic violence (10), family life (7), gender
Increasing
equality (7), gender roles (6), child abuse (5),
Terms
nurture kinship (5), raising children (5), equal
rights (5)
Frequency
maternity leave (-8), men and women (-5),
Decreasing
working mothers (-5)
Terms
Frequency United States (10), marriage and family (8),
Increasing father’s rights (8), New York (5), father’s rights
Terms
movement (5)

Health issue (problem),
social factor (family issue)

Social factor (family issue),
abuse and violence
(domestic violence)

Social factor (family issue),
abuse and violence
(domestic violence, child
abuse), inequality and
discrimination
Woman protection,
inequality and
discrimination (work)
Social factor (family issue),
man protection

Table 25. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the CYFF Theme
An interesting finding was that the frequencies of the terms about inequality and
discrimination increased slightly from Periods 2 to 3 but decreased slightly from Periods 3 to 4.
According to Table 25, the discussion about gender equality, gender roles, and equal rights rose
from Periods 2 to 3. The discussion about maternity leave and working mothers reduced from
Periods 3 to 4. To the contrary, the discussion about father’s rights grew from Periods 3 to 4.
These finding indicate that the Wikipedia editors’ interests in inequality and discrimination
increased first and then decrease, while their interests in father’s rights rose in the last period.
(3) The Health problems and risks (CM-HPR) theme

150

The top frequency increasing/decreasing terms and phrases in the CM-HPR theme, and
the associated subjects of these terms/phrases were displayed in Table 26. Considering both
the frequency increasing and decreasing terms about health issue, the total frequency of terms
related to this subject increased in the four periods, which implies that the Wikipedia editors’
interests in health-related topics grew from 2010 to 2017. However, a particular finding
illustrates that the term frequency of Disease Control and Prevention decreased rapidly from
Periods 1 to 2 (the frequency difference was -46).
Time
Period

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

Health issue
(organization,
problem,
cause), abuse
and violence
(physical abuse),
children and
youth
protection (law)
Health issue
(problem,
service,
organization,
treatment),
abuse and
violence
(domestic
violence)

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

Disease Control and Prevention (-46), traumatic stress (15), sexual abuse (-12), heart disease (-11), population
health (-10), social determinants of health (-9), complex
trauma (-7), Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (-7), foster
children (-6), risk factors (-6), physical abuse (-6), van Der
Kolk (-6), conduct problems (-5), clinical psychology (-5),
foster parent (-5)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

people with BPD (77), infant mortality (68), emotion
regulation (42), personality disorder (33), borderline
personality disorder(31), mortality rate (21), foster care
(19), blunted affect (15), substance abuse (14), birth
weight (12), conduct disorder (11), bipolar disorder (10),
domestic violence (9), oppositional defiant disorder(9),
substance use order(9), emotional regulation (9), drug
abuse (8), psychiatric association (8), diagnostic criteria
(8), personality disorders (8), flat affect (8), New York(8)

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

substance abuse (-9), oppositional defiant disorder (-6)

Health issue
(problem)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

Washington DC (15), infant mortality (14), child molesters
(12), conduct problems (11), sudden infant death (11),
personality disorder (10), antisocial behavior (10), Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome (10), conduct disorder (9),
mortality rate (8), antisocial personality (8), sexual abuse
(8), traumatic stress (8), women’s health (7), assessment
and treatment (7), chronic stress (7), determinants of
health (7), borderline personality (6), Blanchard R (6),
child pornography (6), sexual behavior (6)

Health issue
(problem,
cause,
research), abuse
and violence
(child abuse,
sexual abuse)

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Subjects

151

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

drug abuse (-6), Cantor JM (-6), van Der Kolk (-5),
Blanchard R (-5)

Health issue
(problem,
research)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

women’s health (50), United States (35), health care (21),
United Nations (21), developing countries (18), World
Health Organization (17), developed countries (16),
substance use disorders (14), infant mortality (13),
mental health (13), New York (12), borderline personality
(12), public health (10), mortality rate (9), Child Health
and Human Development (8), family members (8),
substance abuse (8), health issues (7), disease control (7),
personality disorder (6)

Health issue
(service,
organization,
problem)

Table 26. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the CM-HPR Theme
(4) The Support and protection (CM-SP) theme
Table 27 includes the terms/phrases whose frequencies increased/decreased the most
from one period to next in the CM-SP theme. After examining all the frequency
increasing/decreasing terms/phrases, it shows that the total frequencies of the abuse and
violence subject, the children and youth protection subject, and the social factor subject all
increased during the investigated periods. It reveals that the Wikipedia editors paid more and
more attention to these three subjects from Periods 1 to 4.
Time
Period

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

family members (-7), Jehovah’s witnesses (-6), child
wellbeing (-6), attachment parenting (-5), parenting
style (-5)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

child abuse (50), sexual abuse (37), Amber Alert (27),
child sexual abuse (20), cognitive development (17),
child protection (16), Watch Tower Society (14),
Child Abuse and Neglect (14), Department of Health
(11), Haut de la Garenne (9), Catholic Church (8),
United States (7), Supreme Court (7), Health and
Human Services (7), marriage and family (7), family
therapy (6), parental investment (6), child
development (5), social work (5), United Kingdom
(5), alert system (5)
152

Subjects
Social factor (family
issue), children and
youth protection
(organization)
Abuse and violence
(child abuse, sexual
abuse), children and
youth protection
(technology,
organization,
research), health
issue (treatment),
social factor (family
issue)

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

family therapy (-18), attachment theory (-12), bodies
of elders (-9), mandatory reporting (-9), substance
abuse (-8), family members (-8), Journal of Family (7), Juvenile Justice (-6), Cassidy J (-6), Developmental
Psychology (-5), attachment theory research (-5)

Health issue
(treatment,
research), social
factor (family issue),
children and youth
protection (law)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

sexual abuse (139), child sexual abuse (101),
Commission into Institutional Responses (51), child
abuse (40), Amber Alert (27), Royal Commission
(27), corporal punishment (25), child protection (21),
Children Act (20), attachment figure (15), Jehovah’s
witnesses (11), parenting styles (10), child’s needs
(10), Save the Children (10), child maltreatment (9),
missing children (9), Human Development (8), Blehar
M (8), human rights (8), parenting style (8), New
South Wales (8)

Abuse and violence
(sexual abuse, child
abuse, physical
abuse), children and
youth protection
(organization, law,
technology), social
factor (family issue)

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

Save the Children (-11), Force Report (-10),
attachment style (-6)

Children and youth
protection
(organization), social
factor (family issue)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

attachment parenting (143), sexual abuse (93), child
sexual abuse (73), child abuse (58), Commission into
Institutional Responses (53), New York (31), Royal
Commission (27), parental investment (26),
mandatory reporting (20), Child Abuse Prevention
(17), child protection (16), Child Abuse and Neglect
(16), United States (16), Catholic church (13), abuse
inquiry (11), case study (11), foster care (10), child
maltreatment (9), child care (9), sexual selection (9)

Social factor (family
issue), abuse and
violence (sexual
abuse, child abuse),
children and youth
protection
(organization, law)

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Table 27. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the CM-SP Theme
For the children and youth protection subject, many of the relevant frequency increasing
terms/phrases of this subject were about the organizations and laws of children and youth
protection, which implies that these organizations and laws played an increasingly important
role in children and youth protection. Moreover, there were two phrases, “Amber Alert” and
“alert system”, referring to the technologies that helped protect children and youth. It reveals
that the Wikipedia editors’ interests in the children and youth protection organizations, laws,
and technologies all increased from Periods 1 to 4.

153

4.3.2.2. The Family Planning Topic
(1) The Family planning and reproductive health (FPRH) theme
Table 28 contains the terms/phrases that increased/decreased the most in the FPRH
theme during the investigated periods, and the associated subjects of these terms/phrases as
well. Although some specific terms’ frequencies reduced, the overall frequency increases of the
terms about health issue, family planning and reproduction, and population issue revealed that
the Wikipedia editors’ interests in these subjects kept growing.
Time
Period

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

Disease Control and Prevention (-46), the eugenics
(-21), German Foundation for World (-14), World
Population (-8), human heredity (-8), World War (7), 20th century (-7), sperm donors (-6),
Population Research (-6), birth control politics (-6),
birth control movement (-6), teenage pregnancy (5), Couple to Couple League (-5), University of
California (-5), history of birth control (-5)

Health issue
(organization), family
planning and
reproduction
(research, method,
organization),
population issue
(research), woman
protection (activity)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

sex ratio (120), family planning (95), reproductive
health (86), infant mortality (66), birth control
(62), United States (59), Planned Parenthood (41),
female condom (31), sex-selective abortion (28),
reproductive coercion (27), domestic violence
(25), health care (23), mortality rate (22),
International Conference (19), United Nations
(18), one-child policy (17), developing countries
(17), health organization (16), prenatal care (16),
ratio at birth (15)

Family planning and
reproduction (law,
policy, organization),
health issue (problem,
organization, service),
abuse and violence
(domestic violence),
population issue
(organization)

reproductive coercion (-17), paid leave (-17),
domestic violence (-12), birth control sabotage (6)

Family planning and
reproduction (policy,
method), abuse and
violence (domestic
violence)

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Subjects

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

154

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

family planning (67), sex ratio (41), parental leave
(40), United States (40), Planned Parenthood (31),
New York (31), birth control (29), maternity leave
(25), birth sex (22), United Nations Population
Fund (19), human rights (18), infant mortality (17),
sex selection (17), women’s health (17), sexselective abortion (16), reproductive rights (14),
health organization (13), men and women (13),
ovulation method (13), Billings Ovulation Method
(11)

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

Catholic church (-15), termination of pregnancy (10), ovulation method (-6), population control (6), Roman Catholic church (-5)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

Family planning and
reproduction (policy,
organization), health
issue (organization,
problem), population
issue (organization),
woman protection

Family planning and
reproduction
(method, religion),
population issue
Family planning and
family planning (82), Planned Parenthood (72),
reproduction
birth control (50), United States (42), reproductive
(organization, policy,
health (37), maternity leave (32), one-child policy
method, education,
(31), health care (31), parental leave (30), sex
law), health issue
education (29), human rights (23), United Nations
(organization,
Population Fund (20),Supreme Court (20), New
service), population
York (16), mortality rate (16), infant mortality (14),
issue (organization),
sex-selective abortion (14), sex ratio (13), sexuality
abuse and violence,
education (11), violence against women (11),
woman protection
Hong Kong (11)
(law)

Table 28. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the FPRH Theme
Among the lower-level subjects of health issue and population issue, the content about
health organizations (e.g. the Planned Parenthood clinics) and population organizations (e.g.
the United Nations Population Fund) were enhanced. The terms about family planning and
reproduction policies and laws also grew from one period to next, especially the terms about
parental leave, maternity leave, and abortion rights. There was only one lower-level subject
whose related terms decreased from Periods 3 to 4 in the family planning and reproduction
subject, which was religion. When examining the associated entries of this lower-level subject,
it shows that some religious traditions regarded abortion as murder and allowed only natural
methods of pregnancy avoidance. These findings demonstrate that the Wikipedia editors had

155

increasing interests in reproduction rights and benefits, while their interests in traditional
reproduction methods decreased.
(2) The Human and environment (HE) theme
Table 29 shows that the subjects of the HE theme became more and more diverse
during the investigated periods. During all the periods, the frequencies of the terms related to
social factor kept increasing. Different from social factor, the content about other subjects in
this theme did not keep increasing all the time but increased in specific periods. For instance,
from Periods 2 to 3, the content about human development increased. From Periods 2 to 4, the
content about futures studies kept growing. These results reveal that the Wikipedia editors’
focuses of the HE theme became more diverse than before as time went by.
Time
Period

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
Frequency
parenting styles (-9), Gaia hypothesis (-8),
Decreasing
social protection (-5)
Terms
a comedy series (28), planetary boundaries
(22), forced marriage (21), United States (18),
voluntary human extinction (16), New York
(14), Jean Stapleton (13), financial crisis (12),
Frequency
global recession (11), Carroll O’Connor (10),
Increasing
United Nations (9), banking system (9), Rob
Terms
Reiner (8), identity politics (7), maternity leave
(7), Sally Struthers (7), New York Times (7),
fertility rate (6), reserve army (6), middle class
(5), conditional cash transfer (5)
Frequency
Decreasing All in the Family (-6)
Terms
forced marriage (38), earth system science
(26), human rights (17), United States (15),
Frequency
Gaia hypothesis (11), human development
Increasing
(10), existential risk (7), United Nations (6),
Terms
reserve army (6), New York Times (6), United
Kingdom (6), gender equality (6), Futures
156

Subjects
Environment issue
(research), social factor
(family)
Social factor (family issue),
abuse and violence,
population issue
(problem), economy
(policy), inequality and
discrimination, family
planning and reproduction
(policy), military

Social factor (family)
Abuse and violence,
environment issue
(research), human
development, military,
futures studies, social
factor (family issue)

Research (5), catastrophic risks (5), British
Columbia (5)
Frequency
Decreasing work-life balance (-9), New York Times (-6)
Terms

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

United States (18), futures studies (16),
identity politics (13), fertility rate (12), tragedy
of the commons (8), forced marriage (6),
United Nations (5), European countries (5),
Gaia hypothesis (5), Great Recession (5), New
Brunswick (5), strategic foresight (5)

Social factor (lifestyle)
Futures studies, inequality
and discrimination, family
planning and
reproduction, abuse and
violence, social factor
(family issue),
environment issue
(research), economy,
population issue
(problem)

Table 29. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the HE Theme
(3) The Population problems (PP) theme
The high frequency increasing/decreasing terms/phrases and their associated subjects
in different periods in the PP theme were demonstrated in Table 30. All the terms listed in this
table are related to population issue, including population problems, population policies, and
censuses. The result shows that the terms about population problems decreased from Periods 1
to 2 but increased from Periods 2 to 4. The terms about population policies increased from
Periods 1 to 3, and then decreased from Periods 3 to 4. The census subject kept decreasing
from Periods 2 to 4.
Time
Period

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

Subjects

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms

list of countries (-6), Soviet Union (-5), population figures
(-5)

Population
issue (problem,
policy)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

official population (24), sex ratio (27), birth sex ratio (18),
population growth (14), world population (11), human
sex (7), global population (7), population control (6), New
York (6), human population (5), fertility rate (5)

Population
issue (policy)

157

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Decreasing
Terms
Frequency
Increasing
Terms
Frequency
Decreasing
Terms
Frequency
Increasing
Terms

United States (-9), Census Bureau (-6), Population Clock (5), 19th century (-5), 2008 census (-5), preliminary 2012
census (-5)
population growth (24), human population (19), official
population (14), population control (11), carrying
capacity (8), world population (7), sovereign states (6)
population control (-28), 2010 census (-23), 2012 census
(-21), 2011 census (-21), dependent territories (-7),
census result (-6), youth bulge (-5), 2014 census (-5)
Country’s population (22), population growth (19), world
population (9), New York (9), list of countries (9), million
people (9), United States (8), human overpopulation (7),
Cambridge University (6), human population growth (6)

Population
issue (census)
Population
issue (policy,
problem)
Population
issue (policy,
census)
Population
issue (problem)

Table 30. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the PP Theme
4.3.2.3. The Women’s Health Topic
(1) The Discrimination, violence, harm, and subordination (DVHS) theme
Table 31 presents the terms/phrases whose frequencies changed the most from one
period to next in the DVHS theme. During all the periods, the terms about abuse and violence,
inequality and discrimination, and minority group kept growing. One lower-level subject of
abuse and violence, sexual violence, increased in all the periods, and another lower-level
subject, domestic violence, increased from Periods 1 to 2, and Periods 3 to 4. The increase of
the terms relevant to female genital mutilation mainly caused the growth of domestic violence.
Time
Period
Period 1
VS.
Period 2

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
Frequency
Decreasing a history of women (-9), US Department (-5)
Terms

158

Subjects
Inequality and
discrimination (work),
minority group
(woman)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

female genital (92), female genital mutilation (73),
female circumcision (40), hegemonic masculinity
(39), human rights (38), New York (34), United
States (29), gender apartheid (29), United Nations
(27), gender identity (23), men and women (21),
transgender people (20), age discrimination (18),
rape culture (18), Glick P (16), World Health
Organization (16), genital cutting (14), Oxford
University (14), South Africa (14), gender roles
(13), sexual assault (13), Islamic law (13)

genital mutilation (-32), female circumcision (-30),
female genital (-29), Islamic law (-13), South
Frequency
Carolina (-9), gender identity (-8), Type III (-7),
Decreasing
Hosken Report (-6), Glick P (-5), Oxford University
Terms
(-5), World Health Organization (-5), medical
journal (-5), Agrarian System (-5)
Period 2
VS.
Period 3
Frequency
Increasing
Terms

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

New York (50), gender gap (39), sex ratio (31), first
female (25), rape culture (23), gender inequality
(22), age discrimination (19), missing women (19),
New York Times (18), women and girls (18),
United States (16), men and women (16),
hegemonic masculinity (15), glass cliff (15), victim
blaming (11), male privilege (11), sexual violence
(10), gender equality (10), gender bias (10),
transgender people (9), women and children (8)

Frequency
Decreasing New Zealand (-5)
Terms
men and women (42), missing women (37),
United States (30), gender gap (23), sexual assault
(20), genital mutilation (20), transgender people
Frequency (17), triple oppression (16), sexual violence (15),
Increasing South Africa (13), women’s rights (11), New York
(9), gender bias (9), rape victims (9), global gender
Terms
gap (9), gender roles (9), violence against women
(9), labor force (9), sex differences (9), pay gap (9),
gender gap report (9)

Abuse and violence
(domestic violence,
sexual violence),
inequality and
discrimination (society,
economy, work),
minority group (LGBT),
woman protection
(organization), health
issue (organization)
Abuse and violence
(domestic violence),
inequality and
discrimination
(research), health issue
(organization,
research)
Inequality and
discrimination
(healthcare, work),
abuse and violence
(sexual violence),
minority group (LGBT,
woman)
Inequality and
discrimination (work)
Inequality and
discrimination
(healthcare, work),
abuse and violence
(sexual violence,
domestic violence),
minority group (LGBT,
woman), woman
protection

Table 31. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the DVHS Theme
The content about inequality and discrimination focused on different aspects in
different time periods. For instance, the interests about inequality in society, economy, and
work increased from Periods 1 to 2, while from Periods 2 to 4 the interests about inequality in

159

healthcare grew. For the minority group subject, the content about LGBT people increased in all
the investigated periods. When examining the high-frequency terms/phrases about LGBT, it
shows that “transgender people” occurred the most. In other words, from Periods 1 to 4, the
Wikipedia editors paid increasing attention to the LGBT group, especially the transgender
people.
(2) The Health problems and risks (WH-HPR) theme
The most highly increasing/decreasing terms/phrases and their associated subjects in
the WH-HPR theme are listed in Table 32. This table shows that the terms about the health
issue subject and the family planning and reproduction subject increased in all the periods.
From Periods 1 to 2, the increasing terms about family planning and reproduction were related
to family planning and reproduction organizations (e.g. United Nations Population Fund), while
in the following periods, the terms were related to family planning and reproduction methods
(e.g. induced abortion and medical abortion).
Time
Period

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
Frequency
Disease Control and Prevention (-43), medical
Decreasing
dictionary (-5)
Terms
infant mortality (62), United States (40), mortality
rate (38), health organization (36), health care (34),
World Health Organization (29), public health (25),
Frequency reproductive health (23), developing countries (18),
Increasing infant mortality rate (17), Sub-Saharan Africa (14),
family planning (12), urban development (10), men
Terms
and women (10), ovarian cancer (9), New York (9),
drinking water (9), determinants of health (9), heart
disease (8), infant death (8), United Nations (8)
Frequency
Decreasing Today’s Evidence (-15), Tomorrow’s Agenda (-15)
Terms
160

Subjects
Health issue
(organization)
Health issue
(problem,
organization, service,
cause), family
planning and
reproduction
(organization)
Health issue
(organization),

woman protection
(organization)

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

ovarian cancer (102), epithelial ovarian cancer (18),
infant mortality (16), United States (13), gender
polarization (12), risk of ovarian cancer (12), birth
control (10), women’s health (10), mental health (7),
public health (6), live birth (6), health issues (6), side
effects (6), health care (5), mortality rate (5), New
York (5), infant mortality rate (5), infant death (5),
induced abortion (5), million people (5), substance
abuse (5), preterm birth (5), lymph node (5)

Frequency
embryo or fetus (-11), gynecologic oncology (-7),
Decreasing
poor health (-6)
Terms

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

mental health (67), health care (29), germ cell (26),
blood pressure (21), United States (20), cell tumor
(25), birth control (14), African Americans (12),
socioeconomic status (12), infant mortality (11),
mortality rate (8), health and human (8), health
organization (7), burden of disease study (7), causes
of death (7), ovarian cancer (11), infant mortality
rate (6), systematic analysis (6), Stage I (6), health
problems (5), health services (5), developed
countries (5), medical abortion (5), systematic
review (5), Cochrane Database (5)

Health issue
(problem, service),
family planning and
reproduction
(method), inequality
and discrimination
(society)
Health issue
(research, problem),
family planning and
reproduction
(method)

Health issue (service,
problem,
organization,
research, cause),
family planning and
reproduction
(method)

Table 32. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the WH-HPR Theme
The increasing terms of the health issue subject were related to different aspects in
different periods. From Periods 1 to 2, the increasing terms covered various lower-level
subjects, including health problems, health organizations, health services, and causes of health
problems. Among these lower-level subjects, only health problems and health services attracted
more attention than before in the next period. From Periods 3 to 4, a new lower-level subjects
emerged, which was health research.
(3) The Medical and interdisciplinary subjects (MIS) theme

161

Table 33 shows that the frequency increasing terms covered more and more subjects as
time went by in the MIS theme. From Periods 1 to 2, the terms were relevant to health issue
and family planning and reproduction. It means that the Wikipedia editors’ interests focused on
these two subjects. In Period 3, a new interest about population issue emerged. In addition to
the previous subjects, in Period 4, the Wikipedia editors had two more interests, violence and
inequality and discrimination.
Time
Period

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases
Frequency population health (-12), Oxford University (-5),
Decreasing health status (-5), maternal deaths (-5), political
economy (-5)
Terms

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

Period 2
VS.
Period 3

public health (83), health care (72), sex segregation
(70), world health (40), mental health (39), health
organization (39), United States (37), men and
women (28), social determinants (27), health
Frequency
outcomes (26), World Health Organization (26),
Increasing
history of medicine (25), rural areas (24), health
Terms
services (22), determinants of health (21), global
health (19), 19th century (19), family planning (18),
maternal mortality (17), living conditions (17), sex
differences (16)
African American (-40), health disparities (-17),
global health (-13), heart disease (-11), risk factors
Frequency (-8), coronary heart disease (-8), Healthcare
Decreasing Research and Quality (-7), ethnic disparities (-6),
Community Health (-5), physical activity (-5), racial
Terms
and ethnic disparities (-5), racial differences (-5),
universal health (-5)
reproductive health (35), mental health (33), family
planning (21), medical sociology (20), New York
(19), health care (18), women’s health (14), public
health (13), sexually transmitted diseases (13),
Frequency
women’s health (13), molecular pathology (13),
Increasing
United Nations (12), social science (12),
Terms
reproductive age (12), health issues (11), live births
(10), rural areas (9), determinants of health (9),
mental illness (9), Social Science & Medicine (9),
women of reproductive age (9)

162

Subjects
Population issue,
health issue
(problem), economy,
politics

Health issue (service,
organization, cause,
research, problem),
family planning and
reproduction

Health issue (service,
problem,
organization,
research), inequality
and discrimination
(healthcare)
Health issue
(research, service,
problem, cause),
family planning and
reproduction
(organization),
population issue
(organization)

Period 3
VS.
Period 4

feminist theory (-10), women’s studies (-8),
Frequency Western medicine (-8), sexually transmitted
Decreasing diseases (-6), Chinese medicine (-6), Law Review (5), myth of matriarchal prehistory (-5), Charlotte
Terms
Perkins (-5), John Knox (-5), medical care (-5)
mental health (72), women’s health (54), United
States (38), public health (34), mental illness (26),
health care (25), social work (24), world health
(24), female genital (24), family planning (23),
United Nations (22), developing countries (22),
Frequency reproductive health (20), sustainable development
Increasing (20), violence against women (20), maternal
Terms
mortality (16), developed countries (16),
Millennium Development (16), health issues (15),
social determinants (13), World Health
Organization (13), health research (13), health
disparities (13), intimate partner (13), cervical
cancer (13)

Woman protection
(research, law), health
issue (research,
treatment, problem)
Health issue (problem,
organization, cause,
research), abuse and
violence (domestic
violence), family
planning and
reproduction
(organization),
population issue
(organization),
inequality and
discrimination
(healthcare)

Table 33. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the MIS Theme
(4) The Support and protection (WH-SP) theme
Table 34 displays the terms/phrases whose frequencies changed the most in each
period in the WH-SP theme. This table illustrates that the terms about health issue and woman
protection kept increasing from Periods 1 to 2, although in different periods these terms
focused on different aspects of the two subjects. For instance, the terms about treatment only
increased from Periods 1 to 2, while the terms about health education increased from Periods 1
to 3.
Time
Period

High-Frequency Terms and Phrases

Subjects

Period 1
VS.
Period 2

health insurance (-42), Health Affairs (-13), care
services (-12), women’s college (-12), medical care (10), health care services (-10), health care costs (Frequency
10), insurance coverage (-8), sex discrimination (-8),
Decreasing
Medicaid Services (-8), Women’s College Hospital (Terms
8), Centers for Medicare (-7), Washington DC (-6),
medical treatment (-6), National Organization for
Women (-6), civil rights (-5), universal health (-5)

Health issue
(insurance, research,
service, organization,
treatment),
inequality and
discrimination,
woman protection
(organization)

163

Frequency
Increasing
Terms

women’s health (163), health center (59), United
States (50), reproductive health (50), women’s
suffrage (37), health initiative (28), public health
(27), health centers (27), breast cancer (26),
women’s rights (25), men and women (22),
Michigan Health System (22), Women’s Health
Initiative (20), hormone therapy (19), planned
parenthood (18), health education (16), female
condom (16), red dress (16), postmenopausal
women (15), colorectal cancer (14), University of
Michigan (14), red dress collection (14)

Frequency reproductive health (-8), ancient Rome (-5),
Decreasing University of Pittsburgh (-5), Journal of Obstetrics (5), Stefanick ML (-5)
Terms

Period 2
VS.
Period 3
Frequency
Increasing
Terms

women’s health (82), public health (40), health
literacy (35), health education (33), human rights
(33), New York (30), violence against women (30),
gender equality (29), domestic violence (28), United
Nations (27), health care (25), Department of Health
(23), Oxford University (21), women’s suffrage (20),
breast cancer (20), right to vote (20), reproductive
rights (20), social security (18), men and women
(17), United States (15), health system (15), National
Institute (15)

hormone replacement (-20), health system (-16),
Frequency
hormone replacement therapy (-11), Michigan
Decreasing
Health System (-10), red dress collection (-9),
Terms
suffrage referendum (-5), equine estrogen (-5)

Period 3
VS.
Period 4
Frequency
Increasing
Terms

New York (84), United States (55), women’s health
(36), violence against women (35), United Nations
(26), health care (25), reproductive health (25),
gender equality (24), health organization (21),
Medical Association (21), women’s rights (20),
women’s suffrage (16), birth control (16), World
Health Organization (16), sexual and reproductive
health (15), Department of Health (14), health and
human (14), United States Department (14), human
rights (13), reproductive rights (13), family planning
(13), women’s education (13)

Health issue
(organization,
problem, treatment,
education),
inequality and
discrimination
(politics), woman
protection, family
planning and
reproduction
(method)
Family planning and
reproduction
(organization,
research, treatment),
health issue
(organization,
education)
Health issue
(education, service,
organization), abuse
and violence
(domestic violence),
inequality and
discrimination,
woman protection
(politics, health)
Health issue
(treatment,
organization),
inequality and
discrimination
(politics)

Health issue (service,
organization), abuse
and violence, women
protection (politics,
education), family
planning and
reproduction

Table 34. Changes of Subjects in the Four Periods in the WH-SP Theme

164

The woman protection subject had three lower-level subjects, which were politics,
health, and education. The terms about politics increased from Periods 2 to 4, which indicates
that the Wikipedia editors had increasing interests in this subject in the recent years.
Furthermore, examination of the terms about politics demonstrates that the Wikipedia editors’
interests increased the most in women’s suffrage.
4.3.3. Changes of External Popularities
The external popularity of a topic/theme was defined as the numbers of the page edits
and the numbers of the page views of its associated entries. To reveal the changes of the
selected topics more in-depth, two hypotheses were proposed in Chapter 3 and this section
presents the results of the hypothesis testing. The two hypotheses proposed in Chapter 3 are:
H01: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in terms
of the number of page views of the entries relevant to each of the topics.
H02: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in terms
of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to each of the topics.
According to H01 and H02, the independent variable of the test was time period and the
dependent variable was the number of the page views/edits of an entry relevant to a specific
topic. Since three topics were selected in this study, six sub-hypotheses were generated:
H01a: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page views of the entries relevant to Child Maltreatment.

165

H01b: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page views of the entries relevant to Family Planning.
H01c: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page views of the entries relevant to Women’s Health.
H02a: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to Child Maltreatment.
H02b: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to Family Planning.
H02c: There were no significant differences among the investigated time periods in
terms of the number of page edits of the entries relevant to Women’s Health.
As it was mentioned in the Methodology chapter, the Friedman’s Test was applied to
test for the differences among the periods. Table 35 presents the results from H01a to H01c
and H02a to H02c.
Hypotheses Chi-square Value P-value
H01a
χ2(3) = 110.660
0.000
H01b
χ2(3) = 78.865
0.000
H01c
χ2(3) = 73.384
0.000
H02a
χ2(3) = 23.052
0.000
H02b
χ2(3) = 26.672
0.000
H02c
χ2(3) = 0.383
0.944
Table 35. Hypothesis Testing Results of H01 and H02
The results show that H01a, H01b, H01c, H02a, and H02b were rejected, while H02c was
not rejected. It means that: (1) there were significant differences among the four periods in

166

terms of the number of the page views of the entries relevant to each topic; (2) there were
significant differences among the four periods in terms of the number of the page edits of the
entries relevant to Child Maltreatment/Family Planning; (3) there were no significant
differences among the four periods in terms of the number of the page edits of the entries
relevant to Women’s Health.
The Sign Test was used to explore the difference among every two periods. The
comparisons intended to reveal the differences from one period to next in order to show the
temporal changes of external popularities. Hence, only the adjacent periods were compared.
Since the result of H02c was not significant, no follow-up test was conducted for this
hypothesis. The results of the follow-up tests for H01a, H01b, H01c, H02a, and H02b were
presented in Table 36. In this table, P1, P2, P3, and P4 stand for Period 1, Period 2, Period 3,
and Period 4, respectively.
Topics

Measures

Values P1 VS. P2 P2 VS. P3 P3 VS. P4
Z-value
-2.487
-3.076
-1.016
No. of Edits
P-value
0.013
0.002
0.310
Child Maltreatment
Z-value
-7.951
-4.843
-7.988
No. of Views
P-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
Z-value
-1.814
-3.344
0.000
No. of Edits
P-value
0.070
0.001
1.000
Family Planning
Z-value
-6.929
-1.025
-7.640
No. of Views
P-value
0.000
0.305
0.000
Z-value
-7.363
-1.331
-6.134
Women's Health
No. of Views
P-value
0.000
0.183
0.000
Table 36. Pairwise Comparison Results of H01 and H02
4.3.3.1. Changes of Page Edits

167

According to Table 35, the number of the page edits of the entries in the Women’s
Health topic had no significant change during the investigated periods. To the contrary, the
other two topics had significant changes in terms of the number of edits.
The results in Table 36 reveal that for Child Maltreatment, there were significant
differences among Periods 1 and 2 (p-value = 0.013 < 0.05), and Periods 2 and 3 (p-value =
0.002 < 0.05) in terms of the associated entries’ number of the page edits. However, there was
no significant difference among Periods 3 and 4 in terms of the number of the page edits (pvalue = 0.310 > 0.05). When examining the detailed results, there were 81 (much less than half)
positive signs obtained from the comparison among Periods 1 and 2. In other words, there
were 81 entries’ numbers of the page edits of Period 2 less than Period 1. Therefore, the overall
number of the page edits of Period 2 was less than that of Period 1. After examining the
positive and negative signs obtained from the comparison among Periods 2 and 3, the results
demonstrate that the number of the page edits of Period 3 was less than Period 2 (84 positive
signs VS. 130 negative signs). These findings show that the number of the page edits of the
entries in the Child Maltreatment topic dropped a lot from Periods 1 to 3, but had no significant
change after Period 3.
For the Family Planning topic, there were no significant differences among Periods 1
and 2, or Periods 3 and 4 in terms of the associated entries’ number of the page edits.
However, there was a significant difference among Periods 2 and 3. The examination of the
comparison between Periods 2 and 3 presents that the number of the page edits of Period 3
was less than Period 2 (48 positive signs VS. 88 negative signs). Therefore, the number of the

168

page edits of the entries in the Family Planning topic did not change a lot from Periods 1 to 2 or
from Periods 3 to 4, but decreased from Periods 2 to 3.
4.3.3.2. Changes of Page Views
The results in Table 36 reveal that for Child Maltreatment, there were significant
differences among Periods 1 and 2, Periods 2 and 3, and Periods 3 and 4 in terms of the number
of the page views. Examining the positive and negative signs obtained from the comparisons
illustrates that the number of the page views of Period 2 was larger than Period 1 (158 positive
signs VS. 44 negative signs), the number of the page views of Period 2 was less than Period 3
(74 positive signs VS. 147 negative signs), and the number of the page views of Period 4 was
less than that of Period 3 (58 positive signs VS. 183 negative signs). These findings show that
the number of the page views of the entries associated to Child Maltreatment increased
significantly from Periods 1 to 2, while decreased significantly from Periods 2 to 4.
Regarding the Family Planning topic, the results reveal that there were significant
differences among Periods 1 and 2, and Periods 3 and 4. However, there were no significant
differences among Periods 2 and 3. The results of the positive and negative signs obtained from
the comparisons reveal that the number of the page views of Period 2 was larger than Period 1
(105 positive signs VS. 25 negative signs), and the number of the page views of Period 4 was
less then Period 3 (26 positive signs VS. 119 negative signs). These results show that the
number of the views of the associated entries in Family Planning increased significantly from
Periods 1 to 2, kept stable from Periods 2 to 3, and then decreased significantly from Periods 3
to 4.

169

Similar to Family Planning, the results for Women’s Health show that there were
significant differences among Periods 1 and 2, and Periods 3 and 4, but no significant difference
was found among Periods 2 and 3 in terms of the number of the page views. When
investigating the detailed results obtained from the pairwise comparisons, it shows that the
number of the page views of Period 2 was larger than Period 1 (129 positive signs VS. 34
negative signs) and the number of the page views of Period 4 was smaller than Period 3 (53
positive signs VS. 139 negative signs). Therefore, the number of the page views of the
associated entries in Women’s Health grew from Periods 1 to 2, remained stable from Periods 2
to 3, and dropped from Periods 3 to 4.
4.3.4. Research Question Two Results Summary
The internal characteristics of the three selected topics changed during the investigated
periods. The changes were demonstrated from two perspectives: entry growths and changes of
subjects. The results show that the number of the associated entries in each selected topic kept
growing from 2010 to 2017. Among the three topics, the number of the associated entries of
Child Maltreatment increased the most during the four periods, while the number of the
associated entries of Family Planning increased less than the other two topics. The number of
the associated entries in each defined theme also grew, but in some specific periods, no new
entry was generated. For example, no new entry was created in the fourth period in the CYFF
theme of Child Maltreatment.
For the Child Maltreatment topic, a part of the entries generated in the investigated
periods mainly referred to specific abuse types, abuse behaviors, cases or scandals, and regions.

170

The entries created in early years mainly focused on child maltreatment in the United States,
while more and more entries about other countries or regions were created in the next few
years. These entries usually summarized the child maltreatment and child protection status in
certain countries/regions. Some other entries presented a collection of related items about
child maltreatment, such as the “List of child abuse cases featuring long-term detention” entry
and the “List of songs about child abuse” entry.
Similar to the entries created in the Child Maltreatment topic, some of the entries
created in the Family Planning topic referred to specific organizations, policies, laws,
techniques, and regions. Some other entries, like the “List of people that have expressed views
relating to overpopulation as a problem” entry and the “List of population concern
organizations” entry, listed a series of related items. The rest entries contained the content
about general topics, like the “Family planning policy” entry.
Regarding the Women’s Health topic, similar findings were obtained. A part of the
entries created during the investigated periods in this topic mainly concentrated on specific
sexism types, regions, organizations, and research. Some other entries focused on more general
topics, like gender polarization, women’s health issues, and so on. The rest entries displayed a
collection of associated items, such as the “List of women’s studies journals” entry.
The changes of the subjects in each theme of a topic can also reflect the evolutions of
the topic’s internal characteristics. Table 37 summarizes the growing, diminishing, and
fluctuating subjects of the three selected topics. The growing/diminishing subjects were the
subjects whose associated terms and phrases kept increasing/decreasing during the

171

investigated periods. In other words, the growing/diminishing subjects attracted
increasing/decreasing attention during the investigated periods. The fluctuating subjects were
the subjects whose associated terms and phrases increased in some periods but decreased in
the other periods.
Topic
Growing
subjects

Subjects
Abuse and violence, children and youth protection, family
planning and reproduction, health issue, man protection, social
factor

Child
Diminishing
Maltreatment
Woman protection
subjects
Fluctuating
Human trafficking, inequality and discrimination
subjects
Abuse and violence, economy, family planning and
reproduction, futures studies, health issue, human
Growing
development, inequality and discrimination, military,
subjects
population issue, social factor
Family
Planning
Diminishing
subjects
Fluctuating
Environment issue, woman protection
subjects
Abuse and violence, family planning and reproduction, health
Growing
issue, inequality and discrimination, minority group, woman
subjects
protection
Women's
Diminishing
Health
Economy, politics
subjects
Fluctuating
Population issue
subjects
Table 37. Growing, Diminishing, and Fluctuating Subjects
Table 37 shows that there were six subjects kept growing in the Child Maltreatment

topic. Five of the six subjects grew from Periods 1 to 4 except the man protection subject. The
man protection subject rose only from Periods 3 to 4. It implies that the Wikipedia editors’
interests not only focused on women’s rights and woman protection, but extended to other
groups in recent years.
172

For the Women’s Health topic, the growing subjects’ associated terms/phrases kept
increasing from Periods 1 to 4. A typical example was the minority group subject. This subject
became more and more important from Periods 1 to 4. In other words, the Wikipedia editors
paid increasing attention to the minority groups from 2010 to 2017.
Similar to the internal characteristics, the external popularities of the three selected
topics changed during the investigated periods. The changes were explored from two aspects:
number of the page edits and number of the page views. The results of hypothesis testing show
that the numbers of the page edits of Child Maltreatment and Family Planning declined
substantially from 2010 to 2017, while the number of the page edits of Women’s Health had no
significant changes during the four periods. The number of the page views of Child
Maltreatment increased rapidly from 2010 to 2013, while decreased rapidly after that. The
numbers of the page views of the other two topics increased quickly from 2010 to 2013, kept
stable from 2013 to 2015, and declined quickly from 2015 to 2017, respectively.
4.4.

Results of Research Question Three

Research question three aims to discover the commonalities and differences among the
selected topics’ evolution patterns. It explores the commonalities and differences among the
evolution patterns from both the internal and external perspectives. The changes of the
internal characteristics and external popularities of each topic were demonstrated in Section
4.1 and Section 4.3.
4.4.1. Differences and Commonalities among the External Popularity Evolution Patterns
4.4.1.1. External Popularity Differences among Topics
173

As it was mentioned before, the external popularity of a topic was represented by the
total number of the page edits and the total number of the page views of its associated entries.
To explore whether the number of the page edits/views was influenced by a topic, two
hypotheses were proposed:
H03: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of the
number of the page edits of the associated entries.
H04: There were no significant differences among the selected topics in terms of the
number of the page views of the associated entries.
The independent variable of H03 and H04 was topic and the independent variables were
the number of the page edits and the number of the page views respectively. As it was
mentioned in the Methodology chapter, the Kruskal-Wallis H Test was employed for H03 and
H04. Table 38 illustrates the hypothesis testing results of H03 and H04.
Hypotheses Chi-square Value P-value
H03
χ2(2) = 39.988
0.000
H04
χ2(2) = 38.329
0.000
Table 38. Hypothesis Testing Results of H03 and H04
The results of the Kruskal-Wallis H Tests show that there were significant differences
among the topics in terms of the number of the page edits (P-value = 0.000 < 0.05). It indicates
that the Wikipedia editors did not pay same attention to the three topics. Similarly, there were
significant differences among the topics in terms of the number of the page views (P-value =
0.000 < 0.05). Therefore, the Wikipedia viewers did not have same interests in the three topics.

174

To figure out the difference among every two topics, the post-hoc pairwise comparisons
were conducted for H03 and H04. For H03, the results of pairwise comparisons demonstrate
that there were significant differences between Family Planning and the other two topics (Pvalue = 0.000 < 0.05), while there was no significant difference among Child Maltreatment and
Women’s Health (P-value = 0.088 > 0.05). Since Child Maltreatment (Mean Rank = 178.19) and
Women’s Health (Mean Rank = 103.30) had higher mean ranks than Family Planning (Mean
Rank = 152.02), the numbers of the page edits of Child Maltreatment and Women’s Health
were significantly larger than Family Planning. It indicates that the Wikipedia editors had more
interests in Child Maltreatment and Women’s Health than Family Planning.
For H04, the pairwise comparisons demonstrate that there was a significant difference
among Child Maltreatment and Family Planning (P-value = 0.000 < 0.05), Child Maltreatment
and Women’s Health (P-value = 0.022 < 0.05), and Family Planning and Women’s Health (Pvalue = 0.001 < 0.05). Child Maltreatment had the highest mean rank (Mean Rank = 179.98)
among the three topics, Women’s Health had the second highest mean rank (Mean Rank =
147.75), and Family Planning had the lowest mean rank (Mean Rank = 105.77). These findings
imply that the Wikipedia viewers had the most interests in Child Maltreatment, the second
most interests in Women’s Health, and the least interests in Family Planning.
4.4.1.2. Commonalities among the External Popularity Evolution Patterns
According to the results stated before, several commonalities of the external popularity
patterns were found among the selected topics. The descriptive statistical results reveal that
the trends of the page edits and the trends of the page views were not consistent for the

175

selected topics. This phenomenon implies that the Wikipedia editors and viewers were two
groups with different interests.
Another commonality was that the three topics’ trends of the page views were
consistent in the figures in Section 4.1. The three topics’ numbers of the page views all declined
from 2010 to 2011, climbed from 2011 to 2013, and dropped from 2013 to 2017. Therefore, the
Wikipedia viewers’ interests on the three topics changed in the same pattern. This result
indicates that the Wikipedia viewers’ interests on the family-health-related topics changed in
the same pattern.
4.4.1.3. Differences among the External Popularity Evolution Patterns
Differences were observed among the external popularity evolution patterns of the
selected topics. The trends of the number of the page views from Periods 1 to 4 and the results
of H04 illustrate that Child Maltreatment attracted much more attention than the other two
topics, Women’s Health attracted the second most attention among the three topics, while
Family Planning received the least attention. The inferential statistical tests confirmed these
results.
The trends of the three topics in terms of the number of the page edits varied in the
topics. Although the hypothesis testing results reveal that in general Child Maltreatment,
Women’s Health, and Family Planning reached the first, second, and third places according to
their numbers of the page edits, the changes of the three topics did not follow the same
pattern. Therefore, the Wikipedia editors’ interests on the three topics changed in different
patterns.
176

4.4.2. Differences and Commonalities among the Internal Characteristic Evolution Patterns
4.4.2.1. Commonalities among the Internal Characteristic Evolution Patterns
As it was mentioned before, the evolutions of the internal characteristics of a topic were
reflected by the entry growths and the changes of the subjects. The examination of the entry
growths of each topic in Section 4.3.1 shows a commonality among the three topics: the entries
in all the three topics kept increasing from 2010 to 2017. It means that the Wikipedia editors’
interests in these topics grew from 2010 to 2017.
Another commonality was discovered when investigating the emerged entries: the
content of some emerged entries became more specialized. For instance, the “Attachment
theory” entry, introducing the general knowledge of the attachment theory, was created in
2004. In 2012 two associated entries of this theory were generated, which were the
“Attachment theory and psychology of religion” entry and the “Fathers as attachment figures”
entry. These two entries focused on specific aspects of the attachment theory.
Apart from the specialized entries, some other emerged entries provided summaries of
other entries, such as the “Family planning policy” entry and the “List of women’s studies
journals” entry. The “Family planning policy” entry offered a summary of the one-child policy
and the two-child policy and the “List of women’s studies journals” entry listed a collection of
journals concerning women’s studies.
The third was that the content of the emerged entries became more internationalized.
The entries created in the early years mainly focused on the family-health-related content in
the United States, but as time went by, more and more entries about other countries and
177

regions were generated. In the three selected topics, there were emerged entries about specific
countries and regions rather than the United States, including New Zealand, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, India, Hong Kong, and so forth.
Commonalities were also found by examining the changes of the subjects in each topic.
The fourth commonality was that there were common subjects emerged in the three topics,
including abuse and violence, family planning and reproduction, health issue, inequality and
discrimination, and woman protection. Among the five common subjects, the abuse and
violence subject, the family planning and reproduction subject, and the health issue subject
kept growing from Periods 1 to 4. In other words, consistent growths of the subjects were
found across the three topics. It also implies that the Wikipedia editors had increasing interests
in these subjects.
In addition to the growing subjects, there were diminishing subjects and fluctuating
subjects in each topic. These findings reveal that different subjects changed in different
patterns. Since this phenomenon was observed in all the three topics, it infers that the variation
of subject changes was common for the family-health-related topics.
The last commonality was that new subjects emerged during the investigated periods
and the subjects in each topic became more and more diverse over time. For instance, a lowerlevel subject, health education, occurred in Period 3, and the man protection subject emerged
in Period 4. These findings show that the Wikipedia editors’ interests extended to new areas of
family health.
4.4.2.2. Differences among the Internal Characteristic Evolution Patterns
178

After comparing the entry growths of the three topics, it shows that although the
numbers of the associated entries in the topics all kept growing, the number of entries of Child
Maltreatment climbed much faster than the other two topics. In other words, the speed of the
entry growth varied from one topic to another. Moreover, the trends of the entry growths were
also different among the three topics. The entries of Child Maltreatment increased the fastest
during 2010 to 2011, while the entries of Family Planning increased the fastest during 2011 to
2012. Different from the other two topics, the Women’s Health topic’s associated entries
emerged the most in 2013 and 2015.
Regarding the different types of the subjects in each topic, more differences were
discovered. The woman protection subject kept diminishing in the Child Maltreatment topic,
but kept growing in the Women’s Health topic. Meanwhile, this subject was a fluctuating
subject in Family Planning. These findings reveal that one subject could have totally different
developing trajectories in different topics. The different developing trends of the subjects
finally formed the different internal characteristic and external popularity evolution patterns of
the family-health-related topics.
The third difference was that each topic had their own unique subjects. For instance,
Child Maltreatment had the human trafficking subject and the man protection subject; Family
Planning involved futures studies, human development, military, and environment issue;
Women’s Health contained minority group, and politics. Each of these subjects belonged to only
one topic. The Wikipedia editors and viewers paid different attention to these subjects
according to the external popularities of the defined theme and their associated subjects. These
subjects and their related entries were the potential causes of the differences among the
179

external popularities of the topics. For instance, the diminishment of the women protection
subject could be a reason for the declines in the numbers of yearly page edits and views of Child
Maltreatment.
4.4.3. Research Question Three Results Summary
The inferential statistical results of H03 and H04 illustrate that the Child Maltreatment
topic and the Women’s Health topic were more popular than the Family Planning topic among
the Wikipedia editors. The Child Maltreatment topic, Women’s Health topic, and Family
Planning topic were the most, second most, and least popular among the Wikipedia viewers,
respectively.
Regarding the external popularity evolution patterns, two commonalities were found
among the three topics: (1) their page edits trends were not consistent with their page views
trends; (2) their page views trends were similar to each other. Considering the internal
characteristic evolution patterns, six commonalities were discovered for the topics: (1) the
associated entries of the topics all kept increasing from 2010 to 2017; (2) a part of the new
entries became more specialized, while the other entries offered summaries of certain topics
for the Wikipedia users; (3) the content of the emerged entries became more internationalized;
(4) the three topics contained common growing subjects; (5) each subject had its own growing
pattern, which might differ from other subjects; (6) the subjects in each topic became more and
more diverse.
Two differences among the external popularity evolution patterns of the topics were
observed: (1) the popularities of the three topics were different among the Wikipedia viewers;
180

(2) the Wikipedia editors’ interests in the topics changed follow different patterns. Moreover,
three differences were found in terms of the internal characteristic evolution patterns of the
topics: (1) the topics’ entry growth trends were different from each other; (2) the same subjects
had different developing trajectories in the different topics; (3) each topic had its own unique
subjects and these subjects could cause the differences in the topics’ external popularities.
4.5.

Chapter Four Summary

This chapter demonstrates the results of the three research questions proposed in the
previous chapters. The results show that Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and Women’s
Health had 241, 150, and 207 associated entries, respectively. Child Maltreatment had four
themes and five subjects, Family Planning had three themes and eleven subjects, and Women’s
health had four themes and eight subjects. Child Maltreatment was the most popular among
the three topics in terms of the numbers of page edits and page views, while Women’s Health
and Family Planning ranked the second and third places.
The entries and subjects of each topic kept increasing from 2010 to 2017. The subjects
were assigned to three groups in terms of their developing trajectories during the four defined
periods, which were the growing subject group, the diminishing subject group, and the
fluctuating subject group. However, the external popularities of the topics declined during the
investigated periods.
Based on the evolution patterns obtained for each topic, the commonalities and
differences among the three topics’ evolution patterns were discovered. Six commonalities and
three differences were found among the internal characteristic evolution patterns of the three
181

topics. Additionally, two commonalities and two differences were observed among the external
popularity evolution patterns of the three topics.

182

5. DISCUSSION & IMPLICATIONS

5.1. Discussion
Family-health-related topics are widely discussed in academic research and people’s
daily life. Family health information is a prominent component of information posted online,
especially on social media platforms. This study investigated the evolutions of the internal
characteristics and external popularities of three family-health-related topics. The implications
of this study covered three areas: the theoretical implication, the practical implication, and the
methodological implication.
5.1.1. External Popularity Evolution Patterns
5.1.1.1. Trends of Online Health Information Generation, Seeking, and Use
The use of social media kept rising during the past decades. According to Social Media
Usage: 2005-2015 (Perrin, 2015), American adults who used social network sites rose from 7%
to 65% during 2005 to 2015. From 2012 to 2018, Smith and Anderson’s (A. Smith, Monica, &
erson, 2018) report illustrated that American adults who used Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest,
Snapchat, LinkedIn, Twitter, and WhatsApp also kept growing. As one of the most well-known
social media platforms, Wikipedia attracted increasing users and received increasing accesses
from 2010 to 2017. The registered Wikipedia users was 1.06 million in December 2009 and
reached 2.51 million in December 2017 (Wikimedia, 2018). Moreover, the Wikipedia page views
increased 1595.68 billion from 2010 to 2017 (Wikimedia, 2018).

183

To the contrary, the use of online health information did not achieve sustainable growth
during the past decades. Tu (2011) reported that considering all the health information sources,
the proportion of online health consumers kept increasing from 2001 (15.9%) to 2010 (32.6%).
A survey (Fox & Jones, 2009) demonstrated that 39% of the online health consumers used
social network sites for information seeking and sharing. In 2010, 42.5% of the online health
information seekers retrieved the online information about other people’s health experience
(Fox, 2011). The proportion dropped to 36.11% in 2012 (Fox, 2014). The proportion of the
online health consumers who sought the people having the same health concerns with
themselves also decreased from 24.32% to 22.22% during 2011 to 2012 (Fox, 2011 & 2014).
The Social Life of Health Information (Fox & Jones, 2009) survey also showed that 5% of
the online health consumers posted health-related comments on blogs and 8% of them
participated in online discussion. In 2010, 8.45% of those people had posted health-related
information on social network sites (Fox, 2011). The proportion reached 8.49% in 2012 (Fox,
2014). These studies demonstrate that the contributors of health-related content on social
media increased during the past years. Meanwhile, the trends of online health information use
and online health information generation were not consistent.
A similar result was obtained from this study, which is that the trends of the page edits
(online health information generation) and the page views (online health information use) were
not consistent. However, different from the results obtained from the previous research
studies, the findings of this study reveal that the family-health-related topics’ page edits and
page views both declined during the investigated periods.

184

Figure 25 illustrates the trends of the total number of page edits and page views of the
selected topics. This figure shows that the overall trends of the two measures declined from
2010 to 2017. The total number of the page edits decreased from 2010 to 2014, rose slightly
from 2014 to 2015, but continued to decrease after 2015. The total number of the page edits
declined from 2010 to 2011, climbed from 2011 to 2013, and dropped dramatically after 2013.

110000000

38000
36000

100000000

34000
90000000

32000

80000000

30000

70000000

28000
26000

60000000

24000
50000000

22000

40000000

20000
2010

2011

2012

2013

No. of Views

2014

2015

2016

2017

No. of Edits

Figure 25. Trends of the Numbers of Page Edits and Page Views
The different findings demonstrate that although the overall trend of online health
information generation rose, the trends of particular health topics (e.g. family-health-related
topics) on particular social media platforms (e.g. Wikipedia) might be different from the general
trend. Similarly, the online health information use trends of specific topics on specific platforms
could differ from the overall online health information use trend.
5.1.1.2. Characteristics of Page Views

185

The number of the Wikipedia page views of an entry reflects the Wikipedia viewers’
interests in the entry and its relevant concepts. According to the previous literature, it can
reflect the Web search trend of the corresponding search term of the entry, which means that
it can reflect the public’s interests in the terms and the relevant concepts (Yoshida, Arase,
Tsunoda, & Yamamoto, 2015).
Yoshida et al. (2015) conducted correlation tests to explore the association between
Google search frequency and Wikipedia page views. They collected the Google Trends data and
Wikipedia page views data of almost ten thousand personal names and utilized the Pearson
product-moment correlation tests to investigate the associations. High correlations were found
between the search frequency and the page views of the personal name keywords because the
correlation coefficient was 0.72.
Same tests were conducted for three of the selected family-health-related entries,
including the Child abuse entry, the Family planning entry, and the Women’s health entry. The
entries were also used as search terms to obtain Google search frequency data on Google
Trends. Figure 26 displays the trends of the Google search frequency and the Wikipedia page
views from 2010 to 2017 for Child abuse. The X-axis represents the month from January 2010 to
December 2017. The left Y-axis stands for the Google search frequency and the right Y-axis
stands for the ratio of the number of the Wikipedia page views of a month to the highest
number of monthly page views of Child abuse. The Google search frequency of a search term
was the proportion of its number of searches at a time point to the highest number of searches
over the selected time period on Google (Nuti et al., 2014). The figure shows that the two
curves fluctuate at a same frequency.
186

100.00

100.00%

90.00%
80.00%

70.00

70.00%

60.00

60.00%

50.00

50.00%

40.00

40.00%

30.00

30.00%

20.00

20.00%

10.00

10.00%

0.00

0.00%
2010-01
2010-04
2010-07
2010-10
2011-01
2011-04
2011-07
2011-10
2012-01
2012-04
2012-07
2012-10
2013-01
2013-04
2013-07
2013-10
2014-01
2014-04
2014-07
2014-10
2015-01
2015-04
2015-07
2015-10
2016-01
2016-04
2016-07
2016-10
2017-01
2017-04
2017-07
2017-10

90.00
80.00

Google Search Frequency

Wikipedia Page Views

Figure 26. Trends of Google Search Frequency and Wikipedia Page Views for Child Abuse
The correlation coefficient between the search frequency and the number of the page
views of Child abuse was 0.608 and the P-value was 0.000, smaller than the 0.05 significant
level. For the Family planning entry, the correlation coefficient was 0.704 and the P-value was
0.000, smaller than the 0.05 significant level. However, the correlation coefficient of Women’s
health was 0.102 and the P-value was 0.323, larger than the 0.05 significant level. Therefore,
there were significant associations between the search frequency and the number of the page
views for Child abuse and Family planning, but no significant association was found for
Women’s health.
The results of Child abuse and Family planning confirm Yoshida et al.’s (2015) results,
but the result of Women’s health did not. The Google search frequency shows the general
public’s interests, but some Wikipedia entries’ page view trends and Google search trends were
inconsistent (Yoshida et al., 2015). It infers that the Wikipedia page views cannot always reflect
187

the public’s interests. In other words, the Wikipedia viewers involved not only the public or lay
people, but also the other user groups.
Thij, Volkovich, Laniado, and Kaltenbrunner (2012) analyzed the Wikipedia page view
trend and proposed a model for popularity prediction of a promoted Wikipedia entry (an entry
shown on the Main Page of Wikipedia as “today’s features articles” and sent to subscribers).
They found that a promoted entry received decreasing page views from the second hour to the
eighth hour after it was promoted, then rose until the 18th hour, and the fell rapidly until the
24th hour. After the first day, the promoted entry’s page views decayed exponentially with a
constant rate. Figure 27 is an example cited from the Thij et al.’s work, which displays the real
page view trend and the predicted page view trend of the Augustus entry.

Figure 27. Example of the Prediction of the Page Views for a Promoted Entry (Thij et al., 2012)

188

Thij et al. (2012) explored the Wikipedia page view trend on a micro level, while this
study illustrated the trend on a relatively macro level. Figure 10 in Section 4.1.3 demonstrates
the trends of the selected topics in terms of their yearly number of the page views. Comparison
of the two types of trends shows they had similarities to some extent. They both declined at
first, then climbed to their highest points, and then dropped quickly. However, the fluctuation
ranges of the two types of trends were different. Therefore, both similarities and differences
were discovered among the two types of Wikipedia page view trends.
5.1.1.3. Characteristics of Page Edits
The Wikipedia page edit is another measure of the external popularity of an entry. Suh,
Convertino, Chi, and Pirolli (2009) collected the monthly Wikipedia edits data generated by five
user classes. A user was assigned to a class according to his/her contribution to Wikipedia
entries. Figure 28, cited from the Suh et al.’s work, shows the monthly Wikipedia page edits (in
thousands) generated by each user class. This figure shows that the page edits increased rapidly
from 2005 to 2007, but decreased slightly after 2007.

189

Figure 28. Monthly Edits by User Class (Suh et al., (Suh et al., 2009)
The trend of Wikipedia page edits obtained in this study was illustrated in Figure 29. The
X-axis represents the year. The left Y-axis stands for the number of page edits of the whole
English Wikipedia, while the right one stands for the total number of page edits of the selected
topics. This figure confirms the results obtained by Suh et al., since the trend rose rapidly from
2005 to 2007 and then fell slow until 2014. It also shows the consistency between the page
edits data of the English Wikipedia and the selected family-health-related topics. These results
indicate that the family-health-related topics followed the general page edit trend, and
moreover, potentially followed the page edit trends proposed by Suh et al. (2009).

190

40000
50000000

35000
30000

40000000

25000
30000000

20000
15000

20000000

10000

10000000

5000

0

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Number of Page Edits (English Wikipedia)

Number of Page Edits (Selected Topics)

Figure 29. Numbers of Yearly Wikipedia Page Edits
5.1.1.4. Page Edits VS. Page Views
As it was mentioned before, the previous studies investigated the characteristics of the
Wikipedia page edits and views and proposed models for them. However, few studies paid
attention to the association between these two factors. This study collected the monthly page
edits and views data of the selected topics and applied the simple linear regression tests to
explore whether there was significant association between the two variables, the number of
the page edits and the number of the page views.
A series of regression tests were conducted and the R-square values and P-values
obtained from the tests are demonstrated in Figure 30. The monthly numbers of the page views
(dependent variable) from January 2012 to December 2017 were collected and the monthly
number of the page edits (independent variable) from 2012 to 2014 were collected.
Considering the effect of time on the association, the monthly page views data were matched
to the monthly page edits data generated 36-month earlier to the same month. The X-axis
191

represents the time difference between the independent variable and dependent variable. For
instance, 8 means that the page views data used were 8 month later than the page edits data
used in the test. The left Y-axis stands for the R-square value and the right Y-axis stands for the
P-value of the regression tests.

0.25

0.6
0.5

0.2

0.4
0.15
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.05

0.1
0

0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
R-Square

P-Value

Figure 30. R-Square Values and P-Values of Regression Tests
The results show that although significant associations were found between the
monthly page edits and the monthly page views when the page views data were later than the
page edits data, the values of R-square were all smaller than 0.4, which means the influence of
page edits on page views were not strong. The highest R-square value (0.56) was found
between the two variables when the data were both collected from 2012 to 2014, but the Rsquare value was smaller than 0.7 which was considered as the borderline of strong effect size
(Moore, Notz, & Flinger, 2013). Therefore, there was no strong association between the
Wikipedia page edits and views. The Wikipedia users’ editing behaviors and the viewing
behaviors do not influence each other.
192

5.1.2. Internal Characteristic Evolution Patterns
5.1.2.1. Reasons for Entry Growth
The previous studies emphasized the importance of the editors’ intrinsic and Extrinsic
motivation and in the content generation on Wikipedia (Yang & Lai, 2010; Zhang & Zhu, 2006).
Zhang and Zhu (2006) proposed that editing of an article decreased the creator’s passion in
further contribution. However, Yang and Lai’s (2010) declaimed that intrinsic motivation had no
significant effect on the contribution. They tested the effects of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic
motivation, external self-concept motivation, and internal self-concept motivation in Wikipedia
knowledge sharing behavior and found that only self-concept motivation had significantly
positive effect on the knowledge sharing behavior. These studies concentrated on the reasons
why content was generated on Wikipedia from the contributors’ perspective, while this study
explored the reasons of entry generation by examining the content of the emerged entries.
After investigating all the entries created in the four investigated periods and the
characteristics of these entries, four reasons for generating new entries were discovered. The
first reason was that there were certain “triggers” inducing the generation of new entries. The
triggers included establishing organizations, events happening, proposing concepts and
theories, publishing journals, enacting laws, promulgate policies, and so on. The creation time
of the “triggered” entries were usually close to the time when the corresponding triggers
appeared. Some of the “triggers”, such as popular culture events, deaths, and breaks of
diseases also affected the external popularities of the corresponding entries (Generous,

193

Fairchild, Deshpande, Valle, & Priedhorsky, 2016; McIver & Brownstein, 2014; West &
Milowent, 2013).
The second reason was the spread of an existing concept. A good example was the
creation of the “Non-consensual condom removal” entry. This concept emerged no later than
2014 but was not used or accepted by the mainstream. It was the news reporting of this
concept that led to the creation of the corresponding entry on Wikipedia later.
The third reason was the need of a summary of related entries. There were hundreds of
entries relevant to specific topics on Wikipedia, like the entries about organizations concerning
the same topics, the entries about a specific region, the entries about a particular form of arts,
and so forth. As the relevant entries increased, the need for a summary of these entries rose.
For example, the “List of population concern organizations” entry listed the world-wide famous
population organizations. The “Misogyny in horror films” entry summarized the types and
characteristics of films which degraded women. These summaries provided rich information of
a specific topic to the Wikipedia users.
The fourth reason was the engagement of the people who concerned about certain
topics, such as the domain experts, the founders or members of organizations, and so on. For
instance, the “The Honest Body Project” entry was generated by the creator of the project
when the project began. Some entries on Wikipedia were not generated when the “triggers”
appeared, but they were produced when the people concerned about these “triggers”. For
instance, there were three entries of the attachment theory created in the second period, but
the time this theory and relevant studies proposed were much earlier than 2012. These three

194

entries were created by the people who were interested in this theory and had enough domain
knowledge.
5.1.2.4. Featured Subjects
(1) The man protection subject
The man protection subject started to grow from Periods 3 to 4, especially the phrases
“father’s rights” and “father’s rights movement” which increased fast during these periods.
Examining the associated entries shows that the observed man protection subject mainly
centered on father’s parental and reproductive rights.
The advocate of fatherhood emerged in the 1990s since the fatherlessness became “the
most critical social issue” (Baskerville, 2004, p.485). The researchers claimed that many serious
social problems (e.g. violence, crime, unwed pregnancy, and so on) and health problems (e.g.
mental disorders) were strongly correlated to fatherlessness. A primary cause of fatherlessness
was the gender bias in family law. The researchers examined the previous cases and proposed
suggestions for protecting father’s rights to the government and the father’s rights
organizations (e.g. Fathers 4 Justice) were built all over the world (Baskerville, 2004). The
research studies about father’s rights also grew in the past decades.
Figure 31 presents the number of articles about father’s rights published from 2000 to
2017 and the yearly number of page edits and views of the “Father’s rights movement” entry
on Wikipedia. The X-axis is the year, the left Y-axis is the number of articles and page edits, and
the right Y-axis is the number of page views. The articles were retrieved from WOS with the
search query “TS=(father’s rights)” (TS means topic in the database).
195

60000

450
400

50000
350
40000

300
250

30000
200
20000

150
100

10000
50
0

0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Number of Articles

Number of Page Edits

Number of Page Views

Figure 31. Trends of Father’s Rights Related Articles and Wikipedia Page Edits and Views
The figure illustrates that the number the related articles increased rapidly from 2014 to
2015, kept stable till 2016, but decreased rapidly from 2016 to 2017. Moreover, no obvious
growths were found for the other two factors. Therefore, these trends were not consistent with
the changes of man protection.
A relevant entry of man protection was the “Father’s quota” entry. Father’s quota is the
paternity leave for fathers. This concept began to expand in the 1990s as it was introduced by
the Norwegian welfare state, the studies about the paternity leave for fathers dated back to the
early 1990s, and the studies are still active in the recent years (Jensen & McKee, 2003; Klinth,
2008). The researchers studied how fathers used the paternity leave, whether the paternity
leave affected fathers’ work and income, the influences of fatherhood on children, and so forth
(Cools, Fiva, & Kirkebøen, 2015; Jensen & McKee, 2003; Klinth, 2008). The associated Wikipedia
entries focused on the history and policies of father’s quota and paternity leave.

196

Figure 32 presents the number of articles about the paternity leave for fathers
published from 2000 to 2017 and the yearly number of page edits and views of the “Father’s
quota” entry on Wikipedia. The X-axis is the year, the left Y-axis is the number of articles and
page edits, and the right Y-axis is the number of page views. The articles were retrieved from
WOS with the search query “TS=(paternity leave AND (men OR father))”.

60

3000

50

2500

40

2000

30

1500

20

1000

10

500

0

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Number of Articles

Number of Page Edits

Number of Page Views

Figure 32. Trends of Father’s Quota Related Articles and Wikipedia Page Edits and Views
The figure shows that the number of relevant articles rose rapidly from 2014 to 2017
(Periods 3 to 4), which confirmed the changes of the man protection subject. The number of
page views had two substantial growths, 2011 to 2013 and 2014 to 2016, which did not match
the subject changes. Meanwhile, the number of page edits climbed quickly from 2014 to 2015,
but no notable increase was observed during 2015 to 2017.
(2) The minority group subject

197

The Wikipedia editors paid increasing attention to the minority groups from 2010 to
2017, particularly the LGBT people. The collected entries like “LGBT stereotypes” and
“Healthcare and the LGBT community” centered on the LGBT people. The associated entries of
the abuse and violence subject, the family planning and reproduction subject, and the health
issue subject also gave their eyes on the LGBT group.
The research papers studied both family health and LGBT topics grew steadily growth
from 2010 to 2016, but decreased in 2017 in WOS (retrieved with search query “TS=(LGBT AND
(family health))”). The research subjects covered family planning and reproduction, health
problems and diseases, healthcare, interpersonal relationships, social interactions, abuse and
violence, and so forth (Croghan, Moone, & Olson, 2014; Klein et al., 2018; S. T. Russell, Ryan,
Toomey, Diaz, & Sanchez, 2011; Shields et al., 2012; Snapp, Watson, Russell, Diaz, & Ryan,
2015; Willging, Salvador, & Kano, 2006). These subjects were also found among the selected
Wikipedia entries. Therefore, a consistency was discovered between the research subjects and
the user-generated subjects on Wikipedia.
The findings of the featured subjects imply that there was association between research
studies and Wikipedia entries’ content to some extent. However, not all the changes of subjects
were reflected by the changes of relevant studies, which indicates that the Wikipedia editors
were not only researchers or scholars.
(3) The diminishing subjects
There were three diminishing subjects discovered in this study, which were the woman
protection subject in Child Maltreatment, and the economy subject and the politics subject in
198

Women’s Health. The women protection subject in the Children, youth, families and friends
theme of Child Maltreatment diminished from Period 3 to Period 4. It was caused by the
decreasing discussion of maternity leave and working mothers.
The economy subject and the politics subject diminished from Period 1 to Period 2 in the
Medical and interdisciplinary subjects theme of Women’s Health. The diminishing was caused
by the decrease of the phrase “political economy”. In the early version of the Global health
entry, political economy was included as a factor that influenced global health, while in the late
versions, the content of political economy was removed. It means that the Wikipedia editors do
not regard political economy as an important factor for global health in the recent years.
5.1.3. Internal Characteristics VS. External Popularities
Figure 33 displays the trends of the yearly numbers of the new generated entries, the
page edits, and the page views for the selected topics from 2010 to 2017. The X-axis represents
the year, the left Y-axis represents the number of the new entries every year, the right Y-axis
represents the yearly number of page edits (thousands) and page views (billions). This figure
demonstrates that the trends of the new entries and the page views were similar, while the
trend of the page edits varied from the others. The probable reason was that the generation of
new entries attracted the users to access and view the Wikipedia pages.

199

40

120

35

35

35
30

27

84

25
76

25

100

98

95

30

80

22 75

20

14 47

15
37

36

31

10

30

26

29

60

17

58

27

43
26

5

40
20
0

0
2010

2011

2012

Number of Entries

2013

2014

Number of Page Edits

2015

2016

2017

Number of Page Views

Figure 33. Trends of Entries, Page Edits, and Page Views for the Selected Topics
Regarding the content of the selected topics, the average length of the entries increased
from 1945.83 terms to 2838.11 terms and the subjects of each topic became increasingly
diverse from Periods 1 to 4. However, the decreasing page edits and views show totally
different trends. In other words, the content and subject changes had no association with the
external popularity changes.
5.1.4. Wikipedia VS. Other Platforms
As it was mentioned before, there were common subjects discovered from the
Wikipedia entries and the academic research. Staub and Hodel (2015) also declared that
widely-accepted research findings were cited on Wikipedia and accurate terminologies were
provided for the viewers. To the contrary, the external popularity evolution patterns of the
entries was not consistent with the increase of research papers. This finding confirms König’s
(2013) conclusion that both experts and lay people made contributions to Wikipedia entries.

200

König proposed that the experts completed most of the knowledge production, while the lay
people contributed more in the content hierarchy organization.
The relation between Google search frequency and Wikipedia page views was
investigated by Yoshida et al. (2015), but the results of this study rejected their findings. Not all
the family-health-related topics had high correlated Google search frequencies and Wikipedia
page views.
Health-related topics were also widely discussed on social media platforms other than
Wikipedia, such as social network sites (e.g. Facebook), media sharing sites (e.g. YouTube),
blogs (e.g. WordPress), microblogs (e.g. Twitter) and so on (Grajales III, Sheps, Ho, NovakLauscher, & Eysenbach, 2014). The social media platforms were utilized to surveil diseases and
educate the lay public, and moreover, these platforms also attracted the health professionals to
share their knowledge and built the bridge between them and the lay public (Hagg, Dahinten, &
Currie, 2018). Wikipedia shared the common functionalities as the other social media
platforms.
Wikipedia was one of the prominent resources of health information and knowledge
(Heilman et al., 2011). Considering the results obtained, the entries growth was faster than the
increase of research papers. The number of the page views for each Wikipedia entry was huge,
which illustrates the popularity of the entry to the Wikipedia viewers, both the lay people and
experts. Heilman et al. (2011) reported that 50% to 70% physicians used the Wikipedia as a
health information source and Allahwala, Nadkarni, and Sebaratnam (2013) discovered that
94% medical students regarded Wikipedia as the most used information source. Meanwhile,

201

large amounts of the lay public read the health-related Wikipedia entries extensively (Heilman
& West, 2015).
According to the previous research papers, Wikipedia provided a variety of healthrelated information and knowledge, including health care, medicine, illnesses and diseases,
health research and education, and so forth (Azer, 2014; Generous et al., 2016; Heilman et al.,
2011; McIver & Brownstein, 2014). Based on the previous findings, this study investigated the
family-health-related topics in-depth and found the prevalent subjects (e.g. abuse and violence,
family planning and reproduction, health issue, and so on) and lower-level subjects (e.g. sexual
abuse, domestic violence, family planning and reproduction method, LGBT group, health
organization, and so on) for the Wikipedia editors and viewers.
5.1.5. Discussion Summary
This section discussed the unique findings and compared them with the previous
research papers. The previous findings showed that the trends of online health information
generation and seeking kept growing during the past decades, but a decrease was found for the
trend of the online health information use. Different from the previous findings, the external
popularity evolution patterns observed in this study both fell during the investigated periods.
The previous models of Wikipedia page views did not work well for the selected topics, while a
consistency was found for the page edit trends between the previous literature and this study.
This phenomenon confirms the results obtained in Chapter 4.
For the internal characteristic evolution patterns, the previous literature explored the
factors influencing the users’ contribution on social media from the users’ perspective, while
202

this study investigated the reasons for entry growth by examining the content of the entries
themselves. Four reasons were proposed, which were the “triggers”, the spread of an existing
concept, the need of summarization, and the engagement of the people who concerned about
typical topics.
The external popularity evolution patterns were not associated with the internal
characteristic evolution patterns. However, there was association between research studies
and Wikipedia entries’ content to some extent, since health professionals had made
contributions to the content on Wikipedia, similar increases were discovered between research
articles and Wikipedia subjects for specific entries, and common subjects were studied in both
academic research papers and Wikipedia entries.
5.2. Implications
This study explored the associated entries, themes, and subjects of the Child
Maltreatment topic, the Family Planning topic, and the Women’s Health topic on Wikipedia,
and examined the evolution patterns of the three topics, which included not only the
evolutions of their internal characteristics but also external popularities. The implications of this
study consist of three layers: the theoretical implications, the practical implications, and the
methodological implications.
5.2.1. Theoretical Implications
5.2.1.1. Family Health Topics

203

Family-health-related topics are widely discussed in research studies and people’s daily
life. Family health information is a prominent component of information posted online,
especially on social media platforms. This study demonstrated that the overall external
popularities of the investigated family-health-related topics declined from 2010 to 2017, but
their associated entries and terms increased and the associated subjects became more diverse.
There were three types of subjects for the topics, which were growing subjects (e.g. abuse and
violence, family planning and reproduction, and health issue), fluctuating subjects (e.g. human
trafficking in Child Maltreatment, and environment issue in Family Planning), and diminishing
subjects (e.g. economy in Women’s Health). The findings can help health professionals,
patients, and general users gain insights into the history and development of the topics from a
general public’s perspective and understand the related concepts, subjects, and themes better.
5.2.1.2. Wikipedia
The family-health-related topics’ internal characteristic and external popularity
evolution patterns were demonstrated based on the data obtained from Wikipedia. The
evolution patterns of the selected topics can reflect the evolution of the Wikipedia content to
some extent. For instance, the general trends of the page edits and views for the entries went
down in the long run, while their content and related subjects became rich and diverse as time
went by. The Wikipedia contributors and users can deepen their knowledge about the
characteristics of Wikipedia and the user-generated content on it.
This study also compared Wikipedia with other platforms, including Google Trends,
academic databases, and other social media platforms from both internal and external aspects.

204

The findings revealed the commonalities and differences among the different platforms, which
enables the researchers and the general users to know more about the characteristics of these
platforms.
5.2.1.2. Ontology Development
In the philosophical sense, ontology is defined as “a particular system of categories
accounting for a certain vision of the world” (Guarino, 1998, p.82). In the area of artificial
intelligence and computer science, ontology refers to “an engineering artifact, constituted by a
specific vocabulary used to describe a certain reality, plus a set of explicit assumptions
regarding the intended meaning of the vocabulary words.” (Guarino, 1998, p.82). In the second
definition, vocabulary words are concepts and relations. Therefore, to develop an ontology, it is
necessary to include all the related concepts of a specific topic and identify the relations among
them.
The results of Research Question One demonstrated the associated entries, themes,
subjects, and high-frequency terms/phrases of the selected topics, and the relations among
them as well. The entries, subjects, and terms obtained for the topics could be recognized as
the vocabulary words of the family health ontology. The relations among the topics, themes,
subjects, entries, and terms/phrases could be the references for developing the relations
among the concepts of the ontology.
For example, the Child Maltreatment topic had 241 associated entries assigned to four
themes and the majority of the entries were relevant concepts of Child Maltreatment, like Child
grooming, Abuse defense, and so on. Moreover, a part of the high-frequency terms and phrases
205

of this topic were the relevant concepts, such as immigrant families, neglected children, and so
forth. The entries and terms/phrases obtained in this study, as well as the relations among
them, could be used for ontology development of family health and child maltreatment.
Additionally, since this study presented the subject changes of the topics, it is possible
to develop temporal dynamic ontologies based on the findings. The emerging or diminishing
concepts in each period could be extracted from the emerging entries and the frequencyincreasing or frequency-decreasing terms and phrases.
5.2.1.3. Consumer Health Vocabularies
The consumer health vocabulary problem which describes the mismatch between the
terms used by health professional and the ones used by consumers of health information has
existed for a long time (C. A. Smith & Stavri, 2005; Zeng et al., 2007). Since general users usually
have different educational background and do not have professional health training, it is
impossible to require them to use professional terms. However, in general, consumer terms are
not well defined, which causes problems in seeking and understanding health information
(Zielstorff, 2003). On the other hand, the existing health vocabularies do not cover all the
consumer terms. To fill the vocabulary gap between health professionals and consumers,
health scientists have started to develop consumer health vocabularies (Patrick, Monga,
Sievert, Hall, & Longo, 2001; Tse, 2011). For instance, Patrick et al. (Patrick, Monga, Sievert,
Hall, & Longo, 2001b) used folk medical terms to extend three controlled vocabulary resources
of technical medical terms and with the extended resources they linked consumer diabetesrelated terms to their related terms used by family physicians.

206

Consumer health vocabulary development includes two steps: “(1) the identification of
candidate strings (i.e., words or phrases) in a domain and (2) the determination of which of
these should be included in a vocabulary as ‘valid’ terms” (Zeng et al., 2007, p.1). To identify the
candidate strings, there are two criteria: the terms should be “commonly used by consumers”
and the terms should allow for “computer processing of consumer language” (Zeng et al., 2007,
p.2).
The family-health-related entries, subjects, terms, and phrases investigated in this study
were collected from Wikipedia, created by the experts and lay people. Both professional
terminologies and consumer health vocabularies were found from the content of the entries.
For instance, the terms “hypertension” and “high blood pressure” were used interchangeably in
the “Complications of pregnancy” entry. The health-related terms and phrases obtained from
the selected entries were associated with family health, so they could be regarded as the
candidates of the consumer health vocabularies. For example, the terms “child grooming” and
“immigrant family” obtained from the entries could be added to the open-access and
collaborative consumer health vocabulary. This procedure will contribute to the first step of
consumer health vocabulary development.
5.2.2. Practical Implications
The theoretical implications mentioned before have relations to the practical
implications in this section. The implications in ontology development and consumer health
vocabulary are not only theoretical but also practical. Researchers can build ontology systems
based on the ontologies obtained from research studies, and consumer health vocabulary can

207

be applied to optimizing information retrieval systems. Apart from these practical implications,
the other implications were classified into two groups: the user-oriented implications and the
system-oriented implications.
5.2.2.1. User-Oriented Practical Implications
The illustration of the selected topics’ internal characteristics enables health
professionals and general users to get a more comprehensive understanding of family health.
The associated entries, subjects, and themes obtained in this study offered a whole picture of
the three selected topics, demonstrated the relations among the relevant concepts, and can
help different user groups distinguish relevant or similar concepts. The findings can improve the
communications among different groups, such as patients, healthcare takers, and medical
professionals. Moreover, in health information seeking, especially online information searching,
they can use accurate search terms and related terms to present their information needs.
Based on the changes of the subjects, and the frequency-increasing and frequency-decreasing
terms/phrases discovered in the investigated periods, the users can modify their search
strategies so as to retrieve more relevant information in specific periods.
5.2.2.2. System-Oriented Practical Implications
(1) Information organization
The system-oriented practical implications include an information organization aspect
and an information retrieval aspect. The internal characteristics and external popularities
obtained for the topics provide a way for information organization from the general public’s
view.
208

Wikipedia allows editors to classify entries into categories and sub-categories, and
organize them in tree-like structures (Wikipedia, 2018). Navigation pages have been created to
displays the categories, sub-categories, and entries. However, the relations among the
categories, sub-categories, and entries are very complex. The categories and sub-categories are
not exclusive. A sub-category might belong to multiple categories on different levels.
The Health category is one of the top-level categories on Wikipedia and has 45 subcategories, including Health by continent, Health care, Sexual health, Women’s health, and so
on (Category:Health, 2018), while family health is not identified as a sub-category. This study
collected and examined three family-health-related topics and their associated entries, which
will supplement the entries in the existing sub-categories (e.g. the Women’s health subcategory) and contribute to the generation of the Family health sub-category in the future. The
methods used in this study could be applied to generate and enrich the other categories or subcategories.
For Websites which aim to offer health information to the general public, their
designers can consult the internal characteristics of the selected topics when organizing the
family-health-related topics. The external popularities could be references for selecting the
popular topics. Additionally, in order to assist users in exploring more related information, the
Websites can add links of the information according to the related entries, subjects, and highfrequency terms and phrases detected in this study. For example, abuse and violence and
family planning and reproduction were two popular subjects of Family Health, so these two
subjects could be displayed in a prominent area on the family health page. The links of domestic

209

violence, sexual abuse, and other popular relevant lower-level subjects could be created and
connected to the abuse and violence subject.
(2) Information retrieval
From the information retrieval aspect, the related entries, subjects, and terms/phrases
obtained could be considered as related search terms by the recommendation system. An
instance was that women protection laws and women protection news report could be related
search terms of women protection. In query search, these items could be provided by
information retrieval systems to help users modify their search queries.
Another potential implication is that observing the evolution patterns of the selected
topics will support temporal information retrieval. A challenge in developing temporal
information retrieval is the changes of terms and topics. New terms emerge and their meanings
change as time goes by; the related concepts and terms of specific topics also change over time.
As a result, in different ages the terms about the same topic vary a lot. This phenomenon
causes the difficulty in retrieving all related documents in different time periods of a topic with
same terms. This study demonstrated the internal characteristic changes of the selected topics
in the determined periods. These findings provide the temporal relevant terms of the selected
topics for information retrieval system, which will help information retrieval system judge the
relevance between search queries and documents in a specific time period and return more
relevant search results.
A typical example was the emergence of the “Non-consensual condom removal” entry
and the term “stealthing”. Stealthing emerged in gay community in 2014 or earlier, while non210

consensual condom removal, a formal expression of stealthing, appeared later than stealthing
and was widely used after 2016. To retrieve the results on “non-consensual condom removal”
after 2016, the information retrieval system can return the items related to “non-consensual
condom removal”. However, to retrieve the results before 2016 or 2014, the system can return
the items about “stealthing” instead.
5.2.3. Methodological Implications
The third layer of implications lies in the research design. Since this study is a mixed
research method study, different types of data were collected, and various methods and
approaches were adopted for data collection and analysis. The uniqueness of this study
included two aspects: data and methods applied.
5.2.3.1. Wikipedia Historical Data
Different data sets have been used in the Wikipedia studies, such as the text of
Wikipedia entries, the users’ profiles, the editing records of entries, and the talk pages of
entries. However, after reviewing plenty of research papers about Wikipedia, few of them
collected and used the historical data of Wikipedia entries, like text of historical versions.
Therefore, the data used in this study were unique.
The Wikipedia data dump was the data source of the page edits and page views data
and the view historical pages on Wikipedia were the data source of the page creation time data
and the historical revision data. The tools, r and RStudio, and the packages, WikipediR and
pageviews, were utilized to collect and process these data. These were efficient and effective

211

means to acquire and process the Wikipedia data. The data from Google Trends and Web of
Science were also collected and compared with the Wikipedia data in the Discussion section.
The findings reveal that the partition of the four time periods in this study was
reasonable. The two-year time interval was long enough to show the subject changes for the
selected topics. The experience of collecting and analyzing Wikipedia historical data would
make a contribution to the future studies.
5.2.3.2. SOM Approach
The SOM approach is a popular unsupervised learning approach that projects highdimensional data onto low-dimensional output (Kohonen, 1990). It is a widely used neural
network method which can measure similarities between items of input data so as to form
similarity graphs. The SOM approach has been applied to diverse research fields, such as
finance, industry, biology, and so on (Deboeck & Kohonen, 2013; Ernst, Kellis, Hardison, Myers,
& Wold, 2013; Fuertes et al., 2010; Sarlin, Yao, & Eklund, 2012). In the field of library and
information science, this approach is usually employed in document cluster analysis and
information retrieval algorithm, and to explore and extract information from documents (X. Lin,
Soergel, & Marchionini, 1991; Suchanek et al., 2009; J. Zhang, 2007). However, few research
studies employed this approach to analyze Wikipedia data.
This study applied the SOM approach to cluster Wikipedia entries, which was a new
attempt in the information science field. Compared with other clustering approaches, the SOM
approach has several advantages: (1) its outputs, the SOM displays, illustrate clear boundaries
of clusters; (2) the colors on the SOM displays demonstrate the similarities between the
212

investigated items in addition to the distances between them; and (3) the SOM toolbox allows
users to customize the data processing procedure of SOM based on the users’ needs. According
to the qualitative analysis results, the entries in one resultant cluster from the SOM analysis had
high similarities, which means the SOM approach performed well for the Wikipedia data.
Additionally, the SOM approach was combined with the coding method and the subject analysis
method to reveal the internal characteristics of the selected topics.
5.2.3.3. Temporal Analysis Methods
Not only one quantitative analysis method (SOM) was utilized in this study, descriptive
statistical analysis, inferential statistical analysis, and natural language processing methods
were used as well. These methods were all applied for the temporal analysis.
Temporal analysis covers various data analysis methods that demonstrate the temporal
changes of the research objects. This study used the bar charts and line charts to reveal the
trends of the page edits and views, the Google search frequencies, and the research articles of
the selected topics and entries. Four hypotheses and six sub-hypotheses were posted and
tested to illustrate the differences between the four identified periods (Friedman’s Test and
Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test) and the differences between the topics (Kruskal-Wallis H Test). The
n-gram approach, a natural language processing method, was used to analyze the historical
data of each period, and extract the terms/phrases changed the most from one period to next.
The combination of temporal analysis methods in this study was unique compared with the
previous research studies.
5.2.4. Implication Summary
213

The findings of this study could enable the experts and lay people understand family
health and Wikipedia better, and benefit the development of ontologies and consumer health
vocabularies. The practical implications have two aspects: the user-oriented and systemoriented aspects. The system-oriented implications will improve the information organization
of online health information, and optimize the temporal information retrieval of health
information. Regarding the methodological implications, the data collected and the data
analysis methods used in this study will both contribute to future studies, particularly the
methodologies.
5.3. Chapter Five Summary
This chapter includes two sections, Discussion and Implications. The first section further
discussed the unique findings obtained in Chapter Four, and compared them with the previous
literature. The second section demonstrated the theoretical implications, the practical
implications, and the methodological implications of this study.

214

6. CONCLUSION

This chapter reviews the research problem of this study, and summarizes the primary
findings obtained in the Results section and the Discussion & Implications section. The
limitations of this study and the future directions are also demonstrated in this chapter.
6.1. Research Problem and Primary Findings
With the development of Web 2.0 and social media, the volume of information grows
much more rapidly than the previous decades. New terms and concepts emerge and existing
terms and concepts change much quicker on social media platforms than on conventional
media. Family-health-related topics, terms, and concepts also change a lot during the past
decades. This study investigated and discovered the evolutions of three family-health-related
topics derived from the social media Website Wikipedia from 2010 to 2017. The entire time
span was divided to four periods, which were 2010 to 2011 (Period 1), 2012 to 2013 (Period 2),
2014 to 2015 (Period 3), and 2016 to 2017 (Period 4).
Three family-health-related topics were selected from the WHO Website, which were
Child Maltreatment, Family Planning, and Women’s Health. The associated entries of the topics
were retrieved from Wikipedia, and the numeric and text historical data of the entries were
collected from Wikipedia data dump and the Wikipedia Web pages. Coding, subject analysis,
descriptive statistical analysis, inferential statistical analysis, SOM approach, and n-gram
approach were employed to explore the internal characteristic and external popularity
evolutions of the selected topics. The primary findings of this study are demonstrated in the
following paragraphs.
215

6.1.1. Findings of Child Maltreatment
Child Maltreatment had 241 associated entries on Wikipedia and the entries referred to
four themes: (1) Abuse, violence, harm, and subordination; (2) Children, youth, families and
friends; (3) Health problems and risks; and (4) Support and protection. Six subjects attracted
increasing attention from the Wikipedia editors, which were abuse and violence, children and
youth protection, family planning and reproduction, health issue, man protection, and social
factor. However, the editors’ interests in Woman protection diminished during the investigated
periods. This topic was the most popular among the three topics from both the Wikipedia
editors’ and viewers’ perspectives. Its popularity among the Wikipedia editors decreased
significantly from Periods 1 to 3, while stayed stable after Period 3.
6.1.2. Findings of Family Planning
One hundred and fifty associated entries of Family Planning were found on Wikipedia
and were assigned to three themes, Family planning and reproductive health, Human and
environment, and Population problems. This topic had more diverse subjects than the other two
topics. Among the subjects, abuse and violence, economy, family planning and reproduction,
futures studies, health issue, human development, inequality and discrimination, military,
population issue, and social factor received increasing attention from the editors. This topic was
less popular than the other two topics among the Wikipedia editors and viewers. The popularity
among the Wikipedia editors dropped rapidly from Periods 2 to 3, but kept stable in other
periods.
6.1.3. Findings of Women’s Health
216

Two hundred and seven associated entries of Women’s Health were retrieved on
Wikipedia and four themes emerged from these entries, which were (2) Discrimination,
violence, harm, and subordination; (2) Health problems and risks; (3) Medical and
interdisciplinary subjects; and (4) Support and protection. For this topic, the editors paid more
and more attention to abuse and violence, family planning and reproduction, health issue,
inequality and discrimination, minority group, and woman protection, while their interests in
economy and politics decreased. Different from the other two topics, no significant change was
found in terms of this topic’s popularity among the editors.
6.1.4. Internal Characteristic and External Popularity Evolution Patterns
No association was found between the internal characteristic evolution patterns and the
external popularity evolution patterns. From the internal characteristic’s aspect, the familyhealth-related topics’ content (e.g. entries, subjects, terms, and phrases) on Wikipedia kept
increasing from 2010 to 2017. However, the topics’ entry growth trends were different from
each other. Three features were discovered for the emerged associated entries, which were
specialization, summarization, and internationalization. The reasons for the entry growth
included: (1) the “triggers”; (2) the spread of an existing concept; (3) the need of
summarization; and (4) the engagement of the people who concerned about typical topics.
For some of the entries, the increases of their relevant articles were consistent with the
growth of the relevant subjects. Meanwhile, similar family health subjects were found from the
Wikipedia entries and research papers. Therefore, academic research had an association with
the Wikipedia content to some extent.

217

The subjects in each topic became increasingly diverse as time went by. The common
subjects (e.g. abuse and violence, family planning and reproduction, and health issue) of the
topics had different developing trajectories in each topic.
From the external popularity’s aspect, the overall popularity of the family-health-related
topics declined from 2010 to 2017, contrary to the growth of their content and the growth of
extensive online health information seeking.
The selected topics had similar trends of popularities among the Wikipedia viewers.
Their popularity all grew rapidly from Periods 1 to 2, remained stable from Periods 2 to 3, and
fell dramatically from Periods 3 to 4. However, the trends of the popularities among the
viewers were not consistent with those among the editors. Therefore, the members in these
two groups did not totally overlap each other. Moreover, the trends of the topics’ popularities
among the editors were not consistent with each other. It means that the editors of different
family health topics varied from one to another.
6.2. Limitations
The first limitation is that due to the limitation of time, only the data of three familyhealth-related topics from 2010 to 2017 were collected and analyzed. Since the number of
selected topics was relatively small and the time span was relatively short, it is possible that the
results obtained from the three topics cannot be generalized to the whole health science field.
The Gender bias on Wikipedia entry on Wikipedia claimed that the majority of Wikipedia
editors were male, which might lead to a potential bias in the Wikipedia content. Since male
editors were much more than female editors, the user-generated content on Wikipedia more
218

reflected the male’s opinions than the female’s opinions, which might skew the findings
obtained in this study.
Another limitation is that only one clustering approach and one data mining approach
were employed in this study. In data analysis, different clustering and data mining approaches
may lead to different results. However, it is hard to find and choose the most suitable
approaches to get the best results. The researcher could only apply a limited number of
approaches and acquire the most reasonable and reliable results by using these approaches.
6.3. Future Directions
To overcome the limitations, the data of more family-health-related topics from
Wikipedia or other platforms (e.g. Twitter, YouTube, academic databases, and digital libraries)
should be gathered in future studies. Examination of the evolution patterns of other familyhealth-related topics will show whether the patterns obtained in this study would be confirmed
in other topics. The time duration of the investigation will be extended as well. In this case, the
data obtained will be more complete and the research scope will be larger.
The data of the health-related topics collected could be compared with those obtained
from the other platforms, such as WebMD, PubMed, and academic data sources. Since the
content from these health Websites and academic data sources are mostly created by health
professionals, comparing them with the data collected from this study can reveal the
differences between the public and the health professionals’ interests.
Another future research direction is to employ other data collection and analysis
methods to achieve, present, and interpret results from different angles. As it was mentioned
219

before, there are various methods and tools for data collection and analysis. Although this
study used r and RStudio for data collection, other tools (e.g. Python) are also useful for online
data crawling. Additionally, apart from SOM and n-gram, there are many other clustering
approaches and text mining approaches, such as Hierarchical Clustering methods, Partitioning
Clustering methods, topic modeling methods, and so on. Using different data analysis methods
will lead to different results and the corresponding interpretation will be different. Therefore,
the researcher could compare the different results.