A COLLECTIVE CASE STUDY TO EXAMINE ADMINISTRATORS’ INSTRUCTIONAL
LEADERSHIP PERSPECTIVE OF THE ROLE OF INSTRUCTIONAL COACHES AND
TEACHER LIBRARIANS IN CALIFORNIA PUBLIC SCHOOLS

by
Melanie A. Lewis
Liberty University

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this collective case study was to develop an understanding of why California K12 public school administrators distribute instructional leadership responsibilities to either
instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how the two roles compare within the context of
the implementation of the California Common Core State Standards in ELA/Literacy. The study
addressed the following research questions: Why do administrators select instructional
coaches/teacher librarians to help them provide instructional leadership? How do administrators
and instructional coaches/teacher librarians work together to provide professional learning within
daily instructional practice? How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the
instructional coaches’/teacher librarians’ instructional leadership roles? Participants were district
administrators who oversee the population, site administrators who directly supervise site-based
instructional coaches or teacher librarians, and the corresponding instructional coaches and
teacher librarians. Data were collected from multiple sources, including documents, interviews,
observations, and focus groups with participants. Within-case and cross-case analyses were
conducted to develop a naturalistic generalization of what was learned about how the coach and
teacher librarian contributed to instructional leadership. Results demonstrated that administrators’
personal values influence their decisions to select and utilize instructional coaches or teacher
librarians to provide instructional leadership. Instructional coaches are considered to be extensions
of administrators as instructional leaders in ELA while teacher librarians are considered to be
resources that can be called upon to provide occasional instructional support in ELA.
Keywords: teacher librarian, school librarian, school library program, instructional
leadership, distributed leadership, instructional coach, professional learning, administrator
perception, Common Core State Standards

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
Overview
The 2010 adoption of the California Common Core State Standards: English Language
Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects (CCSS ELA) created a
need for public school leaders to identify and deliver intensive professional learning to their
teachers. To meet this need, districts have hired large numbers of instructional coaches to assist
site administrators with this instructional leadership task (Udesky, 2015). Teacher librarians,
educators who have been specifically trained and credentialed to provide instructional leadership
in the CCSS ELA and are mandated by California Education Code to be employed in California’s
school libraries, are not usually considered for this task (American Association of School
Librarians [AASL], 2009a; California Commission on Teacher Credentialing [CCTC], 2014;
California Department of Education [CDE], 2011, 2012a, 2015a; California Education Code,
n.d.; Williams, 2015). As only approximately 8% of K-12 public schools in California employ a
credentialed teacher librarian (California School Library Association [CSLA], 2015), there is a
need to examine why administrators have elected to employ instructional coaches instead of
teacher librarians.
This study employed a collective case study design (Yin, 2014) to examine how the roles
of the teacher librarian and instructional coach compared in assisting California school
administrators to provide instructional leadership in the implementation of the CCSS ELA. This
chapter provides an overview of the study, including important background information, situation
to self, the problem and purpose statements, significance of the study, research questions, and
definitions of pertinent terms used throughout the study.

17
Background
In 2010, the California State Board of Education adopted the new CCSS ELA, which
were designed to ultimately enable students to successfully meet college and career expectations,
compete in a global economy, and participate in civic life. The standards necessitate a rigorous
and relevant instructional program that focuses upon the development of 21st century skills:
critical thinking and problem solving, creativity, and communication and collaboration. The use
of technology to access, evaluate, synthesize, and communicate information is strongly
emphasized in each grade level’s learning benchmarks. Students are expected to be able to
demonstrate proficiency of these skills not just in ELA, but across the curricular areas of
history/social science, science, and technical subjects (CDE, 2013; Parkay, Hass, & Anctil,
2014).
Social Context
California school leaders are under tremendous pressure to increase student achievement
in ELA in a high-stakes, computer-based testing environment (Range, Pijanowski, Duncan,
Scherz, & Hvidston, 2014). Both the Common Core State Standards System Implementation
Plan and the English Language Arts/English Language Development Framework for California
Public Schools: Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (ELA Framework) indicate that strong
instructional leadership and well-prepared teachers are essential for success (CDE, 2014, 2015a).
To prepare teachers effectively, school leaders must organize and facilitate high quality
professional development. Research has demonstrated that ongoing and intensive professional
development that is connected to practice and school initiatives, focused on the instruction and
learning of specific academic content, and incorporates a collaborative approach produces
positive gains in student achievement (Darling-Hammond, Hyler, & Gardner, 2017; Darling-

18
Hammond, Wei, Andree, Richardson, & Orphanos, 2009). Consequently, California K-12 school
administrators have sought to implement a model of continuous, embedded, one-on-one
professional development within the context of daily ELA instructional practice (Neumerski,
2013).
Theoretical Context
Time constraints, competing demands, and lack of knowledge and expertise often prevent
school administrators from fully engaging in the role of instructional leader (Hallinger, 2005).
Distributed leadership theory acknowledges that multiple leaders are needed to assist a school
administrator in fulfilling his or her instructional leadership responsibilities. These leaders must
possess the necessary skill sets and dedicated time to focus upon engaging in curriculum and
instructional improvements. In California, some K-12 public school administrators have
identified instructional coaches and teacher librarians as leaders that meet these criteria and
possess the ability to provide continuous, one-on-one professional development. As such,
distributed leadership theory will serve as a framework for developing an understanding of why
and how California K-12 school administrators distribute instructional leadership responsibilities
to either instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how the interactions among the leaders
enable them to meet CCSS ELA instructional goals (Neumerski, 2013; Spillane, 2006).
Historical Context
The instructional roles of instructional coaches and teacher librarians appear to be similar
in nature (CDE, 2013, 2015a; Knight, 2007; Marzano & Simms, 2013). Both are expected to be
experts in providing professional development. Both are also expected to establish collaborative
partnerships with teachers in the planning, delivery, and assessment of instruction in order to
improve student achievement. Where the roles appear to differ is in instructional content;

19
instructional coaches are generally expected to focus upon implementing research-based
instructional practices while teacher librarians are expected to focus upon integrating 21st
century skills and multiple literacies into the curriculum. The roles also differ in role definition,
qualifications, and standards and guidelines. While there is no common definition, model, or
certification for general instructional coaches (Neumerski, 2013), there does exist a common
definition, professional standards, and advanced training and certification for teacher librarians
(AASL, 2009a, 2009b, 2010, 2016a; CCTC, 2014, 2015).
The research base for instructional coaches and teacher librarians differs quite
significantly. While there is little research to demonstrate that the role of the instructional coach
positively impacts student achievement (Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Neumerski, 2013),
there are multiple large-scale studies (Gretes, 2013; Kachel, 2013; Kaplan, 2010; School
Libraries Impact Studies, 2013; School Libraries Work, 2016) that demonstrate how strong
school library programs led by teacher librarians positively impact student achievement in ELA.
One of these studies focused exclusively on California’s school library programs (Achterman,
2008). There is some research to suggest that coaching improves teacher knowledge and skill,
but recent studies on instructional coaching have revealed recurring barriers to effective practice.
These barriers include role confusion, a lack of training and support, and inability to engage in
coaching work due to competing responsibilities (Bean, Draper, Hall, Vandermolen, & Zigmond,
2010; Galluci, DeVoogt Van Lare, Yoon, & Boatright, 2010; Knight, 2012; Lowenhaupt,
McKinney, & Reeves, 2014; Lynch & Ferguson, 2010; Range et al., 2014; Stock & Duncan,
2010; Vanderburg & Stephens, 2010). Researchers have conducted multiple studies to
specifically examine administrators’ perceptions of the instructional role of the teacher librarian
that demonstrate why they value this role (Church, 2008, 2010; Levitov, 2013; Lupton, 2016;

20
Shannon, 2012), but only one small study that demonstrates why administrators value the
instructional role of the instructional coach (Selvaggi, 2016).
California K-12 public school administrators are expected to use their knowledge of the
state’s content standards, adopted curriculum, and governmental regulations to direct staff hiring
and placement according to staff capacity and instructional goals (CCTC, 2016). However, they
are unlikely to achieve a great depth of understanding of any of these sources due to their
combined volume of information. Considering that knowledge of the components of effective
school library programs is not specifically required by the California Professional Standards for
Education Leaders and the role of the teacher librarian was not clearly linked to the
implementation of the CCSS ELA until 2014, is it unlikely that administrators have been exposed
to this information. This is compounded by the reality that most California administrators have
had few opportunities to work with a credentialed teacher librarian, and research on school library
programs has not been well disseminated to administrative publications and professional learning
venues (CSLA, 2015; Everhart & Mardis, 2014; Kaplan, 2010; Lance & Hofschire, 2013;
VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). Given these circumstances, and since there is no state funding
specifically dedicated to fulfilling the California Education Code mandates to provide school
library services by credentialed teacher librarians, it appears that administrators have little to no
knowledge of the role of the teacher librarian (Church, 2008). Consequently, they may not elect
to hire a teacher librarian to assist in the implementation of the CCSS ELA.
Situation to Self
After serving as an elementary classroom teacher for almost nine years in five different
school districts in California, I learned that a teacher librarian was a credentialed teaching position
in the state of California. I did not learn about this position in my teacher credentialing program,

21
nor did I encounter a credentialed teacher librarian in any of the schools or districts in which I
taught. I also do not recall ever receiving instruction from a teacher librarian as a student who
attended K-12 public schools while growing up in different regions of California.
Philosophical Assumptions
Since I have a passion for teaching and learning, reading, and the meaningful use of
technology within the curriculum, the position of teacher librarian was a natural fit for me. I
completed my teacher librarian credential in 2006 and served as a teacher librarian for eight years
in a California public school district before assuming my current position as director of a teacher
librarian preparation program at a private California university. The goal of the teacher librarian
is to cultivate in each student a passion for learning that extends throughout his or her lifetime
(AASL, 2009a). As such, I believe that all students should be provided equitable access to a wide
variety of learning resources in multiple formats and taught how to appropriately access, critically
evaluate, and effectively and ethically use information from those resources.
I believe that there exists one source of truth: God. I also believe that since God’s truth is
revealed in His creation and Scripture, all truth is His. Within the context of public K-12
education, it is not legal nor appropriate for an educator to instill beliefs such as these in his or her
students. However, I also believe that it is important that every individual examine a variety of
worldviews to draw his or her own conclusions. The school library is a place of voluntary
inquiry where intellectual freedom is still valued and defended. Within this context, teacher
librarians have an incredible opportunity to introduce students to many sources of knowledge and
teach them to critically evaluate and discern for themselves what is good and true.
Research Paradigm
Since the literature demonstrates that most administrators learn about teacher librarians by

22
working with them and California employs so few teacher librarians in its schools (California
State Auditor, 2016; CDE, 2015d; Church, 2008, 2010; Shannon, 2012), administrators are
unlikely to learn about the benefits of this position and will probably continue to seek other
personnel to provide services that could be provided by a teacher librarian. This motivated me to
examine how this problem might be remedied; therefore, a pragmatic paradigm guided this
research study (Knight, 2006). I am primarily interested in the practical implications of this
research study and how the results can be used to educate California school administrators about
the instructional role of the teacher librarian.
Ethical Concerns
My education, experience, and position demonstrates a clear bias in favor of the
employment of teacher librarians in California public schools. As an elementary classroom
teacher, I occasionally engaged with my school site’s literacy and math coaches over the course of
three years. Beyond this, I have little experience with instructional coaches but was interested in
learning more about how the role positively impacts a school’s instructional program. Though
recent research on instructional coaching is sparse (Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Neumerski,
2013), I endeavored to be objective in my review of the literature to fairly present both the
strengths and weaknesses of each role. I also made every effort to identify ethical concerns by
maintaining integrity in participant sampling, data collection, and data analysis throughout this
study.
Problem Statement
The problem is that California K-12 public school administrators are electing to hire
instructional coaches instead of teacher librarians to provide instructional leadership in the
implementation of the CCSS ELA (Udesky, 2015; Williams, 2015). Since school leaders often
lack knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of the teacher librarian (Church, 2008,

23
2010; Levitov, 2013; Shannon, 2012; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012) and the roles of an
instructional coach and teacher librarian appear similar in nature (AASL, 2009a, 2016c; CCTC,
2015; Church, 2011; Knight, 2007; Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Marzano & Simms, 2013;
Neumerski, 2013), research is needed to examine from the administrator’s perspective how the
roles compare in practice.
Previous studies on administrator perspective have been primarily descriptive and have
focused upon administrators who have worked directly with teacher librarians or instructional
coaches (Church, 2008, 2010; Levitov, 2013; Lupton, 2016; Selvaggi, 2016; Shannon, 2012). It
appears that no studies have been conducted to examine the perspectives of administrators who do
not work with individuals in these roles and why they may value one role over the other. This
qualitative inquiry will thus fill a gap in the research by providing an in-depth understanding of
how the roles of the instructional coach and teacher librarian compare in providing instructional
leadership from the administrator’s perspective.
Purpose Statement
The purpose of this collective case study was to develop an understanding of why
California K-12 public school administrators distribute instructional leadership responsibilities to
either instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how the two roles compare within the
context of the implementation of the CCSS ELA. Instructional leadership is defined as a role in
which a person defines the school’s mission, manages the instructional program, and promotes a
positive school learning climate (Hallinger, 2005). The theory that guided this study is distributed
leadership theory (Spillane, 2006; Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond, 2004), which explains how
leadership practice is distributed among leaders, followers, and the school’s situation or context.
Significance of the Study
Teachers desire strong instructional leadership, especially when faced with the

24
implementation of a new initiative such as the CCSS ELA, and a single school administrator is
incapable of providing comprehensive instructional leadership (Neumerski, 2013; Spillane, 2006).
Thus, administrators must identify additional leaders to whom they can distribute instructional
leadership responsibilities. Given that 51% of California students did not meet the standards on
the 2015–2016 Smarter Balanced Summative Assessment for English Language Arts/Literacy
(CDE, 2016d), administrators will need to continue their efforts to provide instructional
leadership in this area. The results of this dissertation could serve to demonstrate how
instructional coaches or teacher librarians meet these needs.
If the administrators in this study perceive that both roles similarly impact instructional
leadership in a positive manner, it might follow that other K–12 school administrators would
value the knowledge and skills provided by a teacher librarian. Data from this study could be
used to inform efforts to educate administrators about the nature of the instructional role of the
teacher librarian through administrator preparation programs, professional literature, and
professional learning venues. California school administrators who are made aware of this
research might then be more inclined to make a well-informed hiring decision between
instructional coaches and teacher librarians when they are allocated funding to hire additional
staff (Levitov, 2013; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012).
Results could demonstrate that the instructional leadership provided by instructional
coaches is perceived by administrators to be more highly valued than that of teacher librarians. If
this is the case, the data may serve to inform changes in teacher librarian certification standards to
more closely align the instructional role of the teacher librarian with that of an instructional coach.
Additionally, should the instructional coaching data reveal barriers similar to those indicated in
the literature, the results could serve to inform efforts to more clearly define the role and improve

25
the training and support provided at the state and district levels (Lynch & Ferguson, 2010; Stock
& Duncan, 2010).
Research Questions
In this study, administrators’ perceptions of instructional leadership served as the central
issue (Hallinger, 2005; Neumerski, 2013; Stake, 1995). Six research questions drove the study in
the examination of why and how administrators distribute instructional leadership
responsibilities to instructional coaches or teacher librarians in the implementation of the CCSS
ELA. Data collected from these questions were used to analyze how the roles of the
instructional coach and teacher librarian compared in practice and to generate insights into how
leadership might be practiced more effectively (Johnston, 2015; Spillane, 2006; Tian, Risku, &
Collin, 2016).
1. Why do administrators select instructional coaches to help them provide instructional
leadership?
2. Why do administrators select teacher librarians to help them provide instructional
leadership?
Questions 1 and 2 were designed to define the situation within which teacher librarians or
instructional coaches were selected to provide instructional leadership (Spillane, 2006).
3. How do administrators and instructional coaches work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?
4. How do administrators and teacher librarians work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?
Questions 3 and 4 were designed to examine how the administrator and instructional
coach or teacher librarian cooperatively interacted to fulfill the instructional leadership
responsibility of providing continuous, embedded, one-on-one professional learning in ELA

26
(Darling-Hammond et al., 2009, 2017; Hallinger & Murphy, 1985; Neumerski, 2013).
5. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional coaches’
instructional leadership roles?
6. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the teacher librarians’ instructional
leadership roles?
Questions 5 and 6 were designed to explore how the instructional leadership behaviors
enacted by participants related to the transformation of teaching and learning in ELA (Hallinger
& Murphy, 1985; Spillane, 2006).
Definitions
Terms pertinent to this study are listed and defined below.
1. Collaboration - “…a trusting, working relationship between two or more equal participants
involved in shared thinking, shared planning, and shared creation of innovative integrated
instruction” (Montiel-Overall, 2005, p. 32).
2. Distributed Leadership Theory - Describes how leadership practice is “stretched over” or
distributed among leaders, followers, and the school’s situation or context (Spillane, 2006).
3. Instructional Coach – An educator who partners with teaching peers to plan, observe, model,
and provide feedback on classroom lessons (Knight, 2007; Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010;
Marzano & Simms, 2013; Vanderburg & Stephens, 2010).
4. Instructional Leadership – A role in which an educational leader defines the school’s mission,
manages the instructional program, and promotes a positive school learning climate
(Hallinger, 2005).
5. Multiple Literacies – A term that encompasses information literacy, media literacy, visual
literacy, textual literacy, and technology literacy (AASL, 2009a; Latham, Gross, & Witte,

27
2013).
6. Teacher Librarian – In California K–12 public schools, an educator who holds both a basic
teaching credential and a Teacher Librarian Services Credential (CCTC, 2014, 2015).
“Teacher Librarian” is the title used to describe the position of a certificated school librarian
by the CCTC; “School Librarian” is the official title promoted by AASL. “Library Media
Specialist” was previously used as the official title of the professional school librarian
position by AASL. Each of these three terms is used throughout the school library literature
and hold to the same definition: an educator who collaborates with classroom teachers to
design, co-teach, and co-assess lessons and units of study that integrate a wide variety of
print and electronic resources, address multiple literacies, and encourage learners to
effectively access, evaluate, and use information (AASL, 2009a, 2010, 2016b; Boudrye,
2014).
Summary
This chapter has provided an introduction to a collective case study (Yin, 2014) designed
to develop an understanding of how the roles of the instructional coach and teacher librarian
compare in assisting California school administrators to provide instructional leadership in the
implementation of the CCSS ELA. Important background information, situation to self, the
problem and purpose statements, significance of the study, and research questions have outlined
the need for this study. This study specifically addresses the perceived problem that although
teacher librarians are trained and authorized to provide the instructional leadership administrators
are seeking in the implementation of the CCSS ELA and are supported by research,
administrators are electing instead to hire instructional coaches, a role that is not clearly defined,
does not necessarily require advanced training, and is not well-supported by research.

28
Chapter Two provides a review of the relevant literature for this study’s topic, including
the context for the study—the implementation of the CCSS ELA. It includes a comparison of the
roles of the instructional coach and teacher librarian with supporting research. A discussion of
administrators’ perceptions of these roles follows this comparison. Finally, the instructional
leadership expectations for California school leaders are outlined. The relevant literature is
situated within the theoretical framework of distributed leadership theory.

29
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
Overview
This chapter provides a theoretical framework to guide this research study and a review
of the relevant literature. Today’s school administrators are under tremendous pressure to
increase student achievement of the California Common Core State Standards: English
Language Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects (CCSS
ELA) in a high-stakes, computer-based testing environment. This requires that they devote the
majority of their attention to serving as the school’s instructional leader, but time constraints,
competing demands, and lack of knowledge, skills, and expertise often prevent them from fully
engaging in this role. Distributed leadership theory recognizes that multiple leaders, such as
instructional coaches or teacher librarians, are needed to assist an administrator in fulfilling his
or her leadership responsibilities (Spillane, 2006).
This review of the literature will first discuss the implementation of the CCSS ELA and
corresponding need for instructional leadership through the provision of professional learning. It
will then outline relevant research pertaining to the roles of instructional coach and teacher
librarian. An overview of the history of California school library programs, research that
describes administrators’ perceptions of teacher librarians, and instructional leadership
expectations for California educational leaders will follow. The chapter will conclude with a
comparison of the roles of the instructional coaches and teacher librarians and provide a rationale
for this study.
Theoretical Framework
During the 1970s and 1980s, research was conducted to identify the components of
effective schools, particularly those that were successful in educating all students regardless of

30
socioeconomic status. One of the defining components that emerged from these studies was that
the principals of effective schools exhibited strong instructional leadership (Hallinger, 2005). As
a result of their research, Hallinger and Murphy (1985) developed a model to describe three
dimensions of effective instructional leadership (see Table 1). The first dimension, defining the
school’s mission, is comprised of two functions: framing and communicating the goals of the
school. As such, the school leader is expected to establish and support clear, specific, and
measurable goals that focus upon student academic achievement. Managing the instructional
program serves as the second dimension and is supported by three leadership functions that
include the supervision and evaluation of instruction, curriculum coordination, and the
monitoring of student progress. These functions require that leaders possess expertise in
teaching and learning and commit to a deep level of engagement with the school’s instructional
program. The third dimension is broad in scope and consists of promoting a positive school
learning climate by advancing a culture of continuous academic improvement. This requires that
school leaders seek to protect instructional time, maintain high visibility by regularly engaging
with the instructional program, promote professional learning, and provide incentives for
teachers’ efforts and incentives for student learning.

31
Table 1
Hallinger & Murphy’s Instructional Leadership Model
Dimension

Functions

1. Define the school’s mission

Frame the goals of the school
Communicate the goals of the school

2. Manage the instructional
program

Supervise and evaluate instruction
Coordinate curriculum
Monitor student progress

3. Promote a positive school
learning climate

Protect instructional time
Maintain high visibility
Regularly engage with the instructional program
Promote professional learning
Provide incentives for teachers and student learning

Though this instructional leadership model has been widely used in empirical
investigations, it offers only a list of behaviors and actions exhibited by one individual. It does
not provide an opportunity to develop an understanding of the process behind enacting these
behaviors and how they relate to the transformation of teaching and learning. Spillane (2006)
sought to address this by engaging in a longitudinal mixed-methods study to examine the
practice of leadership in 15 urban K–5 and K–8 schools. He based his research upon two
assumptions: (a) that school leadership is best understood by considering leadership tasks, and
(b) that leadership practice is distributed among leaders, followers, and the school’s situation or
context (Spillane et al., 2001, 2004). Through in-depth observations and interviews with both
formal and informal leaders over a 4-year period, a theory of distributed leadership emerged.
Based upon distributed cognition and activity theories, the distributed leadership theory consists
of a framework of three essential elements: leadership practice, the interactions of leaders and
followers, and aspects of their situation. Within this framework, the situation is considered to be
the defining element since particular aspects of a situation both influence and are produced by

32
school leaders. Distributed leadership theory thus serves as a lens for generating insights into
how leadership might be practiced more effectively. It encourages researchers to consider how
the aspects of a situation enable and constrain leadership practice through the cooperative
interactions of leaders and followers (Johnston, 2015; Spillane, 2006; Tian et al., 2016).
School administrators are under tremendous pressure to increase student achievement in a
high-stakes testing environment (Range et al., 2014). This requires that they devote the majority
of their attention to serving as the school’s instructional leader, but time constraints, competing
demands, and lack of knowledge and expertise often prevent them from fully engaging in this
role (Hallinger, 2005). Based upon their extensive research on instructional leadership,
Hallinger and Murphy (2013) proposed three strategies an administrator can employ to create the
time and capacity needed to effectively lead learning in his or her school: (a) clarify his or her
personal vision and supporting habits or tasks, (b) articulate a collective instructional leadership
role, and (c) enable others to act by establishing team leadership structures. Distributed
leadership theory supports this by acknowledging that administrators need to recruit multiple
leaders that possess particular skill sets and dedicated time to focus upon engaging in curriculum
and instructional improvements. As such, this theory will serve as a framework for developing
an understanding of why and how California K–12 school administrators distribute instructional
leadership responsibilities, particularly in regard to the provision of professional learning, to
either instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how the interactions among the leaders
enable them to meet CCSS ELA instructional goals (see Figure 1; Neumerski, 2013; Spillane,
2006).

33

Figure 1. Framework for the distribution of instructional leadership.
Related Literature
A review of the relevant literature will discuss the existing instructional leadership
expectations for and administrators’ perceptions of the roles of the instructional coach and
teacher librarian in the context of the implementation of the CCSS ELA.
Implementation of the CCSS ELA
In 2010, the California State Board of Education adopted the new CCSS ELA, which
require students to develop higher levels of skills and abilities than in previous iterations. These
standards were designed to enable students to successfully meet college and career expectations,
compete in a global economy, and participate in civic life. The CCSS ELA require a rigorous
and relevant instructional program that focuses upon the development of critical thinking and
problem solving, creativity, and communication and collaboration skills across the curricular
areas of ELA, history/social science, science, and technical subjects. Writing, research, and
reading of complex texts are strongly emphasized. Clear learning benchmarks for each grade
level also require the use of technology to access, evaluate, synthesize, and communicate
information (CDE, 2012b, 2013, 2015a; Parkay et al., 2014).
In 2012, the CDE released the Common Core State Standards Systems Implementation
Plan to provide schools with guidance in developing local CCSS ELA implementation plans.
The plan specifically indicates that strong instructional leadership and well-prepared teachers are
essential for success. Seven guiding strategies are outlined, the first of which highlights the need

34
for schools to “facilitate high quality professional learning opportunities for educators to ensure
that every student has access to teachers who are prepared to teach to the levels of rigor and
depth required by the CCSS” (CDE, 2014, p. 6). The plan also indicates that leaders should be
prepared to respond to two specific challenges. The first is in regard to the high level of
technology proficiency needed by teachers and school leaders to effectively address over 100
direct mentions of the use of technology in the CCSS ELA (United States Department of
Education, 2016). The second relates to the administration of new computer-based standardized
assessments created to measure student achievement of the CCSS ELA. Consequently,
professional learning efforts would need to focus upon these areas.
Professional Learning
In a meta-analysis of studies conducted to examine the relationship between leadership
and student achievement in both academic and nonacademic areas, Robinson, Lloyd, and Rowe
(2008) calculated an average effect size of 0.84 for the leadership dimension of “promoting and
participating in teacher learning and development” (p. 663). In these studies, the researchers
found that the more that school leaders, usually principals, were reported by teachers to be active
participants in professional learning, the more student outcomes increased. As such, this large
effect size provides empirical support to encourage school leaders to become actively engaged in
promoting professional learning opportunities for their teachers.
Effective professional development is defined as “structured professional learning that
results in changes to teacher knowledge and practices, and improvements in student learning
outcomes” (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017, p. 2). Historically, California school administrators
have relied upon outside vendors, such as textbook publishers, to provide stand-alone or short
term professional development sessions for teachers when adopting new initiatives. However,

35
research has demonstrated that teachers generally fail to operationalize the knowledge presented
in these types of sessions (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017; Marzano & Simms, 2013). In 2017
the Learning Policy Institute released a report synthesizing a review of 35 methodologically
rigorous studies from the past three decades that found positive links between professional
development, instructional practices, and student achievement. Within these studies, researchers
identified the following seven features of effective professional development:
1. focuses on content
2. incorporates active learning opportunities aligned to adult learning theory
3. supports job-embedded collaboration
4. models effective practice
5. includes the support of experts and coaching
6. provides opportunities for reflection and feedback
7. is implemented over a sustained period (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017).
The results of recent surveys demonstrate a need to implement these elements of effective
professional development, especially for schools that are seeking to integrate digital content into
the curriculum. Project Tomorrow, a national education nonprofit organization, administers
annual surveys to solicit educator, student, and parent input on digital learning trends. The
results are synthesized into a report that is shared with state and national policy leaders. The
2017 report, entitled Trends in Digital Learning: Building Teachers’ Capacity and Competency
to Create New Learning Experiences for Students, reveals the results of the Speak Up 2016
survey. Participants included 514,000 K–12 students, teachers and school librarians,
administrators, parents, and community members from schools and districts throughout the
United States and abroad. Survey results demonstrate that the expectations of employers,

36
policymakers, and parents for students to be prepared for success in technology-based
postsecondary contexts has increased pressure on school leaders to think differently about
building teacher capacity through professional learning efforts focused on digital learning. A
key finding outlined five essential elements identified by teachers to effectively integrate digital
content into the curriculum, two of these being planning time with colleagues and professional
development. District leaders identified and prioritized content areas for future professional
development: using technology to differentiate instruction (73%); using data to improve teaching
and learning (62%); implementing a blended learning model (57%); and integrating digital
content into a comprehensive curriculum (53%). Teachers also reported that their top wish for
professional development is how to use technology to differentiate instruction (52%; Blackboard,
2017).
In 2016 a nationwide survey was administered to examine the state of professional
learning and determine how to best support educators in their current positions. Over 6,300
teachers responded to the 60-item survey aligned to the Standards for Professional Learning
developed in collaboration by Learning Forward, a national professional learning organization,
and 40 other professional and educational organizations. A key finding demonstrated that
teachers report they are not provided adequate time during the instructional day to practice and
apply skills learned in professional development. Consequently, the report recommends that
school leaders provide more opportunities for continuous, job-embedded professional learning in
the form of instructional coaching and participation in professional learning communities (The
State of Teacher Professional Learning, 2017).
The Role of the Instructional Coach
Despite the influx of instructional coaches into K–12 schools since the 1980s (Ellis,

37
2008; Udesky, 2015; Williams, 2015), a common definition of instructional coaching does not
exist (Neumerski, 2013). The term “coach” is generally defined as an individual who helps
another “move from where he or she is to where he or she needs or wants to be” (Marzano &
Simms, 2013, p. 4). Instructional coaches are described as non-supervisory experts that provide
personalized individual support to teachers with the expressed purpose of encouraging sustained
implementation of new instructional behaviors (Galluci et al., 2010; Knight, 2007; Kretlow &
Bartholomew, 2010). These experts are typically identified by school administrators as veteran
educators that hold a positive reputation with peers (Darling-Hammond et al., 2009). Depending
upon the direction of the school or district, instructional coaches may or may not be required to
hold an advanced credential or degree in addition to their basic teaching credential, but are
generally expected to have knowledge of a large number of research-based instructional
practices, adult learning theory, and effective interpersonal skills (Aguilar, 2013; Galluci et al.,
2010; Knight, 2007). Instructional coaches may be site based and focus upon one grade level or
serve multiple sites and grade levels. They may also be designated and titled according to
specific subject areas or specialized fields, such as math, literacy, and technology (Neumerski,
2013).
Instructional coaching standards and guidelines. Of the various types of instructional
coaches, professional standards are available for only two specialized areas, literacy and
technology: the International Literacy Association (ILA) provides Standards for Reading
Professionals and the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) provides ISTE
Standards for Coaches. The Standards for Reading Professionals state that in order to achieve
certification as a Reading Specialist/Literacy Coach, a candidate must hold a valid teaching
certificate, previous teaching experience, and a master’s degree with a concentration in reading

38
and writing education (ILA, 2016). The Standards for Reading Professionals and the ISTE
Standards for Coaches have both been approved by the Council for the Accreditation of
Educator Preparation (CAEP) to provide guidelines in developing and evaluating advanced
preparation programs in colleges of education (CAEP, 2015). However, both the ILA and ISTE
standards serve only as guidelines; as stand-alone documents they have no direct impact upon the
certification or level of education of the personnel who seek to apply them in practice.
Coaching models. Though a standard model to guide the practice of instructional
coaching does not exist, several models have been developed in efforts to formalize the process
(Neumerski, 2013). These include supervisory coaching, side-by-side coaching, Cognitive
Coaching, transformational coaching, and the Big Four model (Aguilar, 2013; Knight, 2007;
Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Marzano & Simms, 2013). In the supervisory coaching model, a
coach observes a teacher implement an instructional strategy or technique learned in a prior
training. The coach takes notes on the effectiveness of the implementation and then provides
non-evaluative feedback to the teacher in regard to areas of strength and improvement. In sideby-side coaching, the coach expands the supervisory model by intervening during the lesson
instruction to model the targeted instructional technique or strategy and then provides further
opportunities for the teacher to implement the desired behavior (Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010).
In the Cognitive Coaching model, coaches facilitate conversations with teachers focused upon
the planning, reflection, and problem solving of their instructional practices with the goal of
encouraging the teacher to become a self-directed learner. The coach may or may not be present
during the delivery of the instructional practice (Knight, 2007; Marzano & Simms, 2013).
Transformational coaching consists of a synergistic relationship in which both coach and teacher
realize change within three domains: individual behaviors, beliefs, and being; the systems in

39
which they work along with the people that work within those systems; and the broader
educational and social systems (Aguilar, 2013). The Big Four Model, designed by Jim Knight,
president of the Instructional Coaching Group and author of Instructional Coaching: A
Partnership Approach to Improving Instruction, is currently used in many schools throughout
the United States (Marzano & Simms, 2013). This model consists of a collaborative partnership
in which the instructional coach and teacher work together to improve four instructional
components: student behavior, content knowledge, direct instruction, and formative assessment.
Instructional coaches assist teachers in creating a productive learning environment by guiding
them to articulate behavioral expectations, effectively correct student behavior, and increase
student engagement. In regard to content knowledge, they encourage teachers to develop a deep
understanding of the instructional content area by helping them to access and translate state
content standards into lessons and units of study. They then identify and assist in the
development of instructional practices that the teacher can use to effectively guide students in
mastering the content. Finally, instructional coaches assist teachers in developing formative
assessments in order to identify learning targets, enable students to monitor their own progress,
and provide constructive feedback (Knight, 2007). Table 2 summarizes the expectations for an
instructional coach.

40
Table 2
Instructional Coach Expectations
Definition of Role
No common or standard
definition
General description: A
non-supervisory expert
that provides personalized
individual support to
teachers to encourage
sustained implementation
of new instructional
behaviors
May be site based and
focused upon one grade
level or serve multiple
sites and grade levels
May be designated and
titled according to specific
subject areas or specialized
fields, such as math,
literacy, and technology

Qualifications
Typically identified by
school administrators as
veteran educators that hold
a positive reputation with
peers
May or may not be
required to hold an
advanced credential or
degree in addition to a
basic teaching credential
Generally expected to
have knowledge of:
• a large number of
research-based
instructional
practices
• adult learning
theory
• effective
interpersonal skills

Standards & Guidelines
No standard preparation
standards, models, or
guidelines except for two
specialized areas:
• Literacy (ILA)
• Technology (ISTE)
Several coaching models
available:
• Supervisory
• Side-by-side
• Cognitive Coaching
• Big Four (commonly
used in U.S. schools)

Instructional coaching research. Though the concept of instructional coaching has been
widely adopted in K–12 school districts, there is little peer-reviewed research “that (1) defines
the parameters of the role, (2) describes and contextualizes the work of instructional coaching, or
(3) explains how individuals learn to be coaches and are supported to refine their practice over
time” (Galluci et al., 2010, p. 920). Of the research that does exist, it appears that there is more
evidence to suggest that coaching improves teacher knowledge and skill rather than student
achievement. Additionally, most studies focused upon coaching have been qualitative, have
used nonexperimental designs, or have not been published in peer-reviewed journals

41
(Neumerski, 2013).
Kretlow and Bartholomew (2010) conducted a comprehensive review of research to
examine the impact of coaching on changes in teachers’ implementation of evidence-based
practices. Their review included 20 years of literature, published between 1989 and 2009. They
retrieved 457 articles, but only 13 studies met the selection criteria for (a) employing a causal
research design, (b) publication in a peer-reviewed journal, (c) general or special education K–12
preservice or in-service teachers identified as participants, (d) an independent variable of
coaching and dependent variable of a direct, observable measure of teaching accuracy, and (e)
coaching related to an evidence-based practice implemented to improve academic performance
or classroom behavior. Results of the 13 studies demonstrated that coaching resulted in
improved teaching accuracy. However, only three of the studies revealed that coaching resulted
in positive effects on student achievement.
Perspectives of teachers and coaches. Studies conducted since 2009 have yielded mixed
results in regard to improved teaching practices and illustrate the varied expectations, structure,
and levels of support for the role of an instructional coach. A 2010 qualitative study conducted
by Vanderburg and Stephens revealed that coaching resulted in positive effects on teacher
knowledge. This study specifically focused upon understanding the impact of literacy coaches
on 35 K–5 elementary teachers that participated in the South Carolina Reading Initiative (SCRI).
The SCRI was a three-year state-wide professional development effort in which coaches,
teachers, and principals participated in 27 hours of graduate coursework organized around
instructional frameworks. Throughout each of the three years, coaches held site-based study
group sessions on a bimonthly basis with both teachers and their principals. They also spent four
days per week in teachers’ classrooms assisting them in implementing new instructional

42
practices. During years two and three of SCRI, researchers observed 39 teachers for two to three
times each year and held debriefing interviews following each observation. In addition, they
conducted semi-structured interviews with each teacher at the beginning and end of each school
year. Researchers employed a constant comparative methodology to identify patterns regarding
the ways in which teachers found the literacy coaches to be helpful and to determine specific
changes teachers made as a result of the coaching. Results of the data analysis demonstrated that
participants indicated they were more willing and likely to implement new instructional
practices, utilize more authentic assessments, and design student-centered curriculum because of
the coaching they received. They also reported that they expanded their use of educational
research and theory. Participants indicated that they greatly valued how the coach created
collaboration opportunities, provided ongoing support, and instructed them in how to implement
research-based practices.
Perceptions of coaching constructs. A descriptive study conducted to examine the
perspectives of instructional facilitators located in the state of Wyoming yielded mixed results.
Three coaching constructs were examined: the instructional leadership role of the instructional
facilitators, teachers’ instructional practices, and support received from principals and teachers.
Of the 142 participants, the majority (50.4%) consisted of elementary level instructional
facilitators, with 13.7% from middle/junior high schools, 19.4% from high schools, and 16.5%
from K–12 sites. Regarding specialization, 47.9% of participants served as language arts
instructional facilitators, 21.1% as technology instructional facilitators, 16.9% as other, and
14.1% as math instructional facilitators. Survey results showed that overall, participants were
positive about their role in providing instructional leadership to their teaching colleagues. They
indicated that their primary role was to provide mentoring and coaching to teachers by modeling

43
effective instructional practices. Additional duties included meeting regularly with teachers,
sharing professional literature, providing support to those that struggled, assisting with goal
setting and data analysis, and setting up peer coaching to facilitate professional development. In
regard to support received by principals, participants perceived that their relationships with their
principals were generally supportive as a result of regularly meeting together. However, they
also felt that the principals failed to demonstrate support by not attending their professional
development sessions. Finally, regarding teachers’ instructional strategies, participants
demonstrated a neutral perception regarding the rate at which the teachers with whom they
worked implemented the recommended instructional strategies (Range et al., 2014).
Within the participant sample, significant differences were found for three subgroups of
instructional facilitators: technology, high school, and K–12. These instructional facilitators
perceived that they did not engage in the same level of instructional activity or peer coaching
with teachers as elementary, middle/junior high, language arts, and math instructional
facilitators. In addition, they perceived that the teachers with whom they worked did not
implement as many new instructional strategies and that they did not receive the same level of
principal support as the other subgroups (Range et al., 2014).
Barriers to coaching. In a qualitative study conducted to examine the perceptions of 13
elementary level literacy coaches located in Canadian school boards, Lynch and Ferguson (2010)
identified three major topics: the role of the coaches, barriers to coaching, and methods for
overcoming barriers. All participants worked as part-time literacy coaches in Ontario school
boards, serving seven to 10 schools, while maintaining classroom teaching responsibilities.
Experience varied from four to 20 years; most held Bachelor of Education degrees with
additional qualifications or held special education degrees, and three coaches held master’s in

44
education degrees. Previous experience teaching in a literacy intervention program within the
school board was required to be a part of the literacy coaching program. Following a general
coaching meeting, researchers conducted semi-structured interviews lasting from 35 to 45
minutes with each individual literacy coach. They used a constant comparative method to
analyze participants’ responses and form categories, from which the three major topics emerged.
The primary role of the coach was described as planning and modeling with teachers, with data
analysis identified as an important aspect for a few coaches. Barriers included limited principal
involvement, resistant teachers, too many schools to service, lack of time, role uncertainty, and
limited resource material. Suggestions to overcome barriers included addressing teacher
resistance, clarification of the role of the coach, and reduction of the number of schools to
service. In regard to the role of the coach,
Many coaches stated that their role as a literacy coach was evolving both over time and
within different schools. Most coaches stated that they felt competent in their role but
that they were “continually learning along the way” (coach #13) or that their role was
“evolving” (coach #2; coach #4; coach #5). Even when coaches reported feeling
competent, some feared “not knowing what a coach is” and reported that feelings of
uncertainty, at different times, posed a barrier for them because they did not have the
same rapport at all schools (e.g., coach #5). Although many were engaged in a variety of
practices, some coaches stated that they were still unsure of their role. (Lynch &
Ferguson, 2010, p. 211)
Due to this ambiguity, participants suggested that the school board and Ministry of Education
provide more guidelines and support to clarify the coaching role, including information on
coaching models and university level training.

45
Need for professional development. Stock and Duncan (2010) also conducted a study
with instructional facilitators in the state of Wyoming. The purpose of this descriptive study was
to examine the need for professional development, in the form of mentoring, for instructional
facilitators. Of the 171 participants, 39.6% served in grades K–8 and 60.3% served in grades 9–
12. The results revealed that a large majority of participants held advanced degrees, though only
15% reported that they held a graduate degree in Educational Leadership. Eighty-six percent of
participants indicated that they had three years or less of experience as an instructional
facilitator. In regard to the need for mentoring, 90% indicated it was important for beginning
instructional facilitators, and 58% indicated it was important for those with more experience.
The areas for mentoring that participants perceived to be most important were instructional
leadership, working with data, handling difficult staff members, and developing a collegial
faculty. Participants also indicated several barriers to the implementation of a mentoring
program. These included a lack of time, limited guidance provided by the state, and no training.
Though there were no specific questions asked in regard to role definition and job description,
many participants commented about role confusion, stating that the role of the instructional
facilitator needed to be more specifically defined and communicated to both teachers and district
leaders.
Competing responsibilities. Instructional coaches may be assigned a variety of tasks such
as peer coaching, mentoring, administrative duties, and system-wide professional development
(Galluci et al., 2010). This is problematic in that instructional coaches may not be allowed to
fully engage in their primary coaching work. In a qualitative study conducted to examine how
20 elementary literacy coaches distributed their time, Bean et al. (2010) found that coaches
provided direct support to teachers on average only 35.7% of their time due to competing

46
responsibilities. Through case studies conducted to explore how the responsibilities of three
literacy coaches were shaped by their large urban school cultures, Lowenhaupt et al. (2014)
found that each coach “willingly took on additional duties in order to establish rapport with the
teachers, adapting their positions in ways that detracted from their time actually coaching” (p.
754). In his study conducted to examine the cost of instructional coaching at three school sites,
David Knight (2012) found that the coaches spent the majority of their salaried work time on
tasks other than collaboration with teachers. Additionally, he found that the average cost of an
instructional coach per teacher ranged from $3,260 to $5,220, which prompts a need to
investigate whether the instructional coaching model is cost effective for school districts.
Perspectives of administrators. Only one recent study has been conducted to specifically
examine administrators’ perception of the role of the instructional coach. Selvaggi (2016)
solicited the attitudes and beliefs of five elementary principals from five different states in regard
to their interactions with literacy coaches. The survey included questions to which participants
indicated their responses by selecting one of the following statements: “extremely,” “very,”
“somewhat,” or “not at all.” Results demonstrated that all participants believed that their literacy
coaches helped classroom teachers improve their literacy instruction through the provision of
staff development, and worked “very” or “extremely” collaboratively to meet the school’s
instructional goals for literacy. They also believed that the literacy coaches were either “very” or
“extremely” influential in providing opportunities for collaboration among the faculty in the
form of individual or grade-level group meetings, cluster coaching sessions, and ongoing
training. Participants noted that they valued how the literacy coaches helped them to understand
current research and best practices in literacy. In addition, administrators indicated that they
provided support by attending grade-level meetings facilitated by the literacy coaches and talking

47
with them about their work, goals, and professional development. Table 3 summarizes the
strengths and weaknesses of instructional coaches as presented in the research.
Table 3
Instructional Coaching Research: Strengths and Weaknesses
Strengths
The instructional coach’s primary role is to
provide mentoring and coaching to teachers
by modeling effective instructional practices
(Lynch & Ferguson, 2010; Range et al., 2014)
Coaching improves teacher knowledge and
skill (Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010;
Neumerski, 2013; Vanderburg & Stephens,
2010)
Because of coaching, teachers are more
willing and likely to
• implement new instructional practices
• utilize more authentic assessments
• design student centered curriculum
• expand their use of educational
research and theory (Vanderburg &
Stephens, 2010)
Teachers valued the ongoing support and
collaboration opportunities provided by the
coach (Vanderburg & Stephens, 2010)
Administrators believed literacy coaches
helped classroom teachers improve literacy
instruction and were influential in providing
opportunities for collaboration among faculty
(Selvaggi, 2016)

Weaknesses
There is little peer-reviewed research “that (1)
defines the parameters of the role, (2)
describes and contextualizes the work of
instructional coaching, or (3) explains how
individuals learn to be coaches and are
supported to refine their practice over time”
(Galluci et al., 2010, p. 920)
Few studies demonstrate that coaching
positively affects student achievement
(Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010)
Significant differences between the
perceptions of technology, high school, and
K–12 instructional coaches and elementary,
middle/junior high, language arts, and math
instructional coaches in regard to:
• instructional leadership role
• effect upon teachers’ instructional
practices
• support received from principals and
teachers (Range et al., 2014)
Barriers to coaching:
• Limited support from administration
• Limited guidance provided by state
• Role ambiguity
• Resistant teachers
• Lack of time
• Limited resource material
• Too many schools to service
• No training
• Competing responsibilities (Bean et
al., 2010; Galluci et al., 2010; Knight,
2012; Lowenhaupt et al., 2014; Lynch
& Ferguson, 2010; Stock & Duncan,
2010)

48
The Role of the Teacher Librarian
In recent years the role of the school librarian has changed drastically from that of
“keeper of the books” (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012, p. 118) to one that encompasses five distinct
roles within the school’s educational program: instructional leader, collaborative partner,
information specialist, teacher, and program administrator (AASL, 2009a, 2016c; Church, 2011).
Consequently, in California, school librarians are now titled “teacher librarians” (CCTC, 2014)
to more clearly reflect how the roles of instructional leader, collaborative partner, and teacher are
integral to the K–12 educational program.
National school librarian standards and guidelines. The American Association of
School Librarians (AASL), a division of the American Library Association (ALA), is the
premier professional entity for establishing standards for the school library field in the United
States. The AASL recommends that school librarians hold a basic teaching credential and a
master’s degree from an advanced professional program focused upon library and information
science, education, and technology. The professional program should be accredited by the ALA,
AASL, CAEP, or state education agencies (AASL, 2010, 2016d).
Preparation programs. In conjunction with the ALA and CAEP, AASL designed the
Standards for Initial Preparation of School Librarians (2010). Pre-service school librarian
preparation programs that have received CAEP accreditation and wish to be recognized by ALA
and AASL must submit to ongoing review and evaluation according to these standards
(Moreillon, Kimmel, & Gavigan, 2014). Of the five main standards outlined, Standard 1
describes the behaviors school librarian candidates must exhibit in regard to teaching for
learning. These behaviors include a demonstration of knowledge of learners and modes of
learning, the modeling and promotion of collaborative planning, and instruction in inquiry-based

49
learning and multiple literacies. In addition to engaging in ongoing collaboration with teaching
partners and direct instruction with students, Standard 5 indicates that candidates are expected to
lead professional development activities at their school sites and articulate how the school library
program contributes to student achievement.
Daily practice. In 2009, the AASL published Empowering Learners and Standards for
the 21st-Century Learner in Action, which provide guidelines and standards for developing
effective K–12 school library programs and directing the daily practice of school librarians.
These publications explicitly define the collaborative partner role, detailing how school librarians
are to co-plan, co-teach, and co-assess learning activities with classroom teachers. These
activities must be aligned to academic standards and Standards for the 21st-Century Learner and
include critical thinking, information and digital literacy skills, and social skills and cultural
competencies.
Staffing guidelines. AASL also establishes minimum school library staffing
recommendations for school libraries. Each school library should be staffed with at least one
full-time certified school librarian, with each librarian supported by at least one full-time
technical assistant or clerk. Each school district should also be served by a district library
supervisor who functions as a member of the district administrative team and oversees the
direction of the district’s school library programs (AASL, 2016a). Table 4 summarizes the
national expectations of the school librarian.

50
Table 4
School Librarian Expectations
Definition of Role
Serves in five distinct roles
defined by AASL:
• Instructional Leader
• Collaborative Partner
• Information
Specialist
• Teacher
• Program
Administrator
Serves full-time in one
school library and is
supported by at least one
full-time technical
assistant or clerk

Qualifications
Recommended: Holds a
basic teaching credential and
a master’s degree from an
advanced professional
program focused upon
library and information
science, education, and
technology and is accredited
by the ALA, AASL, CAEP,
or state education agency
Demonstrates knowledge of:
• learners and modes
of learning
• collaborative
planning
• instruction in
inquiry-based
learning
• multiple literacies

Standards & Guidelines
Preparation programs
governed by AASL’s
Standards for Initial
Preparation of School
Librarians
Daily practice guided by
AASL’s Empowering
Learners and Standards for
the 21st-Century Learner in
Action, which emphasize the
core expectations of the
Instructional Leader,
Collaborative Partner, and
Teacher roles of the school
librarian:
• provide professional
development
• co-plan, co-teach,
and co-assess
activities with
classroom teachers
• articulate how the
school library
program contributes
to student
achievement

School library program research. AASL defines an effective school library program as
one that “has a certified school librarian at the helm, provides personalized learning
environments, and offers equitable access to resources to ensure a well-rounded education for
every student” (2016b, p. 1). In 2016, a compendium of research findings collected from largescale school library program studies conducted in 25 states from 2000–2015 was released. The
findings demonstrate that the components of effective school library programs positively impact

51
student achievement, particularly in ELA. Many of the state-wide school library impact studies
have been led or supported by the Colorado Library Research Service. Researchers have
examined relationships between student test scores, components of school library programs, and
teacher librarians. These studies have identified the single most important variable to be the
presence of a full-time certificated school librarian (Farmer & Safer, 2010; Gretes, 2013; Kachel,
2013; Kaplan, 2010; School Libraries Impact Studies, 2013; School Libraries Work, 2016). The
positive impact is related to the school librarian’s organization and maintenance of a collection
of print and electronic resources, regular collaboration with teachers to integrate resources and
activities into the curriculum, facilitation of physical and intellectual access to print and digital
information, and provision of leadership in achieving a school’s mission and learning objectives
(School Libraries Work, 2016).
The most recent national school library impact study utilized data from the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) to examine the impact of school librarian layoffs on 4th
grade reading scores between 2004 and 2009. Results demonstrated that students in states that
lost school librarians tended to have lower scores or a slower rise in scores than the states that
gained school librarians. Conversely, 19 of 26 states that gained librarians demonstrated an
average 2.2% gain in reading scores (Lance & Hofschire, 2011). The most recent state-wide
school library study, the 2014 South Carolina Impact Study, demonstrates how school library
programs contributed to student achievement on standardized tests for specific English language
arts and writing standards. Results showed that all students were more likely to demonstrate
strengths and less likely to demonstrate weaknesses on the Palmetto Assessment of State
Standards (PASS) writing standards if their school libraries were staffed by a team consisting of
at least one full-time librarian and one full-time or part-time library assistant. All students were

52
also more likely to have exemplary PASS ELA results and less likely to fail to meet ELA
standards when this library staffing threshold was present and when their librarian spent at least
20 hours per week collaborating with classroom teachers on the delivery of instructional
activities (Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Lance, Schwarz, & Rodney, 2014a, 2014b).
Another significant variable revealed in the large-scale school library impact studies is
that of the presence of a full-time library paraprofessional working alongside the teacher
librarian. This is an essential component of successful school library programs as the
paraprofessional handles the clerical duties of basic management of the library facility to enable
the teacher librarian to focus upon working within the school’s instructional program (Farmer &
Safer, 2010; Kachel, 2013; AASL, 2016a; School Libraries Impact Studies, 2013; School
Libraries Work, 2016).
Small-scale studies. Smaller studies have also demonstrated the positive impact school
librarians have upon a school’s instructional program. Moreillon (2013) conducted a study to
investigate which assignments and resources provided in a pre-service school librarian online
graduate course resulted in the greatest change in school librarian candidates’ understandings of
the instructional partnership role. Twice as many classroom teachers as school librarians
indicated that the multiple collaborative assignments led them to improve their instructional
practice. This finding is not limited to the American population of school librarians. In a study
conducted in Hong Kong to examine the perspectives of three different school librarians, Lo and
Chiu (2015) found that all three were “expected to serve as a ‘natural bridge’ for
interdisciplinary instructions across the whole school community” (p. 706). Additionally, the
researchers found that the increasing emphasis on inquiry-based learning resulted in a greater
dependency by classroom teachers on the resources and teaching and learning services provided

53
by the school librarians.
Dissemination of school library research. Several researchers have sought to examine
how research on school libraries has been disseminated to educational stakeholders. Kaplan
(2010) examined the impact of state-wide school library research studies on the support for
school library programs and school librarians. Participants were identified by their membership
in the Affiliate Assembly of AASL, which is composed of two representatives from each state’s
library media association, typically the president and vice president. These leaders were selected
on the premise that they would possess knowledge of the state’s level of support for school
library media programs and personnel and knowledge of how the results of their state’s school
library study had been disseminated. Twenty-four participants from 16 states agreed to
participate. Survey items solicited information about the state, the nature of the school library
impact study conducted there, and the ways in which the study was disseminated to decision
makers. Results revealed that the majority of the efforts to disseminate the state studies focused
on building-level school library media specialists; there was little focus on disseminating the
results to decision makers. The state studies enabled individual school library media specialists
to increase their advocacy efforts, but there was no indication of an overall effect on teacher or
principal behavior toward school library programs. There was also no evidence of changes in
teacher or principal education programs to integrate information about school library programs
and corresponding research into their preparation programs. Finally, there was minimal effect on
decisions and legislations in regard to support for school library programs and their personnel.
Dissemination to superintendents. In 2009, VanTuyle and Watkins (2012) conducted a
qualitative study with 49 rural superintendents to examine whether they were familiar with
research on effective school library programs and if they utilized the expertise of their teacher

54
librarians to respond to district challenges. Interview questions focused upon superintendents’
reading of and reaction to a 2008 compendium of school library research entitled School
Libraries Work! An analysis of the focus group interview transcripts and observation notes
revealed several themes, which were interpreted as findings. Overall, the findings demonstrated
that the superintendents were not aware of either national or state-specific research on how
school library programs positively impact student achievement. They were also unaware that
teacher librarians are trained and expected to collaborate with teachers and administrators to
provide instructional services and possess expertise to assist administrators in researching school
initiatives. Instead, they viewed librarians “as ‘keepers of the books,’ rather than as Connectors
in the information age” (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012, p. 119). After reading School Libraries
Work, many expressed a reluctance to trust the research findings due to their perceptions of the
teacher librarian and differences in school demographics. They indicated that they desired the
data to be disaggregated by socioeconomic status, per pupil expenditures, and rural, urban, and
suburban school districts. Despite this reluctance, superintendents indicated that they found the
focus group discussion on research to be enlightening.
These findings prompted the researchers to make four recommendations. First, that
library media specialists make a concerted effort to promote school library research to district
stakeholders. Second, that institutions of higher education integrate information about the
instructional role of the library media specialist into teacher and administrator preparation
programs. Third, that districts develop and use specific job descriptions and evaluations to
define and assess library media specialists. Fourth, that districts seek to identify and develop
teachers that can model effective relationships between the school library program, classroom
instruction, and student achievement (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012).

55
Dissemination to state leaders. Everhart and Mardis (2014) also found that school library
research had not been effectively disseminated to state opinion leaders and decision makers in
their qualitative study to examine what stakeholders know about and expect from Pennsylvania’s
school library programs. The researchers held four focus group meetings with 71 total
participants at four sites, two urban and two suburban, in different geographical regions of the
state. Three specific goals were established for the focus groups: a) that participants would gain
information about the impact of school library programs on student achievement and the status of
Pennsylvania’s school libraries, b) that participants would clarify the components of the school
library program infrastructure that they most valued, and c) that participants would disseminate
the knowledge gained in the focus group to their constituencies. The results of the focus group
discussions and interviews revealed that a) participants gained knowledge about school libraries
in Pennsylvania, indicating that they were surprised to have not previously heard of the research
findings communicated during the presentation; b) all four groups reached consensus on valuing
the school library program components of staffing, which included a certified full-time school
librarian and resources; and c) participants reported using the materials to start conversations
with colleagues and others outside their immediate circles. Overall, the predominant theme of
participant interviews focused upon the “importance of having learned more about the
connections between learning and the school library and having discovered that the school
librarian’s instructional role is vital” (Everhart & Mardis, 2014, p. 8).
Criticisms of school library research. Though there exists a large number of studies that
provide evidence to suggest that school library programs helmed by a certificated teacher
librarian positively impact student achievement, there are weaknesses in the research base. First,
each of the large-scale school library impact studies employed a correlational research design.

56
Though this design has been replicated across 25 studies with demonstrated comparable results,
the correlational approach does not establish a clear causal relationship between the work of
teacher librarians and student achievement (AASL, 2014; Ewbank, 2011; Hartzell, 2012).
Second, most of the studies have focused upon standardized test results for reading and language
arts (Hughes, 2014), and 21 of the state-level studies confirming that school libraries support
student achievement were not peer reviewed (Stefl-Mabry & Radlick, 2017).
Third, several weaknesses have been identified in the school library research
methodologies. In a review conducted to examine 25 years of school library research focused on
student achievement, researchers located 266 studies published in scholarly journals,
unpublished research reports, one book, and one dissertation. To meet the criteria for inclusion
for methodological analysis, studies must have been peer reviewed or published as a report,
focused on the PreK–12 environment and school libraries and/or librarians, and utilized a
primary analysis of measured or observed school library and student achievement variables.
Eighty of the 266 studies met these criteria, with only 24 of the 80 found to utilize quasiexperimental or experimental with random assignment research designs. The following
weaknesses were also noted in the research: an absence of a clear underlying theory of action;
almost exclusive use of descriptive data; measurement challenges; problems with statistical
analyses; focus on one point in time, one measure, or one population; and researcher bias (SteflMabry & Radlick, 2017).
Table 5 summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of the research on school library
programs and teacher librarians.

57
Table 5
School Library Program Research: Strengths and Weaknesses
Strengths
Twenty-five large-scale studies demonstrate
that the components of effective school
library programs positively impact student
achievement, particularly in ELA; the single
most important variable is the presence of a
full-time certificated school librarian who:
• Organizes and maintains a collection
of resources
• Regularly collaborates with teachers
to integrate resources into the
curriculum
• Facilitates access to information
• Provides leadership (Farmer & Safer,
2010; Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Gretes,
2013; Kachel, 2013; Kaplan, 2010;
Lance et al., 2014a, 2014b; School
Libraries Impact Studies, 2013;
School Libraries Work, 2016).
Classroom teachers’ instructional practice
improved through engagement in
collaborative assignments with school
librarians (Moreillon, 2013)

Weaknesses
Large-scale studies employed correlational
designs, which does not indicate a causal
relationship (AASL, 2014; Ewbank, 2011;
Hartzell, 2012)
Most research focuses upon reading and
language arts standardized testing data
(Hughes, 2014)
School library research is not welldisseminated to school administrators and
state leaders (Everhart & Mardis, 2014;
Kaplan, 2010; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012)
Some school administrators have expressed a
reluctance to trust the results of the largescale studies (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012)
Many of the large-scale studies are not peerreviewed (Stefl-Mabry & Radlick, 2017)
Several weaknesses noted in research
methodology (Stefl-Mabry & Radlick, 2017)

Classroom teachers depend upon instructional
services provided by school librarians for
inquiry-based learning experiences (Lo &
Chiu, 2015)
California School Library Programs
The failure to effectively disseminate research on how school library programs impact
student achievement may provide one explanation as to why significant discrepancies exist in the
level of library services provided to students in California. In 2008, a statewide study of school
libraries was conducted to examine the strength of the relationship between California school
library programs and student achievement on the California statewide criterion-referenced

58
standards tests for English Language Arts in grades 4, 8, and 11; Social Studies in grade 8; and
U.S. History in grade 11. The same methodology used in previous statewide school library
impact studies was applied in this descriptive, non-experimental study. Results indicated that the
strength of the relationship between school library program elements and student achievement
increased as the overall percentage of certificated teacher librarians at a grade level increased.
However, results also revealed a substantial discrepancy in library staffing levels from
kindergarten through grade 12 (Achterman, 2008). Additionally, the results of a mixed methods
study that used 2007–2008 data sets to examine baseline factors and statistical standards for
resources of effective school library programs found that a lower percentage of California school
library programs met the baseline standards when compared to national school library programs.
This indicates that California school libraries are not providing an appropriate level of services to
enable students to achieve success (Farmer & Safer, 2010).
Standards and guidelines. California Education Code Sections 18100, 18120, and
44868 mandate that public school districts provide library services to students and teachers,
appoint one or more qualified librarians to staff each library, and ensure that the teacher librarian
holds a valid Teacher Librarian Services credential issued by the California Commission on
Teacher Credentialing (CCTC; California Education Code, n.d.). Holders of the California
Teacher Librarian Services Credential and Special Class Authorization are authorized by
California Code of Regulations Title 5, Sections §80053 and §80053.1 to:
•

Instruct students in accessing, evaluating, using and integrating information and resources
in the library program

•

Plan and coordinate school library programs with the instructional programs of a school
district through collaboration with teachers

59
•

Select materials for school and district libraries

•

Develop programs for and deliver staff development for school library services

•

Coordinate or supervise library programs at the school, district, or county level

•

Plan and conduct a course of instruction for those pupils who assist in the operation of
school libraries

•

Supervise classified personnel assigned school library duties

•

Develop procedures for and management of the school and district libraries

•

Provide departmentalized instruction in information literacy, digital literacy, and digital
citizenship (Thomson Reuters, 2016a, para. b; 2016b, para. c)

To obtain the Teacher Librarian Services Credential, individuals must hold a bachelor’s degree, a
valid California teaching credential, and complete one of the following: a) a Teacher Librarian
Services Credential program accredited by the CCTC, b) a comparable out-of-state professional
preparation program consisting of at least 30 graduate semester units, or c) National Board
Certification in Library Media (CCTC, 2014).
Preparation programs. California’s teacher librarian preparation programs are governed
by the CCTC’s Teacher Librarian Services Credential and Special Class Authorization in
Information and Digital Literacy Program Standards (CCTC TL Standards). In 2011 these
standards were updated to maintain consistency with the AASL Standards for Initial Preparation
of School Librarians (2010), Standards for the 21st Century Learner, and the CCSS ELA
(CCTC, 2015). Like the aforementioned documents, the CCTC TL Standards include a strong
emphasis on teaching for learning. Standards 2 and 11 specifically state that candidates must be
able to (a) use a wide variety of instructional strategies and assessment tools to develop and
deliver standards-based learning experiences both independently and in collaboration with

60
educational partners; (b) design developmentally appropriate instruction based on the Model
School Library Standards for California Public Schools, other academic content area standards,
their knowledge of learning theory, and diverse students’ interests and needs; and (c) clearly link
assessment to student achievement, assess student learning, and develop interventions to
maximize student learning outcomes. Additionally, candidates are expected to provide
instructional leadership by advocating for effective school library programs that focus on student
learning and achievement; modeling and communicating information literacy and the ethical,
legal, and safe use of information and technology; providing professional development; and
demonstrating a commitment to continuous professional growth. Candidates must also
demonstrate knowledge of the ethical and legal codes of the profession and various research
strategies; demonstrate proficiency in the use of current and emerging technologies, a wide
variety of digital and print resources, and a variety of learning formats and venues; and be able to
design and deliver curriculum in digital literacy and digital citizenship.
Daily practice and staffing guidelines. In 2010 the California State Board of Education
adopted the Model School Library Standards for California Public Schools (MSLS), which
provides guidance for the library services that should be delivered to students as specified in
California Education Code 18100 and 18101 (California Education Code, n.d.). Though the
MSLS are included in the State Board of Education’s collection of academic content standards,
compliance is not mandatory (CDE, 2011). The document includes two sections, “School
Library Standards for Students” and “School Library Program Standards,” both of which serve to
direct teacher librarians in their daily practice. The “School Library Standards for Students”
focus primarily upon instructing students to access, evaluate, and use information across all
curricular subjects at each grade level. The “School Library Program Standards” provide

61
specific guidelines and quantitative program standards, stipulating that the teacher librarian-tostudents ratio be 1 to 785 along with one full-time classified paraprofessional assistant. The
standards also indicate that the teacher librarian is expected to schedule collaborative planning
and teaching “with at least two grade levels or departments or 20 percent or more of individual
teachers” (CDE, 2011, p. 33) and deliver instruction for at least 20 hours per week.
CCSS ELA connections. The MSLS “School Library Standards for Students” closely
support the CCSS ELA, as evidenced by a document issued by the California Department of
Education in 2012 entitled “Examples of Model School Library Standards for California Public
Schools Supporting Common Core State Standards (CCSS) for English Language Arts &
Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects.” In 2014 the California
State Board of Education adopted the new English Language Arts/English Language
Development Framework for California Public Schools (ELA Framework) which provides
educators guidance in implementing the CCSS ELA and the English Language Development
(ELD) standards. The integral role of libraries and teacher librarians are embedded throughout
the framework and are specifically addressed in Chapter 11:
Given the demands for independent reading and reading across the range of literary and
informational texts in the CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy and the CA ELD Standards, library
professionals are more important than ever to the success of students in achieving the
standards. Teacher librarians have key responsibilities for building library collections
that accomplish the following:
•

Nurture students’ love of literature and pursuit of knowledge

•

Support instruction in all content areas

62
•

Reflect the languages spoken by students and their families and those taught in
biliteracy programs

•

Represent and connect with the cultures and interests of all students and their
families in positive and relevant ways

•

Build students’ technological and critical competencies

Teacher librarians are also key collaborators with classroom teachers on research projects
and other inquiry-based learning. In addition, they coordinate with classroom teachers
and other specialists to address the MSLS in classroom and library instruction. Critically
important for 21st century learners, students need to acquire information literacy skills in
conjunction with their instruction in ELA, ELD, and disciplinary literacy. (CDE, 2015a,
p. 996)
Table 6 summarizes the expectations for California Teacher Librarians.

63
Table 6
California Teacher Librarian Expectations
Definition of Role
Mandated by California Education Code
Sections 18100, 18120, and 44868
Authorized by California Code of
Regulations Title 5 Sections §80053 and
§80053.1 to:
• Instruct students in accessing,
evaluating, using and integrating
information and resources in the
library program
• Plan and coordinate school library
programs with the instructional
programs of a school district through
collaboration with teachers
• Select materials for school and
district libraries
• Develop programs for and deliver
staff development for school library
services
• Coordinate or supervise library
programs at the school, district, or
county level
• Plan and conduct a course of
instruction for those pupils who
assist in the operation of school
libraries
• Supervise classified personnel who
are assigned school library duties
• Develop procedures for and
management of the school and
district libraries
• Provide departmentalized instruction
in information literacy, digital
literacy, and digital citizenship
CDE staffing standard: 1 full-time teacher
librarian per 785 students with one full-time
classified paraprofessional assistant

Qualifications
Hold a
bachelor’s
degree, a valid
CA teaching
credential, and a
CA Teacher
Librarian
Services
Credential
issued by the
CCTC
Complete
CCTC-approved
teacher librarian
credential
program in
California or
comparable outof-state
professional
program
consisting of at
least 30 graduate
semester units

Standards & Guidelines
Preparation programs
governed by CCTC’s
Teacher Librarian
Services Credential
and Special Class
Authorization in
Information and
Digital Literacy
Program Standards
Daily practice guided
by the MSLS, which
outlines the school
library services that
should be provided to
students and staff
MSLS closely support
the CCSS ELA
ELA Framework
outlines role of school
libraries and teacher
librarians in
implementation of
CCSS ELA

64
California teacher librarian staffing discrepancies. Despite education code mandates,
positive school library research, teacher librarian credentialing standards, and clear CCSS ELA
connections, California continues to maintain one of the worst ratios of teacher librarians to
students in the United States (CSLA, 2015; Tuck & Holmes, 2016). At the time of the 2008
statewide school library study, California maintained only one teacher librarian for every 5,965
students, which was seven times below the national average (Achterman, 2008). Several years
of state budget cuts beginning in 2009 served to increase this ratio as districts eliminated teacher
librarian positions, dropping California public schools to 50th in the nation (California State
Auditor, 2016; Education Stakeholders, 2015; Mongeau, 2014; Neason, 2015; Tuck & Holmes,
2016). In the 2014–2015 academic year, the ratio of teacher librarians to California students was
1 to 7,187, which does not even come close to the MSLS standard of 1 to 785 and is again far
below the most recent national average of 1 to 1,023 (California State Auditor, 2016; CDE,
2015c, 2015d).
There are three possible reasons to explain this disparity. First, state law does not clearly
define the minimum type or level of library services that school districts should provide. As
such, districts can choose to employ only one teacher librarian to provide services to all schools,
contract with a county office of education that employs a teacher librarian, or employ classified
staff to offer only basic library operations (California State Auditor, 2016). Secondly, California
does not allocate dedicated funding to provide the MSLS-prescribed staffing and supplies for its
school libraries. Districts and school sites are given discretion in deciding how to distribute their
annual allocations, so funding is directed to the areas in which school leaders see the greatest
need or place the most value (Achterman, 2008; California State Auditor, 2016; CDE, 2016c;
Mongeau, 2014). Third, according to several studies and surveys conducted since 1989, school

65
principals know very little about the components of effective school library programs and are
thus unlikely to value them (Levitov, 2013). In 2016, the California State Auditor released a
state-wide review of school library services. Of the three school districts that were examined,
one district communicated that it was not aware that the MSLS existed. This lack of knowledge
may be due to the failure to effectively disseminate school library research, the absence of
instruction on school library programs in administrative preparation programs, or an inaccurate
perception of the role of the teacher librarian based upon previous experience. This rationale is
supported in a statement made by Keith Curry Lance and Linda Hofschire (2013) in their
discussion of school library research entitled “The Impact of School Libraries on Academic
Achievement”:
Given that many of today’s school administrators are still old enough to have attended
public schools in the 1960s or earlier – before the advent of professional school librarians
– it is often difficult to make the case for a position foreign to the decision-maker’s own
student experience. Further, because some administrators have limited understanding of
school libraries and limited experience with school librarians, they tend to make
decisions about school librarian positions based on their experience with an individual
librarian. For instance, a principal who would consider it absurd to eliminate a math
teacher position because of one poorly performing math teacher thinks nothing of
eliminating a school librarian position because of a poorly performing librarian. (p. 66)
Administrators’ Perceptions of the Role of Teacher Librarians
Within the past decade, several studies have been conducted to specifically examine
administrators’ perceptions of school librarians. A 2008 quantitative study that focused upon
elementary school principals’ perceptions of the school library program sought to examine the

66
basis for principals’ views of the instructional role of the teacher librarian. The questionnaire
developed and administered in this study asked participants to specify their primary source of
knowledge of the teacher librarian’s instructional role. Of the 110 respondents, 65.5% noted
their knowledge of the instructional role of the teacher librarian originated from their interactions
with teacher librarians during their administrative tenure and 26.4% during their tenure as
classroom teachers. Only 2.7% stated that they gained their knowledge through professional
journals and 1.8% stated that their knowledge came from coursework delivered in their
administrative preparation programs. Of those that indicated that they had received formal
training related to the role of the teacher librarian (n=10), five participants indicated that it was a
topic of discussion in several courses and three stated that it was a topic of discussion in one
course (Church, 2008). A similar study conducted in 2010 to evaluate secondary principals’
perceptions of the instructional role of the teacher librarian revealed similar results. The
majority of respondents indicated that they had formed their views through interactions with
library media specialists during their administrative or teaching careers. Only 6% gained their
knowledge through professional journals and 1% through administrative preparation coursework
and conference presentations (Church, 2010). Both of these studies were conducted in the state
of Virginia where Virginia Standards of Quality mandate that schools with an enrollment of 1–
299 students employ a part-time licensed teacher librarian and schools with enrollment that
exceeds 300 employ a full-time teacher librarian. Thus, the principals surveyed in these studies
were likely to have interacted with a teacher librarian as either a classroom teacher or
administrator.
Principal support. The actions of school administrators have the ability to affect the
school library program’s impact on student achievement. Both the 2007 Indiana and 2009 Idaho

67
school library impact studies found that higher performing schools tended to have principals that
met regularly with teacher librarians, valued the collaborative planning process between their
teachers and teacher librarians, and viewed the school library program as having a positive effect
on student success (Hughes, 2014; Lance, Rodney, & Russell, 2007; Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz,
2010). In addition to exploring the impact of school libraries on student achievement, the 2014
South Carolina Impact Study examined administrators’ and teachers’ perceptions of the school
library program and roles of the school librarian. Two hundred seventy-three administrator
participants rated the importance of school library program policies and practices as essential,
highly desirable, or unnecessary. The majority of respondents indicated that five policies and
procedures were considered to be essential or highly desirable, with the top two designated as:
“Librarians and teachers designing and teaching instructional units together” (91.4%) and
“Librarians providing in-service professional development to faculty” (87.2%; Gavigan & Lance,
2015, pp. 8–9). Comments provided on the open-ended portion of the questionnaire revealed
that administrator participants valued the instructional collaboration between their school
librarians and teachers and recognized school librarians as model teachers (Lance et al., 2014a).
Most studies that have examined school administrators’ perceptions of school library
programs have focused upon a sample of participants in a specific region or state. A 2012 study
sought to broaden the perspective by examining the perceptions of administrators who had
received state or national awards for support of school library programs or who were identified
by school librarians as being supportive of their school library programs. The purpose of the
study was four-fold: First, to discern how administrators gained knowledge and understanding
of the school library program. Second, to determine what administrators should learn about the
role of teacher librarians in their administrative preparation programs. Third, to learn how

68
administrators provided support to their school library programs. Fourth, to learn what teacher
librarians could do to gain greater administrative support. Twenty-eight of 30 respondents
indicated that working with a teacher librarian as an administrator contributed to their knowledge
and understanding while only five indicated that they gained their knowledge through a
preparation program. Two-thirds of respondents indicated that the most important source of their
knowledge consisted of working with a school librarian as an administrator or classroom teacher.
No respondents indicated that a pre-service preparation program was an important factor in
contributing to their knowledge of teacher librarians (Shannon, 2012).
Advocacy efforts. Researchers at Mansfield University in Pennsylvania sought to
address the need to educate administrators about the role of the teacher librarian and effective
school library programs and create advocates for such programs by creating and facilitating an
online course entitled “School Library Advocacy for Administrators.” In 2005 and 2006 the
university conducted a study to explore whether completion of the course made a difference in
administrators’ knowledge and perceptions of the school library program and how it impacted
their actions at their school sites. Thirteen of 20 administrators who completed the course
participated in the study. Participants were located in nine states and represented a range of K–12
grade levels. Data were collected from interviews, course feedback forms, self-assessments,
surveys, and action plans. Three main themes emerged from the data analysis: (a) a changed
perception of the teacher librarian and school library program, (b) an improved ability to
communicate with the teacher librarian, and (c) an increased awareness of how the administrator
can support the school library program. A fourth theme, a change in perception of the teacher
librarian’s role in teaching and learning, also emerged. Of particular interest to participants was
the teacher librarian’s information specialist role. Administrators noted that as an information

69
specialist, the teacher librarian plays a central role in the use of technology at the school site and
serves as a professional developer to school personnel. Overall, the administrators who
completed the Mansfield University course indicated that they felt the course content would be
valuable to other administrators and should be incorporated into university-level administrative
preparatory coursework (Levitov, 2013).
International perspective. Since the majority of research on administrators’ perceptions
of school librarians has employed the use of questionnaires based upon American school library
program frameworks, Lupton (2016) sought to employ a qualitative methodology to examine
principals’ perceptions of the role of teacher librarians in Australian schools. Nine principals
from a variety of school sizes and levels in the state of Queensland were nominated by their
teacher librarians and agreed to participate in the study. The researcher conducted semistructured interviews with participants, lasting approximately 30 minutes in length. Five themes,
based upon the value that the teacher librarian provided both the principal and school
community, emerged from the data analysis: a) value for money, b) value in providing a broad
perspective, c) value in giving advice and providing ideas, d) value in providing leadership in
information and communication technologies, and e) value in the teacher librarian’s qualities.
Limitations to this study include the small sample size (n=9) and the fact that participants were
nominated by the teacher librarians with whom they worked. As such, it is noted that the
participants were more likely to be supportive of their teacher librarians. Regardless, the study
provides data to demonstrate that principals value the instructional role of their teacher librarians,
viewing them primarily as teachers and secondarily as librarians. In addition, “several of the
principals in the study compared their current teacher-librarian favourably with former
colleagues. Those with a high performing teacher-librarian mentioned being ‘lucky’ (pp. 56–57)

70
and that ‘the value of the teacher-librarian as an individual seemed to outweigh the value of the
role per se’” (Lupton, 2016, p. 57). Since Australian teacher librarians are evaluated according
to the generic Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership Professional Standards
for Teachers, they are not held accountable to the school library specialist role. Consequently,
teacher librarians that function primarily as managers of the library space and its resources are
not as highly valued by their principals.
California Instructional Leadership Expectations
As only approximately 8% of K–12 public schools in California employ a credentialed
teacher librarian (CSLA, 2015), the finding that administrators’ knowledge of school library
programs and teacher librarians is formed primarily though positive interactions with librarians
during their tenure as either a classroom teacher or administrator is perplexing. California’s
educational leaders and classroom teachers have little to no opportunity to interact with a
credentialed teacher librarian. This has historically been an issue as the few teacher librarians
employed in the state have been consistently laid off during stringent state budget cycles over the
past four decades (Achterman, 2008; California State Auditor, 2016; Mongeau, 2014). Today’s
classroom teachers and administrators who were educated or served in California schools most
likely did not interact with a teacher librarian as a student or an educator (Lance & Hofschire,
2013). If the school they attended or worked in maintained a dedicated library space, it was most
likely managed by a classified staff member who served only to organize and circulate the
library’s materials. In addition, California’s administrative preparation programs are not
required to incorporate instruction about the components of an effective school library program
(CCTC, 2016). Consequently, California educators’ knowledge of the school library program
and the instructional role of the teacher librarian is limited in scope.

71
Administrator preparation standards. The California Professional Standards for
Education Leaders (CPSEL) outline the knowledge and expectations required for California
public school administrators to sustain effective practice. This broad set of policy standards is
the foundation for administrator preparation programs, professional learning opportunities, and
evaluation of school administrators. The CPSEL consist of six broad standards focused upon (a)
vision development and implementation, (b) instructional leadership, (c) management and
learning environment, (d) family and community engagement, (e) ethics and integrity, and (f)
external context and policy. Each of these standards is divided into more specific descriptive
elements with example indicators. Under the instructional leadership standard, the first element
specifically addresses the need for administrators to establish a professional learning culture that
capitalizes on the experiences and abilities of staff to implement structures that promote
collaborative inquiry. The second element, curriculum and instruction, provides statements to
indicate how an administrator might guide and support the school’s instructional program by
developing a shared understanding of the state adopted standards-based curriculum, promoting
the use of state frameworks, and providing access to a variety of resources to implement
effective instruction and support (CCTC, 2016). These statements allude to a need for
administrators to distribute instructional leadership responsibilities, particularly in the areas of
professional learning and developing the instructional program. However, the standards do not
specifically identify how and to whom these responsibilities should be distributed, nor the
specific types of resources, such as school library programs, that are needed to implement
effective instruction and support. California administrative preparation programs are provided
latitude in determining how to instruct their candidates to meet these standards.
Sources of knowledge. The CPSEL require that California public school administrators

72
demonstrate knowledge of all of California’s K–12 academic content standards, state-adopted
instructional programs and materials, and state assessment systems (CCTC, 2016). As such,
administrators may learn about the staffing and resources available to assist in the
implementation of the CCSS ELA by reading the ELA Framework. Chapter 11 of the
framework addresses three critical components—professional learning, leadership, and program
supports—and describes how “distributed leadership is closely connected to professional
learning and includes professional collaborations, coaching, and data-driven decision-making”
(p. 972). The framework also states that “teachers who participate in effective collaboration with
their peers benefit by improving their knowledge and instructional practice, and they also have
opportunities to exercise leadership and share in decision-making at the grade, department, and
school levels” (CDE, 2015a, p. 987). Though the concept of coaching is briefly mentioned in
broad terms in Chapter 11 of the ELA Framework, two specialized areas of certification in
teacher leadership are specifically highlighted in relation to this statement: that of a Reading and
Literacy Leadership Specialist and a Teacher Librarian. Thus, individuals that hold the
credentials authorized by the CCTC for these positions are likely to provide effective leadership
in the implementation of the CCSS ELA. The CCTC currently does not authorize or recommend
an advanced credential for the role of an instructional coach.
Selection of staff. To assist administrators in selecting and assigning teachers to specific
positions, the CCTC (2007) issued The Administrator’s Assignment Manual. The manual is
divided into sections by position, describes the credentials that authorize service for each
position, and outlines local assignment options. Until November 2017, the manual had not been
updated to reflect the changes to the Title 5 sections of the California Code of Regulations that
outline the services that many of the positions are currently authorized to provide. In contrast to

73
the 2007 edition, the 2017 edition includes updated information regarding the current
authorizations of the Teacher Librarian Services Credential and a table that details the specific
library-related services that various school personnel are authorized to provide. The delivery of
staff development is clearly indicated as a service that teacher librarians are authorized to
provide.
If an administrator relied on the 2007 edition of The Administrator’s Assignment Manual
to guide his or her decision in hiring an individual to provide staff development, he or she may
have opted to follow the guidelines for using the local level employment terms of “Teacher on
Special Assignment” (TOSA) or “Resource Teacher” to assign teachers to instructional support
positions. According to California Code of Regulations Title 5 §800020.4, a teacher who holds a
basic California teaching credential may serve as a staff developer at the school site, district, or
county level for grades preschool through 12 and in classes organized for adults. If the teacher is
expected to serve as a staff developer for a specific subject, he or she must either hold a teaching
credential in that subject area or have his or her subject-matter expertise verified and approved
by the local governing board (CCTC, 2000). As such, a teacher assigned to the role of
instructional coach via a TOSA or Resource Teacher designation is not required to hold an
advanced credential or degree. Table 7 compares the expectations for the role of instructional
coaches and teacher librarians in California public schools.
Professional learning standards. In 2014 the CDE released the Quality Professional
Learning Standards (QLPS), which acknowledges the 2009 research of Darling-Hammond,
Andree, Richardson, and Orphanos that found “in an effective professional learning system,
school leaders learn from experts, mentors, and their peers about how to become true
instructional leaders” (as cited in CDE, 2015b, p. 4). After finding that traditional professional

74
development has been poorly planned and implemented and has not produced positive results,
the CDE set out to design a set of standards to guide the development of such quality
professional learning systems. These standards identify seven essential elements:
•

Data

•

Content and Pedagogy

•

Equity

•

Design and Structure

•

Collaboration and Shared Accountability

•

Resources

•

Alignment and Coherence (CDE, 2015b, p. 2)

Regarding the need for collaboration among educators, the Collaboration and Shared
Accountability standard states that “quality professional learning builds a culture of collaboration
and mutual trust by facilitating opportunities for educators to work together to strengthen their
practice and improve student learning” (CDE, 2015b, p. 20). Additionally, within the Resources
standard, two indicators of quality professional learning are noted as: recognizing “the leadership
capacity of internal staff to present, facilitate, or coach targeted professional learning,” and
capitalizing “on flexible staffing arrangements that allow for peer-to-peer learning” (CDE,
2015b, p. 23).
The QLPS are designed to complement the state’s student content standards by increasing
the capacity of educators to enable students to master expected learning outcomes but are not
meant to be used to evaluate teacher performance. The QLPS are intended for use by educators,
educational agencies, institutes of higher education, policymakers, and professional learning
providers throughout the state.

75
Table 7
Comparison of California Expectations for Instructional Coaches and Teacher Librarians
Instructional Coach
No formal definition; assigned to
instructional coaching role as a
TOSA or Resource Teacher
Definition of
Role

Authorized by California Code of
Regulations Title 5 Section
§800020.4 to serve as a staff
developer
Hold a valid CA teaching
credential

No advanced or professional
preparation required
Qualifications

No CDE staffing standard

Standards &
Guidelines

Teacher Librarian
Mandated by California Education
Code Sections 18100, 18120, and
44868 and authorized by California
Code of Regulations Title 5 Sections
§80053 and §80053.1 to provide
specific school library services,
including staff development
Hold a bachelor’s degree, a valid CA
teaching credential, and a CA Teacher
Librarian Services Credential issued by
the CCTC
Complete CCTC-approved teacher
librarian credential program in
California or comparable out-of-state
professional program consisting of at
least 30 graduate semester units
Preparation programs governed by
CCTC’s Teacher Librarian Services
Credential and Special Class
Authorization in Information and
Digital Literacy Program Standards
CDE staffing standard: 1 full-time
teacher librarian per 795 students with
one full-time classified
paraprofessional assistant

No specific standards or
guidelines provided by CDE to
guide daily practice

Daily practice guided by CDE’s MSLS;
MSLS closely support the CCSS ELA

ELA Framework mentions
coaching as a collegial structure
in implementation of CCSS ELA

ELA Framework describes role of
school libraries and teacher librarians in
implementation of CCSS ELA

Given the timeline of implementation of the CCSS ELA (see Figure 2), California K–12
school administrators were provided guidance in the provision of professional learning via two

76
documents, the CCSS Systems Implementation Plan and the ELA Framework. The CCSS Systems
Implementation Plan was released two years after the adoption of the CCSS ELA and MSLS and
did not specifically indicate how professional learning should be provided or by whom. The ELA
Framework did specifically indicate that teacher librarians and reading specialists were
appropriate personnel to provide instructional leadership in this arena, but it was published four
years after the adoption of the CCSS ELA and MSLS and during the year of field testing for the
new computer-adaptive assessments to measure student achievement of the standards. By this
time, most administrators had already selected general instructional coaches to provide
professional learning to their teachers so that students would be ready to take the new assessments
(Udesky, 2015).

Figure 2. Timeline of implementation of CCSS ELA.
California staffing demographics. All California public schools are required to

77
annually submit staffing demographic data to the California Department of Education via the
California Longitudinal Pupil Achievement Data System (CALPADS). The CALPADS Data
Guide v. 8.2 indicates that teaching assignments that do not involve the instruction of students
must be reported as “non-classroom based staff assignments” (CDE, 2016b, p. 97). The
CALPADS Valid Code Combinations file (version 8.2), indicates that there are 98 codes
available for non-classroom based staff assignments (CDE, 2016a). In the 2014–2015 school
year, teacher librarians were required to be reported as a Pupil Service assignment under code
0204 (CDE, 2016b). Of the remaining 97 codes, there is not a specific classification for TOSA
or instructional coach, nor does the CALPADS Data Guide v. 8.2 provide direction in how to
classify these positions. Thus, it is impossible to determine how many instructional coaches are
employed in California’s public schools. However, there are three general classification codes
that schools might use to describe and report these assignments, as listed in Table 8. The
definition for the third code, “Other Certificated non-instructional assignment,” includes a fourth
code, 3020, that could also be utilized to report the assignment.
Table 8
Non-Classroom Based or Support Assignment Staffing Codes
Name
Mentor teacher

Coded Value
6010

Resource teacher (not
instructing students)

6017

Other Certificated noninstructional assignment

6020

Definition
Mentor teacher (CDE, 2016a, Tab 3, Row
1591)
Resource teacher (not instructing students).
Do not use this if the teacher is providing
instruction to students. Submit a Course
Section record with a Course Group State
Code of 3020 (Consultation/Instructional
Support). (CDE, 2016a, Tab 3, Row 1594)
Other Certificated non-instructional
assignment (CDE, 2016a, Tab 3, Row 1597)

78
Figure 3 indicates the number of staff assignments reported by schools for each of these
assignment codes in the 2014–2015 school year. Since staff can be assigned up to seven job
classification codes ranging in percentage from 0.1 to 100 percent of full-time equivalent (FTE)
per school site, these numbers do not indicate an overall total number of teachers assigned to
each code.

Resource Teacher (6017)

11,997

Consultation/Instructional Support (3020)

11,362

Mentor Teacher (6010)

1625

Other Certificated Non-Instructional Assignment
(6020)

6707

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

14000

Figure 3. Potential instructional coach assignments, 2014–2015.
If instructional coaches were classified according to these codes, there was a potential of
31,970 instructional coaching assignments in California schools in the 2014–2015 school year.
In contrast, there were only 955 staff assignments reported for teacher librarians (see Figure 4).

79

35000

31,691

30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
955
0
Non-Classroom Based Staff
Assignment: Teacher Librarians
(0204)

Non-Classroom Based Staff
Assignments: 3020, 6010, 6017, 6020

Figure 4. Comparison of staffing assignments, 2014–2015.
The CALPADS staff assignment classification for teacher librarians was changed for the
2015–2016 school year. Since teacher librarians are required to hold both teaching and teacher
librarian credentials, they were to be reported under the job classification of “Teacher” or
“Itinerant/Pull-Out/Push-In Teacher” with a new associated “State Course Code of 6026 –
(Teacher Librarian Information and Digital Literacy and Digital Citizenship)” (CDE, 2016b, p.
97). The CDE released staffing data for the 2015–2016 school year on May 22, 2017 and 2016–
2017 staffing data on September 21, 2017. Only 152 teacher librarians were reported statewide
for 2015–2016, which reveals an 82.3% drop from the 2014–2015 school year; and 361 teacher
librarians in 2016–2017. This severe drop led the CDE to conclude that local educational
agencies did not understand the changes in reporting and thus did not accurately submit their
staffing data for teacher librarians in either school year (CDE, 2017a, 2017b). As a result, the
teacher librarian staffing data for the 2015–2016 and 2016–2017 school years is not usable.
Instructional Coaches and Teacher Librarians
Upon examination of the instructional coaching model that is currently used in many

80
schools throughout the United States, the Big Four Model, and the CCTC TL Standards, it
appears that the expectations for the instructional roles of both instructional coaches and teacher
librarians are similar in nature (CDE, 2013, 2015a; Knight, 2007; Marzano & Simms, 2013).
Both are expected to be experts in providing professional learning. Both are also expected to be
experienced educators that serve to establish collaborative partnerships with teachers in the
planning, delivery, and assessment of instruction in order to improve student achievement. Table
9 summarizes the similarities of the guidelines for instructional practice for the instructional
coach and teacher librarian.

81
Table 9
Comparison of Instructional Coaching and Teacher Librarian Guidelines for Practice
Big Four Model of
Instructional Coaching
A collaborative partnership in which the
instructional coach and teacher work
together to improve four instructional
components:

California Teacher Librarian
Program Standards
Both independently and in collaboration
with educational partners, teacher librarians
will:

1. Student behavior: assist teachers in
creating a productive learning
environment by guiding them to
articulate behavioral expectations,
effectively correct student behavior,
and increase student engagement
2. Content knowledge: encourage
teachers to develop a deep
understanding of the instructional
content area by helping them to
access and translate state content
standards into lessons and units of
study

Design developmentally appropriate
instruction based on the Model School
Library Standards for California Public
Schools, other academic content area
standards, their [teacher librarians’]
knowledge of learning theory, and diverse
students’ interests and needs

3. Direct instruction: identify and
assist in the development of
instructional practices that the
teacher can use to effectively guide
students in mastering the content

Use a wide variety of instructional strategies
and assessment tools to develop and deliver
standards-based learning experiences

4. Formative assessment: assist
teachers in developing formative
assessments in order to identify
learning targets, enable students to
monitor their own progress, and
provide constructive feedback

Clearly link assessment to student
achievement, assess student learning, and
develop interventions to maximize student
learning outcomes

Where the roles appear to differ is in instructional content; instructional coaches are
generally expected to focus upon implementing research-based instructional practices while
teacher librarians are expected to specifically focus upon integrating 21st century skills and
multiple literacies into the curriculum, which closely aligns to the CCSS ELA. The roles also

82
differ in role definition, qualifications, and standards and guidelines. While there is no common
definition, model, or certification for general instructional coaches (Neumerski, 2013), there does
exist a common definition, professional standards, and advanced training and certification for
teacher librarians (AASL, 2009a, 2009b, 2010, 2016d; CCTC, 2014, 2015).
Finally, the research base for instructional coaches and teacher librarians differs quite
significantly. While there is little research to demonstrate that the role of the instructional coach
positively impacts student achievement (Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Neumerski, 2013),
there are multiple large-scale studies that demonstrate how strong school library programs led by
teacher librarians contribute to student achievement in ELA, including one focused on
California’s school library programs (Achterman, 2008; Farmer & Safer, 2010; Gretes, 2013;
Kachel, 2013; Kaplan, 2010; School Libraries Impact Studies, 2013; School Libraries Work,
2016). There is some research to suggest that coaching improves teacher knowledge and skill,
but recent studies on instructional coaching have also revealed recurring barriers to effective
practice. These include role confusion, a lack of training and support, and inability to engage in
coaching work due to competing responsibilities (Bean et al., 2010; Knight, 2012; Lynch &
Ferguson, 2010; Galluci et al., 2010; Lowenhaupt et al., 2014; Range et al., 2014; Stock &
Duncan, 2010; Vanderburg & Stephens, 2010). Multiple studies have also been conducted to
specifically examine administrators’ perceptions of the instructional role of the teacher librarian
that demonstrate why administrators value this role (Church, 2008, 2010; Levitov, 2013; Lupton,
2016; Shannon, 2012), but only one small study that demonstrates why administrators value the
instructional role of the instructional coach (Selvaggi, 2016).

83
Summary
This review of the literature has demonstrated that California K–12 public school
administrators are distributing instructional leadership responsibilities to other school leaders
who possess the expertise needed to deeply engage in the instructional program. Two such
leaders selected to serve in these roles within the context of the implementation of the CCSS
ELA are the instructional coach and teacher librarian. Each of the existing studies that focus
upon administrative perception of teacher librarians and instructional coaches was conducted with
administrators who worked directly with teacher librarians and instructional coaches. No known
studies have been conducted to examine the perception of administrators who do not work with an
individual in one of these roles or to examine why they may value one role over another. More
specifically, no studies been conducted to examine California K–12 public school administrators’
perceptions of these roles in the unique context of a statewide instructional initiative. Therefore,
this review of literature supports the need to conduct a study to develop an understanding of why
California K–12 school administrators distribute instructional leadership responsibilities,
particularly in regard to the provision of professional learning, to either instructional coaches or
teacher librarians and how the two roles compare within the context of the implementation of the
CCSS ELA.
Chapter Two provided a theoretical framework and a review of the relevant literature to
that guided the development of this research study. Chapter Three outlines the methods for this
collective case study. This includes the design, setting, participant sampling, and data collection
and analysis procedures. It also discusses the role of the researcher, methods to maximize
trustworthiness, and ethical considerations.

84
CHAPTER THREE: METHODS
Overview
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the methods for this collective case study
designed to develop an understanding of why California K–12 public school administrators
distribute instructional leadership responsibilities to either instructional coaches or teacher
librarians and how the two roles compare within the context of the implementation of the CCSS
ELA. This chapter describes the collective case study design, setting, participant sampling, and
data collection and analysis procedures. It also discusses my role as the researcher, methods to
maximize trustworthiness, and ethical considerations.
Design
This research employed a qualitative research design. Qualitative research emphasizes
understanding as the purpose for inquiry and involves a personal, interpretive role for the
researcher in a naturalistic setting (Stake, 1995). The approach that I utilized in this study is a
case study methodology. This qualitative design provides the ability to develop an in-depth
understanding of an issue or concern, which in this study is administrators’ perspectives of how
instructional coaches and teacher librarians contribute to instructional leadership in the
implementation of the CCSS ELA. A case study enables researchers to generate a description
and themes of an issue or concern by exploring a real-life, contemporary bounded system
through detailed, in-depth data collection via multiple sources of information (Yin, 2014). The
bounded system in this study consisted of a comprehensive K–12 California public school site in
which either an instructional coach or a teacher librarian was employed.
A multiple-case or collective case study design is utilized when multiple cases are
selected to illustrate different perspectives on an issue (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). In this study, I
selected two cases to illustrate differing administrators’ perspectives of instructional leadership.

85
Case One consisted of a school in which an instructional coach was employed. Case Two
consisted of a school in which a teacher librarian was employed. I carefully selected each case
and replicated the procedures three times in different school districts in an effort to predict
similar results (Yin, 2014). I collected data from interviews with the district and site
administrators, focus groups with the site administrator and instructional coach or teacher
librarian, observations of the instructional coach and teacher librarian, and documents generated
by the school’s district and site administrators. I then analyzed categories and themes both
within and across Case One and Case Two to determine similarities and differences (Yin, 2014).
Research Questions
In this study, administrators’ perceptions of instructional leadership served as the central
issue (Hallinger, 2005; Neumerski, 2013; Stake, 1995). Six research questions drove the study in
the examination of why and how administrators distributed instructional leadership
responsibilities to instructional coaches or teacher librarians in the implementation of the CCSS
ELA. Data collected from these questions were used to analyze how the roles of the
instructional coach and teacher librarian compare in practice (Spillane, 2006).
1. Why do administrators select instructional coaches to help them provide instructional
leadership?
2. Why do administrators select teacher librarians to help them provide instructional
leadership?
3. How do administrators and instructional coaches work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?
4. How do administrators and teacher librarians work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?

86
5. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional coaches’
instructional leadership roles?
6. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the teacher librarians’ instructional
leadership roles?
Setting
The context for this study was comprehensive K–12 California public school districts in
which instructional coaches or teacher librarians were employed at individual school sites. I
selected California public school districts as the context since they are governed by California
Education Code and held accountable for instructing students according to content standards
adopted by the California State Board of Education. To obtain differing perspectives of
instructional leadership in each case, I selected a total of six different school districts throughout
California for this study, three districts for Case One and three districts for Case Two. School
districts that employ multiple instructional coaches or teacher librarians are more likely to have
established job descriptions, training procedures, and evaluation documents established for these
roles. I identified districts that met this criteria by examining CALPADS staffing data; news
reports; recommendations from colleagues; and by searching Edjoin.org, California’s education
job site. Once I located a potential district, I searched its website for specific staffing
information on instructional coaches or teacher librarians (e.g. employment information, job
descriptions, historical staffing data provided on individual School Accountability Report Cards)
to verify that the district employed a significant population of either role. I selected the
following districts and school sites to serve as settings for this study. Pseudonyms are used for
the names of all settings.
Case One: Setting #1
Adams Unified School District (USD) is a large urban K–12 school district in the

87
southern region of California, consisting of 33,400 students that attend one of its 38
comprehensive schools or nine specialized schools and programs. Student enrollment by
ethnicity is 70.9% Hispanic or Latino, 14.2% African American, 7.7% White, 2.6% Two or
More Races, 2.1% Asian, 1.4% Filipino, 0.8% Pacific Islander, and 0.3% American Indian or
Alaska Native. Of the total student population, 83.0% are socioeconomically disadvantaged,
21.5% are English Learners, 14.2% are homeless youth, 12.7% are students with disabilities, and
1.4% are foster youth.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of administrators that oversee the
departments of Business, Educational Services, and Human Resources. The Professional
Development Program, led by the Director of Professional Development, resides within the
Educational Services department and serves to support staff in the implementation of the CCSS
and core curriculum. The district employs 27 site-based instructional coaches within the
Professional Development Program and assigns them to schools based upon student achievement
needs and coach-to-teacher ratio.
In 2016, 31% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. A primary goal of the district’s Local Control
and Accountability Plan (LCAP) is for all students to be proficient in literacy, numeracy, critical
thinking, and technology. To meet this goal, the district identified three needs related to the
CCSS ELA: a) increase students’ proficiency rate on the Smarter Balanced English Language
Arts/Literacy test, b) increase the number of students that meet their expected growth in Reading
on an interim assessment, and c) ensure that all teachers are trained and implementing the CCSS.
A specific action taken to meet these needs includes the provision of professional development
by instructional coaches in the effective implementation of CCSS. The district employs 1,485

88
certificated teachers and 104 administrators. The district does not employ credentialed teacher
librarians.
Acacia Elementary School (K–6) was identified by the Adams USD Director of
Professional Development as meeting the criteria for a typical case. The school consists of 604
students, 26 teachers, and two administrators. In 2016, 30% of students met or exceeded the
standards on the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s Single Plan
for Student Achievement (SPSA) goals mirror the district’s LCAP goals, though a barrier to
meeting these goals is identified as an increased number of students at risk in reading. The
school improvement strategies include a focus upon providing professional development for
instructional staff by ensuring that all teachers are trained in ELA standards-based strategies and
can fully implement core and intervention ELA programs. A half-time instructional coach is
assigned to the site. The principal and instructional coach have worked together for four years.
Case One: Setting #2
Jefferson USD is a large urban K–12 school district in the northern region of California,
consisting of 32,000 students that attend one of its 41 schools. Student enrollment by ethnicity is
53.3% Hispanic or Latino, 24.1% White, 13.1% Asian, 4.1% Two or More Races, 2.5% African
American, 1.9% Filipino, 0.4% Pacific Islander, and 0.3% American Indian or Alaska Native.
Of the total student population, 47.2% are socioeconomically disadvantaged, 21.8% are English
Learners, 10.2% are students with disabilities, 0.6% are homeless youth, 0.3% are foster youth,
and 0.1% are migrant education.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of 14 administrators that oversee a variety
of departments. The department of Curriculum, Instruction, & English Learner Services is led
by two directors, one overseeing grades PreK–5 and the other overseeing grades 6–12. The

89
district employs 56 site-based instructional coaches and allocates them to schools based upon
student achievement needs.
In 2016, 54% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The primary goal of the district’s LCAP is to
provide a high-quality and comprehensive instructional program. A specific action taken to meet
this goal includes the provision of support by site-based instructional coaches in the
implementation of the CCSS. The district employs 1,590 certificated teachers and 124
administrators. The district does not employ credentialed teacher librarians.
Juniper Elementary School (K–5) was identified by the Jefferson USD Director of
Curriculum, Instruction, & English Learner Services as meeting the criteria for a typical case.
The school is an International Baccalaureate (IB) Primary Years Program World School
consisting of 443 students, 21 teachers, and one administrator. In 2016, 33% of students met or
exceeded the standards on the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s
SPSA goals are aligned to the district’s strategic plan. The SPSA action plan for ELA is focused
upon raising student achievement in early literacy in grades K–2 and reading in grades 3–5. An
action taken to support these goals includes the provision of professional development to
teachers. A full-time instructional coach is assigned to the site by the district. The school site
also employs an instructional coach focused upon providing support for the IB program. The
principal and district-assigned instructional coach have worked together for one year.
Case One: Setting #3
Lincoln USD is a small rural K–12 school district in the central region of California,
consisting of 3,300 students that attend one of its five comprehensive schools or five specialized
schools and programs. Student enrollment by ethnicity is 89.7% Hispanic, 6.1% White, 3.4%

90
African American, 0.3% Asian, 0.2% Filipino, 0.1% American Indian or Alaska Native, and
0.1% Two or More Races. Of the total student population, 84.5% are socioeconomically
disadvantaged, 28.5% are English learners, 9.1% are students with disabilities, 2.5% are
homeless youth, 1.8% are migrant education, and 0.8% are foster youth.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of seven administrators that govern seven
different departments. The department of Educational Services is led by the Director of
Educational Services and oversees the district’s Curriculum and Instruction program. Within
this program, the district employs 10 site-based instructional coaches to assist teachers in the
instruction process and implementation of the CCSS. Instructional coaches are hired for specific
sites, based upon need.
In 2016, 29% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The primary goal of the district’s LCAP is to
provide a rigorous educational program that prepares students for college and career readiness.
In ELA, the district identified two priorities to meet this goal: to improve the performance of
students with disabilities and African American students. A specific action taken to meet these
priorities is the provision of professional development by instructional coaches to integrate
curriculum and technology with the CCSS. The purpose of this is to increase academic
instruction to improve the proficiency of at-risk students. The district employs 166 certificated
teachers and 16 administrators. The district does not employ credentialed teacher librarians.
Lemon Middle School (Grades 6–8) was identified by the Lincoln USD Director of
Educational Services as meeting the criteria for a typical case. The school consists of 750
students, 37 teachers, and three administrators. In 2016, 27% of students met or exceeded the
standards on the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s SPSA goals

91
are aligned to the district’s LCAP. The SPSA goal related to ELA is focused upon improving
students’ reading abilities. An action taken to reach this goal includes the development of ELA
unit plans with the support of an instructional coach. An additional SPSA goal is focused upon
the implementation of strategies to increase student engagement with standards-based
curriculum. Instructional coaches are noted as one party responsible for providing both
classroom-based and stand-alone training to teachers in a variety of instructional programs and
strategies. The site employs one full-time instructional coach. The principal and instructional
coach have worked together for three years. Table 10 summarizes the demographics of Case
One settings.

92
Table 10
Case One Settings

Setting

Adams USD

CA
Region

Southern
Urban

Students

Smarter
Instructional Balanced
Teachers Administrators
Coaches
ELA 2016
Results:
Met/Exceed

33,400

1,485

104

27

31%

604

26

2

0.5

30%

Jefferson
Northern
USD
Urban
Juniper
Elementary
School
(K–5)

32,000

1,590

124

56

54%

443

21

1

2

33%

Lincoln USD

3,300

166

16

10

29%

750

37

3

1

27%

Acacia
Elementary
School
(K–6)

Central
Rural

Lemon
Middle
School
(6–8)

Case Two: Setting #1
Madison High School District (HSD) is a large urban secondary (grades 7–12) school
district in the southern region of California, consisting of 40,700 students that are enrolled at one
of its 32 campuses. Student enrollment by ethnicity is 76.9% Hispanic or Latino, 8.2% Filipino,
5.7% White, 4.5% Two or More Races, 2.6% African American, 1.4% Asian, 0.3% Pacific
Islander, and 0.1% American Indian or Alaska Native. Of the total student population, 55.1%
are socioeconomically disadvantaged, 22.7% are English Learners, 11.9% are students with

93
disabilities, 1.1% are homeless youth, and 0.3% are foster youth.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of five administrators that oversee six
divisions. Within the division of Teaching and Learning resides the Curriculum and Instruction
Department, which is helmed by the Executive Director of Curriculum and Instruction. This
department serves to establish excellence in teaching and learning so that students will be
successfully prepared for college and career. The Curriculum and Instruction Department
oversees the district’s library services and provides direction for the district’s 24 site-based
teacher librarians that are selected at the school-site level.
In 2016, 54% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The primary goal of the district’s LCAP is to
ensure excellence in teaching and learning to prepare students to succeed in college and career.
Several actions are outlined to meet this goal: (a) provide professional development in California
Standards-aligned curriculum with a focus on literacy skills, quality instruction, and mastery; (b)
utilize Teacher Librarians to increase student acquisition of 21st century skills though digital
citizenship and support for the use of technology; (c) extend library hours and resources for
Teacher Librarians to support all students before and after school; and d) provide staff
opportunities to share best practices, participate in co-learning activities, and deepen knowledge
of effective teaching and learning. A secondary goal of the district’s LCAP is to create a safe
and healthy learning environment. An action identified to meet this goal describes how teacher
librarians will provide safe and engaging physical spaces and activities that support technology
and literacy. A third LCAP goal focuses upon supporting student success through parent and
community engagement. An action taken to meet this goal includes the provision of support by
teacher librarians to parents in digital citizenship and Internet safety. Finally, a fourth LCAP

94
goal focuses upon establishing operational excellence to support student success. An action
intended to meet this goal communicates the importance of building relationships among all
employees through purposeful collaboration. The district employs 1,947 certificated teachers
and 135 administrators. The district does not employ full-time instructional coaches; however, it
does employ part-time, site-based Teachers on Special Assignment (TOSA) as specialists trained
to provide professional development to teachers in curricular content areas. The Curriculum and
Instruction Department also provides direction to this population of specialists.
Magnolia Senior High School was identified by the Executive Director of Curriculum
and Instruction as meeting the criteria for a typical case. The school consists of 2,095 students,
49 teachers, and five administrators. In 2016, 43% of students met or exceeded the standards on
the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s SPSA goals are aligned to
the district’s LCAP goals. As such, a planned action step is for district and site Curriculum
Specialists and a literacy consultant to provide professional development to support the
implementation of high quality lesson plans in all content areas and to encourage teachers to
participate in learning walks, lesson studies, and attend conferences. A full-time Teacher
Librarian is assigned to the site’s library along with one full-time paraprofessional library
assistant. The site also employs four resource teachers, called Curriculum Specialists, in ELA,
math, science, and history/social science. These specialists teach in the classroom for three
periods each day and then provide two periods of support to staff; they also develop and deliver
formal professional development at designated meetings. The Assistant Principal of Curriculum
and Instruction and the Teacher Librarian have worked together for two years.
Case Two: Setting #2
Roosevelt High School District is a large urban high (grades 9–12) school district in the

95
central region of California, consisting of 38,700 students that are enrolled at one of its 18
comprehensive sites. Student enrollment by ethnicity is 65.3% Hispanic or Latino, 21.9% White,
5.9% African American, 2.6% Asian, 1.3% Filipino, 1.1% Two or More Races, 0.6% American
Indian or Alaska Native, and 0.2% Pacific Islander. Of the total student population, 69.0% are
socioeconomically disadvantaged, 8.9% are students with disabilities, 7.4% are English
Learners, 0.7% are foster youth, and 0.4% are homeless youth.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of four administrators that govern four
divisions. Leadership for the district’s 18 site-based teacher librarians is provided by the
Director of Instruction within the Department of Instruction, which provides direction in the
development of the district’s instructional programs. Professional development is directed by the
Instructional Services department, also located within the Instruction Division and helmed by the
Director of Instructional Services. Teacher Librarians are selected by principals at the site level.
In 2016, 52% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The primary goal of the district’s LCAP is the
provision of rigorous and relevant instruction by highly qualified and trained teachers. Two
actions related to ELA are outlined to meet this goal: (a) provide additional staffing for a new
literacy course, and (b) retain district Resource Teachers to provide professional development in
the CCSS and literacy course curriculum. A secondary goal of the district’s LCAP is to provide
safe and well-equipped schools with relevant instructional resources to enable student success
with the content standards. Three actions noted to meet this goal include (a) the maintenance of
Teacher Librarians at each site to provide support to core curriculum via resources and services,
(b) keeping each site library open beyond the school day to support student academic progress,
and (c) utilizing site-level technology lead teachers to support professional development in

96
technology. A third LCAP goal focuses upon preparing students for post-graduate success
through the core subject areas. An action planned to meet this goal details how professional
development in the effective teaching of CCSS will be provided to teachers to prepare students
to meet or exceed standards on the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test.
The district employs 1,697 certificated teachers and 129 administrators. The district does
not employ full-time instructional coaches; however, it does employ district-level Resource
Teachers to provide professional development to teachers in curricular content areas and sitebased technology lead teachers to provide professional development in technology.
Redwood High School was identified by the Director of Instructional Services as meeting
the criteria for a typical case. The school consists of 2,277 students, 102 teachers, and six
administrators. In 2016, 50% of students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter Balanced
English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s SPSA goals are aligned to the district’s LCAP
goals, with a targeted instructional focus of student learning and achievement through
advancement in literacy. Actions taken to achieve these goals include the provision of
professional development to teachers, the maintenance of a teacher librarian, and extended
school library hours. A full-time Teacher Librarian is assigned to the site’s library along with
one full-time paraprofessional library assistant. The Principal and the Teacher Librarian have
worked together for two years.
Case Two: Setting #3
Taft USD is a mid-sized K–8 urban school district in the central region of California,
consisting of 10,900 students that are enrolled at one of its 18 school sites. Student enrollment
by ethnicity is 66.3% Hispanic or Latino, 14.8% White, 9.4% Asian, 5.2% African American,
2.2% Two or More Races, 0.7% Filipino, 0.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, and 0.2%

97
Pacific Islander. Of the total student population, 81.3% are socioeconomically disadvantaged,
8.6% are students with disabilities, 24.1% are English Learners, 2.9% are migrant education,
1.3% are foster youth, and 0.5% are homeless youth.
The superintendent’s leadership team consists of three administrators that oversee the
divisions of Educational, Administrative, and Personnel Services. The Educational Services
division provides guidance and support to school sites in the areas of curriculum, instruction, and
professional development and is governed by the Assistant Superintendent of Educational
Services. The district employs nine teacher librarians, each of whom serves two school sites
under the direction of the site principals. One full-time library paraprofessional is assigned to
each of the district’s school sites.
In 2016, 36% of the district’s students met or exceeded the standards on the Smarter
Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. Two of the district’s LCAP goals are focused
upon improving student achievement in this area. The first goal is to increase student
proficiency through well-designed instruction and CCSS-aligned materials; the second goal
states that all teachers will receive well-planned professional development to meet the district’s
priorities. Actions taken to meet these goals include the funding of Teacher Librarians to lead
21st century learning efforts and Teachers on Special Assignment to coach and support
classroom teachers. One of the greatest needs identified is in ELA with the adoption of new
curriculum. Teacher Librarians are noted as individuals responsible for supporting the
advancement of the curriculum with classroom teachers. The district employs 514 certificated
teachers and 50 administrators. The district does not employ permanent instructional coaches;
however, it does employ temporary Teachers on Special Assignment to provide support to
teachers in improving instructional practices.

98
Torrey Elementary School (K–6) was identified by the Assistant Superintendent of
Educational Services as meeting the criteria for a typical case. The school consists of 774
students, 36 teachers, and two administrators. In 2016, 54% of students met or exceeded the
standards on the Smarter Balanced English Language Arts/Literacy test. The site’s SPSA goals
are aligned to the district’s LCAP goals, with specific goals set to increase student achievement
in ELA. Actions taken to achieve these goals include the ongoing provision of instructional
assistance to teachers by a Teacher Librarian. A half-time Teacher Librarian is assigned to the
site’s library along with one full-time paraprofessional library assistant. The Principal and the
Teacher Librarian have worked together for three years. Table 11 summarizes the demographics
of Case Two settings.

99
Table 11
Case Two Settings

CA
Region

Madison
HSD
Magnolia
High
School
(9–12)

Southern
Urban

Roosevelt
HSD
Redwood
High
School
(9–12)

Central
Urban

Taft USD

Central
Urban

Torrey
Elementary
School
(K–6)

Teacher
Librarians

Smarter
Balanced
ELA 2016
Results:
Met/Exceed

Students

Teachers Administrators

40,700

1,947

135

24

54%

2.095

49

5

1

43%

38,700

1,697

129

18

52%

2,277

102

6

1

50%

10,900

514

50

9

36%

774

36

2

0.5

54%

Participants
I used replication logic to select the participants for this collective case study. This
procedure consists of carefully selecting cases to predict similar results. According to Yin
(2014), the ability to replicate similar results across six to 10 cases can provide “compelling
support for the initial set of propositions” (p. 57). To accomplish this, I first identified
comprehensive K–12 California public school districts that primarily employed either
instructional coaches or teacher librarians at individual school sites. Once I identified a district, I

100
searched its website to locate and review the district’s Board Policy (BP) and Administrative
Regulation (AR) 6162.8, which outlines each district's protocol for engaging in research. I then
emailed the designated individual (which was typically the superintendent or his/her "designee";
see Appendix B for email script) a signed copy of my Permission Request Letter (see Appendix
C), Liberty University IRB Procedures for District/School Permission (see Appendix D),
Permission Letter Template (see Appendix E), and Consent Form (see Appendix F). If I did not
receive a response within three business days, I placed a follow-up phone call to the designated
individual (see Appendix B for phone script).
Once each district provided me with a letter of permission to participate in the study, I
requested a meeting (via phone or in person) with the district administrator that provided support
for instructional coaches or teacher librarians within the district (see Appendix B for email
script). In California’s K–12 public school districts, this individual is typically the Assistant
Superintendent, Coordinator, or Director of Curriculum and Instruction or Educational Services.
During the meeting, I discussed the details of the study and asked him or her to identify a school
site within the district in which a site administrator directly supervised an instructional coach or
teacher librarian and that represented a “typical case” within the district. I explained that a
typical case illustrates what the district considers to be “normal” or “average” in regard to the
working relationship between the site administrator and instructional coach or teacher librarian
within the district. This careful selection of a typical case for each district was intended to
provide similar results within and across Case One and Case Two in the study (Stake, 1995; Yin,
2014). After each district administrator and I selected a school site, I was able to identify each
setting’s participants as the (a) district administrator, (b) school site administrator, and (c) the
school site’s instructional coach or teacher librarian. This sampling procedure yielded three

101
participants for each of the three settings within Case One and Case Two, resulting in a total of
18 participants for this study. Table 12 provides the relevant demographic information for each
participant by case and setting.
Table 12
Participant Demographics

Case

Setting

One

Adams USD
Acacia ES
Jefferson USD
Juniper ES
Lincoln USD
Lemon MS

Two

Madison HSD
Magnolia HS
Roosevelt HSD
Redwood HS
Taft USD
Torrey ES

Position

Name

District Administrator
Site Administrator
Instructional Coach
District Administrator
Site Administrator
Instructional Coach
District Administrator
Site Administrator
Instructional Coach
District Administrator
Site Administrator
Teacher Librarian
District Administrator
Site Administrator
Teacher Librarian
District Administrator

Alice
Angela
Audrey
Jeanette
Joanna
Julie
Laurel
Leon
Lynn
Manuel
Michael
Monica
Rachel
Richard
Roxanne
Tanya

Site Administrator
Teacher Librarian

Tomas
Tracey

Current Role in
Setting

Years in
Current
Role

Director
Principal
Instructional Coach
Director
Principal
Instructional Coach
Director
Principal
Instructional Coach
Director
Assistant Principal
Teacher Librarian
Director
Principal
Teacher Librarian
Assistant
Superintendent
Principal
Teacher Librarian

6
8
4
5
2
1
5
3
5
3
2
10
1
2
9
3
5
3

Procedures
I first identified comprehensive K–12 California public school districts that primarily
employed either instructional coaches or teacher librarians at individual school sites. I
accomplished this by examining CALPADS staffing data; news reports; recommendations from
colleagues; and by searching Edjoin.org, California’s education job site. Once I located a
potential district, I searched its website for specific staffing information on instructional coaches

102
or teacher librarians (e.g. employment information, job descriptions, historical staffing data
provided on individual School Accountability Report Cards) to verify that the district employed
a significant population of either role. Once I identified a district, I searched its website to locate
and review the district’s Board Policy (BP) and Administrative Regulation (AR) 6162.8, which
outlines each district's protocol for engaging in research. I began contacting districts in January
2017 by emailing the designated individual (which was typically the superintendent or his/her
"designee;" see Appendix B for email script) a signed copy of my Permission Request Letter (see
Appendix C), Liberty University IRB Procedures for District/School Permission (see Appendix
D), Permission Letter Template (see Appendix E), and Consent Form (see Appendix F). If I did
not receive a response within three business days, I placed a follow-up phone call to the
designated individual (see Appendix B for phone script). Of those that responded, I was
informed of varying procedures for gaining permission to complete my study in each school
district. Of the six final participating school districts, four required detailed applications and
supporting documentation (e.g. description of methodology, copies of interview and observation
protocols, copy of Liberty University IRB application). I carefully completed each procedure as
requested. Gaining permission from each district proved to be a lengthy process. In February
2017 I received letters of permission from the two local school districts that agreed to participate
in the pilot study and two districts that agreed to participate in the actual study.
I then submitted my Liberty University Institutional Review Board (IRB) application
with the four letters of permission. On March 14th, 2017, I was granted IRB approval to begin
collecting data in those four school districts and was informed that I would need to submit
Change in Protocol Forms to the IRB when I received letters of permission from the remaining
four school districts that I had not yet identified and/or received approval. I completed this as

103
requested and received IRB approval for the changes in protocol during the months of April,
May, and August 2017. I did not collect data in any school district prior to obtaining approval
from the IRB for that specific site.
Upon receiving IRB approval, I conducted a pilot study with a convenience sample of
two local public school districts, one that primarily employs instructional coaches and one that
primarily employs teacher librarians. This provided a “less structured and more prolonged
relationship” (Yin, 2014, pp. 96–97) between myself and the participants than what occurred in
the actual cases. The purpose of the pilot study was to refine the recruitment scripts, interview
and focus group questions, data collection procedures, and logistics (Yin, 2014). After
completing the pilot study in March 2017, I found I needed to slightly revise the recruitment
scripts and interview and focus group questions. I submitted my revisions with a Change in
Protocol Form to the IRB and received approval on March 28, 2017. I also created a Data
Collection Form to keep track of contact information and data collection for each school district.
(see Appendix I). I did not utilize any of the data I collected from the pilot study in the actual
study.
After receiving IRB approval to begin collecting data in each of the officially
participating settings, I then worked with each site’s district administrator to contact and
schedule the participant interviews, focus group, and observation (see Appendix B for
recruitment scripts). I collected signed consent forms (see Appendix F) from each participant
prior to engaging in each interview, focus group, and observation (see Appendices G and H)
throughout the months of April, May, August, September, and October 2017. Since I received
data in both print and electronic formats, I created both an electronic and physical file for each
setting. As I identified and collected data, I noted this on a printed Data Collection Form (see

104
Appendix I) that I kept in each setting’s physical file. All electronic files were stored on
password-protected computers and backed up to an external hard drive that was stored in a
locked safe in my home. All physical files were stored in a locked cabinet in my home. I copied
each of the interview and focus group audio files to a USB drive that I physically delivered to a
professional transcriptionist. I directed the transcriptionist to transcribe the interviews verbatim,
except for any identifying information such as names of people or places. She either replaced
participant names and settings with generic acronyms or redacted this information. I later
replaced the generic acronyms with pseudonyms. After receiving the transcription files for each
site, I listened to each interview and focus group while carefully reviewing and annotating a
printed copy of each file. I then edited content as needed in the electronic file, correcting small
errors and removing irrelevant information (see Appendix J for a sample transcript file). During
each observation I took notes by hand on printed copies of the Observation Protocol (see
Appendix H) and later transcribed these myself into electronic format. Any documents that I
received in print format I also scanned into electronic format. I repeated this procedure with
each of the three settings for Case One and Case Two and then began the process of data
analysis.
The Researcher's Role
Qualitative research is personal since the researcher serves as the instrument of inquiry. As
such, the researcher has an obligation to acknowledge how his or her background, education,
experiences, and interpersonal competencies will affect the credibility of data collection, analysis,
and interpretation of findings (Stake, 1995). As a credentialed teacher librarian who taught in
California public schools and a director of a graduate level teacher library preparation program, I
have firsthand knowledge and experience with educators’ lack of knowledge and understanding of

105
the instructional role of the teacher librarian. As a result of my education and experience with the
teacher librarian profession, I am clearly biased in favor of encouraging administrators to employ
teacher librarians over other personnel when funding allows. To minimize how this bias affected
my data collection and analysis procedures, I made an effort to present myself an anonymously as
possible to participants. I introduced myself as both a Doctor of Education (Ed.D.) candidate and a
professor who works in teacher training in a school of education. I also sought to identify
participants with whom I had no previous association and who are known for representing typical
cases in both Case One and Case Two. Due to the small population of teacher librarians in
California, I knew it was likely that I would have either previously met or worked with at least
one teacher librarian in a district’s employ. After identifying each case setting, I found that I had
relationships (in connection to my current position) with potential teacher librarian participants in
two of the Case Two settings. In working with the district administrator for each of those settings,
I requested that I not be placed with those potential participants, if possible. Both district
administrators honored my request and were still able to identify an appropriate “typical case.”
While conducting interviews at those sites, I then learned that four of the participants were alumni
of the institution at which I currently work and three were graduates of the program I currently
direct. However, each of these participants completed their programs prior to my employment at
the institution.
To remain open to what I might learn through data collection, I strove to maintain
empathetic neutrality with each participant. Following each instance of data collection, I
engaged in memoing in a physical reflective journal. This enabled me to become more aware of
feelings or biases that could influence my analysis and interpretation of the data. Overall, I
found it challenging to maintain empathic neutrality with participants; I found myself

106
empathizing with all of them since I have experienced many of the circumstances they described.
I also found it difficult to maintain anonymity with participants. Most participants intuited that I
knew more about the role of teacher librarians than I was sharing and were curious to learn more.
In those instances, I requested that they wait until we completed data collection before I
answered their questions. I also maintained integrity in my sampling procedures, data collection
and analysis, and reporting by keeping a case study database with a clear chain of evidence and
engaged in a peer review to confirm the accuracy of my findings, interpretations, and
conclusions (Yin, 2014).
Data Collection
According to Yin (2014), the use of multiple sources of data, or triangulation, is a major
strength of case studies. Triangulation enables a researcher to examine the phenomenon of study
via multiple measures and corroborate his or her findings and strengthens the construct validity
of the case study. In this study, the multiple sources of data collection included (a) interviews
and focus groups with participants, (b) observations of participants, and (c) examination of
relevant documents within each case.
Interviews
Interviews are considered an essential source of evidence in case studies since they can
provide in-depth insights into human affairs or actions and assist a researcher in identifying other
relevant sources of evidence (Yin, 2014). In this study I conducted two semi-structured
interviews in person with administrators in the selected setting. Prior to beginning the interview,
I asked each participant to sign a consent form. I audio-recorded each interview and directed a
professional transcriptionist to transcribe each audio recording verbatim (Yin, 2014).
I first conducted one semi-structured interview with the district administrator participant.

107
Following this interview, I conducted a second semi-structured interview with the site
administrator participant in the typical case identified by the district administrator. I requested
that interviews be conducted in the selected setting at a quiet location of the participant’s choice.
I communicated that the interview would range between 30 and 60 minutes in length. Tables 13
and 14 outline the interview protocols for the district and site administrators. I developed the
protocols with open-ended questions that align to the study’s research questions and are
grounded in the literature. I requested two experts in the field, a superintendent of a California
K–8 public school district and the director of a California administrator preparation program, to
review the interview questions. Both experts found the questions to be sufficiently open-ended,
thought-provoking, and focused in a manner that would evoke solid data. I also refined the
interview questions and associated procedures through a pilot test conducted with two local
school districts, one that primarily employs teacher librarians and one that primarily employs
instructional coaches (Yin, 2014).

108
Table 13
Interview Questions: District Administrator (see also Appendix G)
Question Questions
#
1.
Tell me about yourself. Why did you decide to pursue a career in
education?
2.
Tell me about why you became an administrator.
• Education/credentials
• Prior teaching experience
• Length of time in current position
3.
Both the CCSS Systems Implementation Plan and the ELA Framework
state that strong instructional leadership and high quality professional
learning are required for successful implementation of the CCSS ELA.
Many districts have sought to fulfill this need by hiring instructional
coaches (IC) or teacher librarians (TL) to implement a model of
continuous, embedded, one-on-one professional learning in ELA at the
school site level. Why did this district select ICs/TLs?
• How many ICs/TLs are employed in the district?
• How many were selected internally?
• How many were selected from outside of the district?
4.
What is the process for selecting the IC/TLs?
• Qualifications?
• How are they assigned to school sites?
5.
What are the district’s expectations for IC/TLs in regard to the
implementation of the CCSS ELA?
• Upon what foundation(s) are these expectations based?
• (IC) a particular coaching model?
• (TL) the Model School Library Standards for California
Public Schools?
• Professional resources?
• Research?
• How does the IC/TL’s job description communicate these
expectations?
• How was the job description created?
6.
What types of support does the district provide to IC/TLs?
• Training
• Professional Learning
• Mentoring
• Paraprofessional/administrative (classified) personnel
7.
How are IC/TLs classified in annual CALPADs staffing reports?
8.
How are IC/TLs evaluated and by whom?
• Standard teacher contract/evaluation form?
• Special process/evaluation form?

Research
Question

1/2

1/2

1/2

3/4, 5/6

3/4, 5/6

5/6
5/6

109
Table 13 (continued)
Question Questions
#
9.
How did you personally learn about the roles of ICs and TLs? Via:
• Teacher or administrative preparation program?
• Previous experience?
• District expectations (job descriptions, training manual,
evaluation forms)?
• Professional standards (MSLS, ELA Framework)?
• Government codes (Ed Code, CCTC)?
• Professional learning?
• Professional reading?
• Research?
• Colleagues?
10.
Please share your thoughts on anything else related to this topic.
11.
If I have any additional questions, may I contact you in person, by
phone, or email?

Research
Question
1/2

Questions 1 and 2 were designed to help establish rapport with the district administrator
and learn about his or her background (Patton, 2015). Questions 3, 4, 5, and 9 enabled an
understanding of the district’s unique situation by asking why and by what process either
instructional coaches or teacher librarians were selected to provide instructional leadership in
ELA. Since the CCTC does not authorize a credential for instructional coaches and there is no
common definition or national certification for instructional coaches (Neumerski, 2013),
question 4 helped to determine the qualifications that the district had established for this
particular role.
Question 5 enabled me to determine the expectations to which instructional coaches or
teacher librarians are held in their daily practice. Since there are no common models or
professional standards for instructional coaches (Neumerski, 2013) and both state and national
professional standards for teacher librarians (AASL, 2009a, 2009b, 2010, 2016d; CCTC, 2014,
2015) it was important to for me to discern the foundation(s) upon which district expectations are

110
founded and whether these expectations have been clearly communicated in a job description
that is specific to the position.
Questions 6, 7, and 8 relate to the effectiveness of the practice of instructional coaches
and teacher librarians. In order to determine effectiveness (Spillane, 2006), I must be able to
determine the methods by which instructional coaches and teacher librarians are evaluated.
Again, since the CCTC does not authorize a credential for instructional coaches and the literature
demonstrates that lack of support is a barrier to instructional coach effectiveness (Lynch &
Ferguson, 2010; Range et al., 2014; Stock & Duncan, 2010), it was important to discern how the
district trains and supports these individuals and provides ongoing training and support to both
instructional coaches and teacher librarians. Questions 7 and 8 enabled me to learn whether
instructional coaches and teacher librarians are classified as teachers and held to the evaluation
processes outlined in the district’s teachers’ contract.
Since most administrators lack knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of
teacher librarians and the CCTC and CDE have not established standards and guidelines for
instructional coaches (Everhart & Mardis, 2014; Kaplan, 2010; Lance & Hofschire, 2013;
Levitov, 2013; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012), questions 2 and 9 enabled me to discern the district
administrator’s source(s) of knowledge of these roles and determine possible avenues for future
educational efforts. Question 10 provided the district administrator the opportunity to share any
additional information. Question 11 enabled me to establish future contact, if needed.

111
Table 14
Interview Questions: Site Administrator (see also Appendix G)
Question Questions
#
1.
Tell me about yourself. Why did you decide to pursue a career in
education?
2.
Tell me about why you became an administrator.
• Education/credentials
• Prior teaching experience
• Length of time in current position
3.
Instructional leadership is defined as a role in which a leader defines the
school’s mission, manages the instructional program, and promotes a
positive school learning climate. How do you provide instructional
leadership?
• To what extent are you able to fully engage in instructional
leadership tasks?
4.
Tell me about your experience with the implementation of the CCSS
ELA.
5.
What are your greatest concerns about the implementation of the CCSS
ELA?
• Regarding the most recent Smarter Balanced ELA Summative
Test results?
6.
What are your ELA instructional goals?
7.
Both the CCSS Systems Implementation Plan and the ELA Framework
state that strong instructional leadership and high quality professional
learning are required for successful implementation of the CCSS ELA.
Many districts have sought to fulfill this need by hiring instructional
coaches (IC) or teacher librarians (TL) to implement a model of
continuous, embedded, one-on-one professional learning in ELA at the
school site level. What are your expectations for the IC/TL in providing
professional learning in ELA to teachers?
8.
In what ways do you support the IC/TL in this role?
9.
In addition to providing professional learning, how does the IC/TL
assist you in meeting your ELA instructional goals?
• Specific examples?
10.
How do you evaluate the IC/TL to ensure that he or she is fulfilling his
or her instructional leadership role?
11.
What do you most value about the role of the IC/TL?

Research
Question

1/2

1/2

1/2
1/2

5/6
3/4

3/4
3/4

5/6
1/2, 5/6

112
Table 14 (continued)
Question Questions
#
12.
How did you personally learn about the roles of ICs and TLs? Via:
• Teacher or administrative preparation program?
• Previous experience?
• District expectations (job descriptions, training manual,
evaluation forms)?
• Professional standards (MSLS, ELA Framework)?
• Government codes (Ed Code, CCTC)?
• Professional learning?
• Professional reading?
• Research?
• Colleagues?
13.
Please share your thoughts on anything else related to this topic.
14.
If I have any additional questions, may I contact you in person, by
phone, or email?

Research
Question
1/2

Questions 1 and 2 were designed to enable me to establish rapport with the site
administrator and learn about his or her background (Patton, 2015). Questions 2, 3, 4, 5, and 9
allowed me to define the school site’s unique situation by eliciting the participant’s view on how
he or she provides instructional leadership (Hallinger & Murphy, 1985, 2013) and corresponding
need to distribute responsibility to others (Spillane, 2006) and his or her experience and concerns
with the CCSS ELA implementation and ELA goals (CDE, 2013, 2014). Question 7 enabled me
to determine the expectations to which the administrator holds the instructional coach or teacher
librarian and how they align with the expectations set forth by the their district. Since the
literature demonstrates that lack of support is a barrier to instructional coach effectiveness
(Lynch & Ferguson, 2010; Range et al., 2014; Stock & Duncan, 2010), question 8 allowed me to
discern how the administrator specifically supports the instructional coach or teacher librarian.
Questions 6 and 10 relate to the effectiveness of the practice of instructional coaches and
teacher librarians. In order to develop an understanding of their effectiveness (Spillane, 2006), I

113
needed to be able to determine the goals and methods by which they are evaluated (Hallinger &
Murphy, 1985). Since the supporting research base differs for each role, there is no common
definition, model, or certification for instructional coaches in California, and school leaders often
lack knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of the teacher librarian (AASL, 2009a,
2009b, 2010, 2016d; Achterman, 2008; CCTC, 2014, 2015; Church, 2008, 2010; Farmer &
Safer, 2010; Gretes, 2013; Kachel, 2013; Kaplan, 2010; Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010; Levitov,
2013; Neumerski, 2013; School Libraries Impact Studies, 2013; School Libraries Work, 2016;
Shannon, 2012; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012), questions 11 and 12 enabled me to clarify the
sources from which administrators derive their knowledge of and value for each role. Question
13 provided the district administrator the opportunity to share any additional information with
me. Question 14 enabled me to establish future contact, if needed.
Observations
Direct observation allows a researcher to examine a phenomenon of interest in a realworld setting. As a nonparticipant observer I observed the instructional coach or teacher
librarian conduct his or her duties over the course of one instructional day. Throughout the
observation, I collected field notes to document how his or her activities aligned with the
instructional leadership perceptions provided by the administrators in their interviews. I
recorded the field notes in writing on an observational protocol (see Appendix H) and later
transcribed these into electronic format (Yin, 2014).

114
Focus Group
Following each site’s observation, I conducted a focus group with both the instructional
coach or teacher librarian and his or her site administrator. The purpose of this focus group was
to observe how the two participants interacted, corroborate the data collected in interviews and
observation, and obtain the participants’ views regarding how they work together to provide
instructional leadership in the implementation of the CCSS ELA. I developed the focus group
protocol (see Table 15) with open-ended questions that aligned to the study’s research questions
and are grounded in the literature. I requested two experts in the field, a superintendent of a
California K–8 public school district and the director of a California administrator preparation
program, to review the focus group questions. Both experts found the questions to be
sufficiently open-ended, thought-provoking, and focused in a manner that would evoke solid
data. I also refined the focus group questions and associated procedures through a pilot test
conducted with two local school districts, one that primarily employs teacher librarians and one
that primarily employs instructional coaches (Yin, 2014).

115
Table 15
Focus Group Questions (see also Appendix G)
Question Questions
#
1.
1. TL/IC: Tell me about why you became a TL/IC.
• Education/credentials
• Prior teaching experience
2.
How long have you worked together and in what capacity?
3.
Describe the instructional leadership actions you take to support the
implementation of the CCSS ELA in regard to:
a. Supporting the school’s mission
b. Managing the instructional program
c. Promoting a positive school learning climate
4.
How do you use the information provided in the ELA Framework
to guide professional learning efforts?
5.
Who directs/initiates professional learning activity between
teachers and the IC/TL?
6.
Tell me about any standards or guidelines that you use to inform
your daily practice.
7.
On a typical day, about how much time do you spend working
directly with teachers?
8.
Tell me about any barriers that keep you from fully engaging in the
ELA instructional program. Examples (if needed):
• Time
• Role confusion
• Teacher resistance
• Multiple responsibilities
• Limited resources
• Training
• Support
9.
How often do you meet together to discuss instructional goals,
progress, and next steps?
10.
Please share your thoughts on anything else related to this topic.
11.
If I have any additional questions, may I contact you in person, by
phone, or email?

Research
Question
1/2

1/2
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4

Questions 1 and 2 were designed to enable me to learn about the participants’ background
and experience together (Patton, 2015). Questions 1, 3, and 7 were designed to elicit the
participants’ views on how the administrator distributes instructional leadership responsibilities
to the instructional coach or teacher librarian (Hallinger & Murphy, 1985, 2013; Spillane 2006).

116
Questions 2 and 4 enabled me to learn how the participants implement a model of continuous,
embedded, one-on-one professional learning in ELA at the school site level (Darling-Hammond
et al., 2009, 2017). Questions 5 and 6 helped me to identify barriers to effective practice
revealed in the literature such as role confusion, a lack of training and support, and inability to
fully engage in primary work due to competing responsibilities (Bean et al., 2010; Galluci et al.,
2010; Knight, 2012; Lowenhaupt et al., 2014; Lynch & Ferguson, 2010; Range et al., 2014;
Stock & Duncan, 2010; Vanderburg & Stephens, 2010). Question 8 provided the site
administrator the opportunity to share any additional information with me. Question 9 enabled
me to establish future contact, if needed.
Documents
To corroborate and augment evidence found in the literature and data collected from the
interviews, observations, and focus groups, I collected and reviewed relevant documents (Yin,
2014). These documents included each district’s Local Control and Accountability Plan (LCAP)
and each school site’s Single Plan for Student Achievement (SPSA). Both documents are
required by the CDE and outline how the school/district intends to meet their annual goals. These
documents provided data to address research questions 5 and 6. Job descriptions and formal
evaluation forms utilized for the instructional coaches and teacher librarians were also collected
from each setting to provided data to address all research questions.
Data Analysis
I first conducted within-case analyses of the data collected from the three settings in Case
One, administrative perception of the instructional coach, and three settings in Case Two,
administrative perception of the teacher librarian. Within each case, I first converted all data files
to electronic format and uploaded them into Atlas.ti, a computer-assisted qualitative data analysis

117
software program. In Atlas.ti, I closely reviewed the multiple sources of information (Yin, 2014)
and employed Saldaña’s (2016) First and Second Cycle Coding methods. During First Cycle
Coding, I first analyzed the interview and focus group transcripts by applying the methods of
Structural and Values Coding to form a list of initial codes. Structural Coding is suitable for
interview transcripts and consists of applying a content-based phrase to a block of data that
relates to a specific research question. This type of coding acts as an indexing device, enabling
the researcher to examine relationships between segments of data. Within each transcript, I first
coded blocks of text for each interview question response to match the research question(s) as
listed in Tables 13 and 14. I then carefully reviewed each response and applied Values Coding,
which is described by Saldaña as applicable to interview transcripts and field notes. This
consists of “the application of codes to qualitative data that reflects a participant’s values,
attitudes, and beliefs, representing his or her perspectives or worldview” (p. 131). Since I was
focusing upon the examination of administrators’ perspectives, this appeared to be the most
appropriate coding method to employ. I then reviewed the transcripts again in conjunction with
each setting’s four documents (LCAP, SPSA, job description, evaluation form), employing
Descriptive Coding to identify topics that related to the administrators’ perspectives. As I
reviewed all data, I engaged in analytic memo writing in a reflective journal, noting significant
thoughts relating to potential categories, themes, cross-case analyses, and implications.
During Second Cycle Coding, I employed Pattern Coding to develop categorical and
theoretical organization from the first cycle codes. “Pattern Codes are explanatory or inferential
codes, ones that identify an emergent theme, configuration, or explanation” (Saldaña, 2016, p.
236). This type of coding is appropriate for developing major themes and establishing a
foundation for cross-case analysis. Within each case, I identified a total of 11 categories, from

118
which the same three themes emerged. Finally, I analyzed each setting’s observation field notes
to determine how the expectations and activities of the instructional coach or teacher librarian
compared with the identified categories and themes. During this review, I did not find any
disparities in the data nor find a need to generate any new codes. Finally, within each case I
interpreted the themes to develop a naturalistic generalization of what I learned about
administrators’ perspectives of how instructional coaches and teacher librarians contributed to
instructional leadership in the implementation of the CCSS ELA. I used thick, rich descriptions
and tables to present an in-depth picture of each case (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014).
Following the within-case analyses of Case One and Case Two, I conducted a cross-case
analysis by establishing word tables that displayed each case’s categorical data in order to identify
similarities and differences. From this analysis I then developed an assertion or interpretation of the
meaning of the cases (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). Table 16 provides a summary of the research plan
for this study.

119
Table 16
Summary of Research Plan
Theoretical
Framework
Distributed1.
Leadership
Theory:
Situation

Research Question
1. Why do administrators
select instructional
coaches to help them
provide instructional
leadership?

Data Sources

Analysis Methods
Within-case
Cross-case
Interview
Content analysis Comparison of
Job description
categorical
Evaluation
Categorical
data
form
aggregation

2.

Direct
interpretation

2. Why do administrators
select teacher librarians
to help them provide
instructional leadership?
Distributed1.
Leadership
Theory:
Interactions

3. How do administrator
and instructional coaches
work together to provide
professional learning
within daily instructional
practice?

Naturalistic
generalization
Interview
Observation
Focus Group
Job description
Evaluation
form

4. How do administrators
and teacher librarians
work together to provide
professional learning
within daily instructional
practice?
Distributed1.
Leadership
Theory:
Practice

5. How do administrators
evaluate the effectiveness
of the instructional
coaches’ instructional
leadership roles?

2.
3. 6. How do administrators
evaluate the effectiveness
of the teacher librarians’
instructional leadership
roles?
4.

Assertion or
interpretation

Content analysis
Categorical
aggregation
Direct
interpretation

Comparison of
categorical
data

Assertion or
interpretation

Naturalistic
generalization

Interview
SPSA
LCAP
Job description
Evaluation
form

Content analysis
Categorical
aggregation
Direct
interpretation
Naturalistic
generalization

Comparison of
categorical
data

Assertion or
interpretation

120
Trustworthiness
Trustworthiness refers to a set of four criteria that determine the quality of qualitative
research: credibility, dependability, confirmability, and transferability (Creswell, 2013). Each of
these criteria was addressed in this study.
Credibility
Credibility provides assurance that the researcher’s reconstruction and representation of
participants’ views are in alignment (Schwandt, 2015). In this study, I established credibility
through triangulation, clarification of bias, and member checking. I triangulated multiple sources
of information to provide evidence to corroborate the main themes. I clarified and mitigated
researcher bias through memoing and peer review. I also employed member checking to provide
participants the opportunity to review and provide feedback on the findings and interpretations of
their respective cases (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). I completed this by emailing participants a copy
of their setting and participant profiles and a narrative draft of the results for their respective
cases. I asked each participant to review these documents and let me know if I presented anything
inaccurately or presented information that could compromise his or her confidentiality or make
him or her vulnerable in any way (Seidman, 2013). Only two participants responded, both
affirming that the documents appeared to be accurate and that they were comfortable with the
level of confidentiality.
Dependability and Confirmability
Dependability refers to the researcher’s responsibility to ensure a logical, traceable, and
documented process (Schwandt, 2015). In this study, I addressed dependability by developing
and maintaining a case study database and chain of evidence aligned to the study’s methods (Yin,
2014). Confirmability demonstrates that the data are clearly linked to the researcher’s

121
interpretations (Schwandt, 2015). To increase confirmability in this study, I requested a peer
review of the study’s methods and case study database to assess the accuracy of the process and
product of the study (Yin, 2014). A colleague who holds an Ed.D. from the School of Education
in which I work conducted this review. She reviewed my case study database, which included a
detailed timeline of IRB approvals and data collection for each setting. I also shared with her my
data analysis procedures, demonstrating how I coded data within Atlas.ti to find categories and
themes. I then discussed how I worked to mitigate bias, sharing my reflective journal with her.
After concluding her review, she stated that it appeared I had been very thorough in my data
collection and analysis procedures.
Transferability
Transferability addresses the issue of generalizability regarding case-to-case transfer
(Schwandt, 2015). In this study, I addressed transferability through the literal replication of
multiple, representative cases and the use of thick, rich descriptions for each case (Stake, 1995;
Yin, 2014). The flowchart in Figure 5 summarizes the order of procedures for this study.

122

Identify Case
Settings

Obtain District
Permission
(Appendices B-E)

Obtain IRB
Approval

Conduct Interviews,
Observations, and
Focus Groups
(Appendices G&H)

Transcribe
Interviews

Obtain Informed
Consent from
Participants
(Appendix F)

Conduct Data
Analysis

Conduct Pilot Study
Refine Procedures

Conduct Member
Checking and Peer
Review

Figure 5. Flowchart of research procedures.
Ethical Considerations
I addressed ethical issues throughout the study. First, I obtained permission letters from
each school district and approval from Liberty University’s Institutional Review Board prior to
implementing the study. I clearly articulated the purpose of the study to participants and asked
them to sign informed consent forms prior to engaging in data collection. I provided participants
the opportunity to opt out of the study at any time and protected their confidentiality through the
use of pseudonyms. I replaced the generic acronyms used for settings and participants in the
interview and focus group transcripts with pseudonyms. I maintained a list of pseudonyms used
for each setting and participant in print format and electronically on a Universal Serial Bus
(USB) drive. These were stored securely in a location that was separate from the raw data: a
locked safe in my home. I stored data in password-protected electronic files and locked cabinets
and will retain it for a maximum of three years. I will destroy the data at the end of this period or
if there is a need to discard the storage receptacle at an earlier date (Creswell, 2013; Yin, 2014).

123
I clarified my bias in favor of the employment of teacher librarians by explaining how my
past experiences, education, and the nature of my current position might shape my interpretation
and approach to the study. To minimize how this bias might affect data collection and analysis, I
strove to present myself an anonymously as possible to participants. I introduced myself as both
an Ed.D. candidate and a professor who works in teacher training in a school of education at a
private university in California. I sought to identify participants with whom I had no previous
association and who were known for representing typical cases in both Case One and Case Two.
To remain open to what I might learn through data collection, I strove to maintain empathetic
neutrality with each participant. Following each instance of data collection, I engaged in
memoing in a physical reflective journal to enable me to become more aware of feelings or
biases that could influence my analysis and interpretation of the data. I also maintained integrity
in my sampling procedures, data collection and analysis, and reporting by keeping a case study
database with a clear chain of evidence, requesting a peer review to confirm the accuracy of my
findings, interpretations, and conclusions, and honestly reporting my findings (Yin, 2014).
Summary
This chapter has provided an overview of the methods that were used in this collective
case study to develop an understanding of why California K–12 public school administrators
distribute instructional leadership responsibilities to either instructional coaches or teacher
librarians and how the two roles compare within the context of the implementation of the CCSS
ELA. It opened with a description of the collective case study design and procedures for
identifying and selecting the case settings and participants. The chapter then outlined procedures
for the collection of data through multiple sources of evidence and within-case and cross-case
analysis. Finally, the chapter discussed the researcher’s role, methods for maximizing

124
trustworthiness, and plans to address ethical considerations.

125
CHAPTER FOUR: FINDINGS
Overview
The purpose of this chapter is to present the results of this collective case study designed
to develop an understanding of why and how California K–12 public school administrators
distribute instructional leadership responsibilities to either instructional coaches or teacher
librarians and how the two roles compare within the context of the implementation of the CCSS
ELA. The chapter opens with descriptive portraits of each of the study’s participants. Results
are then presented by theme within the context of each research question for Case One and Case
Two and the cross-case analysis. The chapter concludes with a summary of the meaning of the
cases.
Participants
There were 18 participants in this study, nine in Case One and nine in Case Two. In each
case, there were three district administrators, three site administrators, and three instructional
coaches or teacher librarians. The following profiles describe the participants by case as listed in
Table 12.
Alice
District Administrator (DA) Alice has been the Director of Professional Development for
Adams USD for six years. She holds three California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching,
Specialist Instruction in Special Education, and Administrative Services; and one added
authorization: Resource Specialist. She also holds master’s and doctoral degrees in education.
Prior to her current role, Alice served as an elementary teacher, Reading Recovery teacher,
resource specialist, assistant principal, and principal. She originally decided to pursue a career in
education because of the impact that her teachers had upon her. She shared that her career path

126
evolved as doors to new opportunities she had not previously considered were opened to her.
One of her most notable professional learning experiences included participating in an intensive,
clinical method for teaching reading; this enabled her to feel empowered as a teacher and “like I
could teach anybody how to read.” Alice feels that her variety of teaching and administrative
experiences have greatly benefitted her in her current role in developing and directing the
district’s instructional coaches.
Angela
Site Administrator (SA) Angela has been the Principal at Acacia Elementary School in
Adams USD for eight years. She holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching
and Administrative Services; she also holds a master’s degree in education focused on
curriculum and instruction. Prior to her current role, she served as an elementary school teacher
and assistant principal. Angela knew from an early age that she wanted to be a teacher. She has
a passion for curriculum and instruction and considers the instructional leadership role to be her
favorite part of the job as a principal because it enables her to make a difference in the lives of
the students. She emphatically stated, “I love kids and that’s why I’m here. I think that’s why
I’ll stay at a site. I don’t ever want to leave a site because I think you lose sight of the kids when
you do.”
Audrey
Instructional Coach (IC) Audrey has worked with SA Angela at Acacia Elementary
School for four years in a half-time capacity; she also serves half-time at another site in the
district. She holds a California Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and previously served as
an elementary teacher for 13 years. Audrey was inspired to move into an instructional coach
position after learning new techniques from others and successfully implementing them in her

127
classroom. Speaking of this experience, she noted: “That put me in a position of feeling, first of
all, more professionally satisfied, and secondly, pleased with the student outcome I was seeing
and wanting to share that with others.”
Jeanette
DA Jeanette has been the Director of Curriculum and Instruction for Jefferson USD for
five years. She holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching and Administrative
Services, and a master’s degree in educational psychology. Prior to her current role, Jeanette
served as an elementary teacher, curriculum coordinator, instructional coach, principal, and
district manager. She greatly enjoyed her role as an elementary teacher but realized “the more
[time] I spent in the role and realizing the issues in education, the more I got sort of – felt the
need to get more involved and kind of up my game.” She shared that she didn’t seek out the
leadership roles in which she’s now served, admitting, “It was sort of one someone encouraged
me to do so, therefore, I can’t back down on that challenge, I need to try it.” Jeanette is “very
passionate about getting the work done” and feels that on-the-job training is sometimes more
valuable than formal coursework.
Joanna
SA Joanna has been the Principal at Juniper Elementary School in Jefferson USD for two
years. She holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching and Administrative
Services; she also holds a master’s degree in educational leadership. Prior to her current role,
she served as an elementary school teacher and an instructional coach at both the site
(elementary) and district levels. Joanna loves working with kids and teaching. She never
thought she would move into an administrative role but conceded, “you have those doors open
up and one thing led to another…it actually is a really good fit and I love being at a site.” She

128
feels that being an instructional leader at a site is very important.
Julie
IC Julie has worked with SA Joanna at Juniper Elementary School for one year. She
holds a California Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and previously served as an elementary
teacher. She also holds a master’s degree in child and adolescent development and is working
toward obtaining National Board Certification and a California Administrative Services
Credential. Julie was inspired to become an instructional coach because she wanted to help
teachers. She described:
…an instance where my previous principal at my old site had asked me to mentor a
teacher who was struggling, and I really enjoyed that experience of working with her and
seeing her get really excited when it finally clicked. It’s kind of like how I experienced it
with students but then with adults.
Julie greatly values the training she has received as an instructional coach and feels that
she’s “going to be so knowledgeable” if and when she returns to the classroom as a teacher.
Laurel
DA Laurel has been the Director of Educational Services for Lincoln USD for five years.
She holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching and Administrative Services
and a master’s degree in educational administration. Prior to her current role, Laurel served as
an elementary and middle teacher, adult education teacher, resource teacher, and principal. After
exploring other career fields, she decided to pursue education partially because she recalled how
much she enjoyed helping her mother, who had been a classroom teacher and administrator.
Laurel also shared how a previous role prepared her for her current role as an administrator:
“Because as a resource teacher, you sort of do a lot of that type of working with teachers.

129
You’re not just by yourself any more like a teacher in a classroom. So I liked that, so I pursued
that.”
Leon
SA Leon has been the Principal at Lemon Middle School in Lincoln USD for three years.
He holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in Biological Sciences and
Administrative Services; he also holds a master’s degree in education. Prior to his current role,
he served as a middle school teacher. Though he originally did not want to go into education, he
found himself following his father’s footsteps in becoming a middle school educator and parttime college professor. He is passionate about putting the needs of students first and feels
strongly that educators absolutely must like children, declaring:
I have teachers who don’t like children and it’s the wrong job. Go do something else.
Go sell insurance – if you don’t like children – if right now you’re like, “I don’t really
like children, but I love English,” it’s not going to be enough for you.
Lynn
IC Lynn has worked with SA Leon at Lemon Middle School for three years. She holds a
California Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and previously served as an elementary teacher
for 10 years and has been the instructional coach at Lemon Middle School for five years. Lynn
was encouraged to move into the instructional coach position by a district administrator, who
appealed to her desire to make a difference by explaining:
…you could make a difference on a greater level. You may not be able to look at it and
monitor it the way that you can see that growth and progress with a student, but you’re
going to see it with your teachers.
Lynn greatly enjoys providing support to her site’s teachers, stating, “I would do anything for

130
them.”
Manuel
DA Manuel has been the Director of Curriculum and Instruction for Madison HSD for
three years. He holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in Science and
Administrative Services; and two added authorizations: Social Science and Psychology. Manuel
also holds master’s and doctoral degrees in education. Prior to his current role, Manuel served as
a high school teacher, department chair, instructional coach, local district administrator, assistant
principal, and principal. He loves teaching and shared that he has been influenced by “great
mentors that have prodded and pushed me to challenge myself and grow” and has a passion for
serving his home community. Speaking of his time as a principal, he shared, “That was an
incredible time for me. I really enjoyed the diving in, not just to the school community, but the
whole broader community to see really firsthand the role that a school plays as a foundation in
the community. That really played a big impact in shaping my perspective.”
Michael
SA Michael has been the Assistant Principal of Curriculum at Magnolia High School in
Madison HSD for two years. He holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in
English and Administrative Services. Prior to his current role, he served as a high school teacher
and curriculum specialist. Michael moved into administration when he realized he could have a
bigger impact, declaring, “I’m going to retire once I impact a million kids.” He enjoys being able
to focus on curriculum and systems of support at his site and finds the role to be mentally
stimulating.
Monica
Teacher Librarian (TL) Monica has worked with SA Michael at Magnolia High School

131
for two years. She holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in English and
Spanish and Library Media Teacher Services; she also holds two master’s degrees, one in
education and the other in library and information science. She previously served as a high
school teacher and has been the teacher librarian at Magnolia High School for 10 years. Monica
enjoys providing teachers with resources to integrate into their curricular programs and is always
looking for opportunities to help them.
Rachel
DA Rachel has been the Director of Instructional Services for Roosevelt HSD for two
years. She holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in English and
Administrative Services. Prior to her current role, Rachel served as a high school teacher, dean,
and principal. From a young age, she knew she wanted to be a teacher. She didn’t plan on going
into administration but gradually transitioned into it after finding herself taking on more
administrative duties. Though she is now served in several administrative roles, she really likes
her current position of overseeing professional development for the district, admitting, “I like
administration, but I do like working with the teachers more.”
Richard
SA Richard has been the Principal at Redwood High School in Roosevelt HSD for two
years. He holds two California credentials: Single Subject Teaching in Social Science and
Administrative Services. Prior to his current role, he served as a high school teacher, dean,
assistant principal, and director. He hails from a family of educators and embarked on a career
in education after pursuing another field. Richard believes it is important to serve as an
instructional leader by listening to the needs of teachers and allowing those with appropriate
expertise to lead their peers in providing professional learning, stating, “With professional

132
development we try to ask our teachers what they want to see, as opposed to this is what I think
you should see. I’ve been there before and that doesn’t go over very well.”
Roxanne
TL Roxanne has worked with SA Richard at Redwood High School for two years. She
holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject and Library Media Teacher Services; she also
holds a master’s degree in education, focused on library science. She previously served as an
elementary teacher and has been the teacher librarian at Redwood High School for nine years.
She is the child of a librarian and has a passion for literacy, declaring, “I want my library and I
see my library as a place for teaching and learning and the side benefit is the checking books in
and out and being that advocate.”
Tanya
DA Tanya has been the Assistant Superintendent of Educational Services for Taft USD
for three years. She holds three California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching, Library
Media Teacher Services, and Administrative Services. She also holds two master’s degrees, one
in library media and the other in applied cognitive studies. Prior to her current role, Tanya
served as an elementary and middle school teacher, instructional coach, coordinator, assistant
principal, principal, and director. Throughout her many roles, she has strived for balance by
developing specializations in literacy, technology, science, and math. She shared, “While I
haven’t become an expert in any one vein, it’s prepared me well to be a director of curriculum,
instruction, staff development, and therefore now this role because I can see things from a lot of
perspectives and I feel confident to be able to lead.”
Tomas
SA Tomas has been the Principal at Torrey Elementary School in Taft USD for five

133
years. He holds two California credentials: Multiple Subject Teaching and Administrative
Services, and a master’s degree in educational leadership. Prior to his current role, he served as
an elementary and middle school teacher, instructional coach, and learning director. His passion
is being in the classroom, often seeking to “kind of invite myself to come in and do lessons and
things like that and engage in a conversation with my teachers, just so I know.” Tomas also
believes that educators need support, especially via collaboration, stating, “Some things you can
do by yourself, but sometimes you need that collaboration. Let’s bounce some ideas off each
other.”
Tracey
TL Tracey has worked with SA Tomas at Torrey Elementary School for three years in a
half-time capacity; she also serves half-time at another site in the district. She holds two
California credentials: Multiple Subject and Library Media Teacher Services; she also holds a
master’s degree in education focused on library science. She previously served as an elementary
teacher and has been a teacher librarian in Taft USD for 21 years. She greatly enjoys working
with students, stating, “my number one goal every day is just to inspire that love of literacy, so
that’s my guiding force.” She also values providing support to both students and teachers
through collaboration and co-teaching, declaring, “It’s the power of having two teachers in the
room.” Table 17 summarizes the participants’ experience and education.

134
Table 17
Summary of Participants’ Experience and Education
Setting

Adams
USD

Participant

DA Alice

SA Leon

Elementary Teacher
Reading Recovery
Teacher
Resource Specialist
Assistant Principal
Principal
Elementary Teacher
Assistant Principal
Elementary Teacher
Elementary Teacher
Curriculum
Coordinator
Instructional Coach
Principal
District Manager
Elementary Teacher
Instructional Coach
Elementary Teacher
Elementary and Middle
School Teacher
Adult Education
Teacher
Resource Teacher
Principal
Middle School Teacher

IC Lynn

Elementary Teacher

SA Angela

Jefferson
USD

IC Audrey
DA Jeanette

SA Joanna

Lincoln
USD

Previous Roles

IC Julie
DA Laurel

CA Credentials and
Authorizations
Multiple Subject Teaching
Resource Specialist
Authorization
Specialist Instruction in
Special Education
Administrative Services
Multiple Subject Teaching
Administrative Services
Multiple Subject Teaching
Multiple Subject Teaching
Administrative Services

Degrees
above
Bachelor’s
Master’s
Doctorate

Master’s
Master’s

Multiple Subject
Administrative Services
Multiple Subject Teaching
Multiple Subject
Administrative Services

Master’s

Single Subject: Biological
Sciences
Administrative Services
Multiple Subject Teaching

Master’s

Master’s
Master’s

135
Table 17 (continued)
Madison
HSD

DA Manuel

SA Michael

TL Monica

Single Subject: Science
Social Science &
Psychology
Authorizations
Administrative Services

High School Teacher
Teacher Librarian

Single Subject: English &
Spanish
Library Media Teacher
Services
Single Subject: English
Administrative Services

Master’s
(2)

Single Subject: Social
Science
Administrative Services

Master’s

Multiple Subject
Teacher Librarian Services
Multiple Subject
Library Media Teacher
Services
Administrative Services

Master’s

Multiple Subject
Administrative Services

Master’s

Multiple Subject
Library Media Teacher

Master’s

Roosevelt DA Rachel
HSD

High School Teacher
Dean
Principal
SA Richard High School Teacher
Dean
Assistant Principal
Director
TL Roxanne Elementary Teacher

Taft USD DA Tanya

SA Tomas

TL Tracey

Master’s
Doctorate

High School Teacher
Department Chair
Instructional Coach
Local District
Administrator
Assistant Principal
Principal
High School Teacher
Curriculum Specialist

Elementary Teacher
Teacher Librarian
Instructional Coach
Coordinator
Assistant Principal
Principal
Director
Elementary Teacher
Middle School Teacher
Instructional Coach
Learning Director
Elementary Teacher

Single Subject: English
Administrative Services

Master’s
(2)

Results
To identify patterns and themes of administrators’ perceptions, I first conducted withincase analyses of the data collected in Case One and Case Two. I interpreted those themes to
develop naturalistic generalizations of why and how administrators distribute instructional

136
leadership responsibilities to instructional coaches or teacher librarians in the implementation of
the CCSS ELA.
Theme Development: Case One
After I completed data collection and finalized all documents in electronic form as
outlined in the Procedures section of Chapter Three, I uploaded the files for each Case One
setting into Atlas.ti. I grouped each of the files by setting; each group included the following:
three transcripts, one observation, one job description, one evaluation form, one LCAP, and one
SPSA. I began my analysis by printing out and reading each of the nine transcripts. As I read, I
underlined and annotated information to help me determine how to best code the data (Yin,
2014).
First cycle coding. For first cycle coding, I decided to employ the elemental method of
Structural Coding and the affective method of Values Coding during a horizonal review of the
interview and focus group transcripts for each setting within Atlas.ti. According to Saldaña
(2016), Structural Coding is suitable for interview transcripts and consists of applying a contentbased phrase to a block of data that relates to a specific research question. This type of coding
acts as an indexing device, enabling the researcher to examine relationships between segments of
data. In this situation, this entailed reviewing all of the district administrator interview
transcripts, and then all site administrator interview transcripts, and then all focus group
transcripts. Within each transcript, I first coded the blocks of text for each interview question
response to match the research question(s) as listed in Tables 13 and 14 (see Table 18 for list of
codes used). I then carefully reviewed each response and applied Values Coding to relevant text.
Values Coding is described by Saldaña (2016) as “the application of codes to qualitative data
that reflects a participant’s values, attitudes, and beliefs, representing his or her perspectives or

137
worldview” (p. 131) and is suitable for interview transcripts and field notes. Since I was
focusing upon the examination of administrators’ perspectives, this appeared to be the most
appropriate coding method to employ. Saldaña (2016) defines a Value as “the importance we
attribute to ourselves, another person, thing, or idea” (p. 131), an Attitude as “the way we think
and feel about ourselves, another person, thing, or idea” (p. 131), and a Belief as “a part of a
system that includes our values and attitudes, plus our personal knowledge, experiences,
opinions, prejudices, morals and other interpretive perceptions of the social world” (p. 132). As
I coded the data, I labeled each with a “V” to indicate a Values code, an “A” to indicate an
Attitude code, and a “B” to indicate a Belief code (see Table 18).
I then conducted a second, vertical review of the data by examining the three transcript
files and four document files (LCAP, SPSA, job description, and evaluation form) within each
setting. I reviewed and added additional Values codes to the transcript files and then applied
Descriptive Coding to the four documents to identify topics (Saldaña, 2016) that related to the
administrators’ perspectives (see Table 18 for list of codes used). Since these documents
partially served to corroborate data collected in the interviews (Saldaña, 2016; Yin, 2014), I
added notes to the codes if they indicated disparities to administrators’ perspectives. Overall, I
identified a total of 261 codes during First Cycle Coding.

138
Table 18
Case One First Cycle Coding Methods
Method
Structural

Values

Descriptive

Code Labels Used
RQ1
RQ3
RQ5
V
A
B
LCAP
SPSA
Job Description
Evaluation
Model
Standards & Guidelines

As I reviewed the data, I engaged in analytic memo writing in a reflective journal, noting
significant thoughts relating to potential categories, themes, cross-case analyses, and
implications. I also kept a copy of the study’s research questions in front of me as I worked to
keep me focused on identifying administrators’ perspectives (Saldaña, 2016).
Second cycle coding. The purpose of second cycle coding is to develop categorical and
theoretical organization from the first cycle codes (Saldaña, 2016). Consulting my analytic
memos, I found that I had already begun to identify categories. Within Atlas.ti, I thus engaged in
Pattern Coding: “Pattern Codes are explanatory or inferential codes, ones that identify an
emergent theme, configuration, or explanation” (Saldaña, 2016, p. 236). This type of coding is
appropriate for developing major themes and establishing a foundation for cross-case analysis
(Saldaña, 2016). I reviewed and organized codes by renaming them with a category prefix. I
identified a total of 11 categories, from which three themes emerged: Challenge, Relationships,
and Values (see Table 19). I then added a theme prefix to each code within Atlas.ti and created
color-coded groups for each theme (See Appendix K for example of prefixes and color coding).

139
Table 19
Case One Second Cycle Coding Methods
Method

Pattern

Category
Accountability
Evolving Role
Limitation
Needs
Communication
Extension
Support
Trust
Disposition
Prior Experience
Satisfaction

Theme
Challenge

Relationships

Values

To determine how the themes related to the research questions, I opened each of the
Structural Codes—RQ1, RQ3, and RQ5—in the Atlas.ti Network Editor and imported cooccurring codes. This generated a visual network of all codes that co-occurred with the selected
research question. Since several of the interview questions served to provide data for multiple
research questions, not all codes were relevant to each question. Consequently, I removed the
codes that did not directly apply to the selected question. I then grouped the remaining codes to
visually organize how each theme related to the question (see Appendix K for a sample
network). After completing this for each of the three research questions, I then vertically
reviewed all data files by setting one final time, in this instance closely examining and coding the
observation field note files to corroborate my findings regarding administrators’ instructional
leadership perceptions. I did not find any disparities in the data nor find a need to generate any
new codes. The following section discusses the themes of Challenge and Relationships within
the context of responses to research questions 1, 3, and 5 for Case One. The Values theme was
embedded throughout all research question responses and will be addressed in the cross-case
analysis.

140
Research Question Responses: Case One
Question 1. The administrators in Case One were unanimous in sharing that their
decision to select instructional coaches to help them provide instructional leadership in ELA was
in response to needs created by similar challenges they’ve experienced within their school
districts.
Challenge: Student achievement in ELA. Without fail, all administrators noted that
their ELA instructional leadership decisions are driven by student achievement data. DA Alice
shared, “If we are not driven by data and using data to make instructional decisions, I just really
in my heart don’t feel that we can get our students to achieve where they need to.”
Administrators noted grave concerns in two areas – first, that even though the CCSS ELA have
been in place since 2010, students are still not close to achieving the expected level of
proficiency on the state’s Smarter Balanced ELA assessment. Regarding the most recent
assessment data, SA Joanna noted,
My greatest concern is just our struggling readers. We definitely have a good percentage
of kids who are not at grade level in reading and writing and so our focus really—since I
have been here, our focus has been on Early Literacy.
SA Angela also communicated her concerns about student achievement in ELA:
We have about – I think it was 30% proficient last year, and our projections again for
next year show the exact same, which means we’ve had no growth, which is very
concerning. As you look, we are now starting to pinpoint where it happens, what grade
level and where it happens.
Secondly, administrators shared a concern that teachers do not adequately comprehend
the depth of rigor required by the CCSS ELA and are not implementing the standards as intended

141
in their classroom instructional programs. SA Leon shared his frustrations with this:
It’s trying to get them [teachers] to understand they have to be able to go deep with them
[CCSS ELA] and they have to be able to understand and comprehend the Lexiles and
they have to be able to pull that stuff out themselves.
SA Angela echoed SA Leon’s concerns:
We’re seeing that the kids are not grasping the standard to the rigor that they need to and
when we look at our projections for Smarter Balanced, look at our last year’s data, the
year before data, we know our kids are not meeting the needs that the standards are
saying you will do this. They’re not getting there…It’s been a challenge, it really has,
because I still don’t think we have a clear understanding of what an ELA standard is. As
much work as we try to put into that area, I don’t think that we completely grasp that.
These data-driven concerns thus created a secondary challenge – a need to provide
embedded instructional support so that teachers can effectively implement high quality academic
programs in ELA.
Challenge: Need for embedded instructional support. Each of the three settings had
instructional coaches in place prior to the implementation of the CCSS ELA standards in 2010.
However, the district administrators noted that the role of the instructional coaches changed
considerably in response to the shifts in teaching and learning required by the CCSS ELA.
Previously, the role of the instructional coaches in Adams USD had been to deliver professional
development from the district office in a traditional stand-alone workshop format. With the shift
to CCSS, DA Alice called out the need to repurpose the role of the coaches and “grow the
department so there’s support out at the school sites.” DA Laurel shared a comparable view of
the need for embedded instructional support in Lincoln USD, stating,

142
We wanted – not the PD to be outside of what they’re doing. You can have a
foundational type, this is what we’re doing, but we really wanted them to go in and help
with the teacher while they’re teaching because that’s where it happened.
She also emphasized the need to address:
…the instructional shifts that come with Common Core with ELA, a lot of the writing,
the informational text, just the shifts that you need to do not just in the standards, because
a lot of the standards are the same, but how we’re teaching them and how we’re
expecting the kids to respond back to us is different. So really working with the teachers
in making those shifts.
A similar perspective was noted in Jefferson USD, with DA Jeanette remarking:
It was recognized by everybody that the coach was necessary in order to make that
change. As we were implementing Common Core, obviously it went hand in hand. It
was already happening, so as we’re providing the training, the coaches had the
expectations that they would be providing that support for the teachers and implementing
and making the shift. We still are struggling even with that because we created the scope
and sequence for Language Arts that clearly shows how you break down the learning
week by week and so many people looked at it. I get it, but they don’t go back and
actually read the document. When they’re doing their planning, they’re really still
thinking about, “this is how I’ve always done it and I’m just going to make this tweak for
Common Core,” instead of “I’m going to actually teach the way it’s supposed to happen,”
which is typical. That’s where the coaches come into play.
She went on to share that each site’s instructional coach provides this embedded support by
scheduling collaborative planning days with the teachers. During these days, they provide brief,

143
targeted professional development to remind them of the CCSS shifts and then dive into the ELA
scope and sequence to collaboratively plan their instruction.
DA Alice summarized why instructional coaches are selected to provide instructional
leadership in Adams USD in response to the challenges of improving student achievement in
ELA and providing embedded instructional support:
We are constantly polling teachers for what they want and what they need and trying to
connect back to the instruction, but we don’t always get a clear picture, so it’s good to
continuously get the data. As we go on through why do we have the coaches, at the end
of the day we know that the best professional development is coaching and we want
teachers to be more effective and kids to achieve better, that’s why they’re out there.
Question 3. Relationships were a prominent theme in addressing how administrators and
instructional coaches work together to provide professional learning within instructional practice.
SA Angela summarized this essential quality by emphatically stating, “You have to have
relationships with people, because you can’t change anything. You can’t do anything unless you
build that relationship with people. You have to listen to their concerns and their needs as well.”
Relationships: Instructional coach as extension of site administrator. The site
administrators consider their instructional coaches to be extensions of themselves, using terms
such as “my left hand,” “another pair of eyes,” “my eyes, ears,” and “speaks with my voice” to
describe their significance. The site administrators shared that since they are limited in their
ability to provide instructional leadership, they greatly appreciate having another individual on
site that can function as an instructional expert; especially one that has time to provide necessary
support to teachers. The instructional coach can spend extended time in classrooms and see
things that the site administrator might not see. The instructional coach is then able to bring it to

144
the attention of the site administrator so that as a team they can, as SA Joanna noted, “come up
with overarching trends and patterns we’re seeing that we can provide professional development
around or kind of focus on school-wide.” The instructional coaches can follow through and
work in-depth with teachers in the classroom on implementing “sit-and-get” professional
developments via modeling, co-teaching, reflection, and feedback. SA Leon shared that he also
appreciates how his instructional coach can provide a “softer touch” in sharing constructive
criticism with teachers, noting, “A lot of times there’s certain things if I say something to a
teacher it comes across one way, so I need her to go say it to a teacher.”
The site administrators view their relationships with their instructional coaches as the key
to enabling them to realize their instructional visions for their school sites. This is reflected most
clearly in SA Angela’s words:
Now that we have [IC] Audrey, it’s been fabulous because we – I can say, “Audrey, I
have this idea. I read this article. I really want to see if we can get some more
information on this,” and she’ll go out and do that for me. Before, it was me trying to do
that. It might not have been at the level that I wanted it to be, because you didn’t have
the time because you’re dealing with all the other tasks as an administrator. Now I feel if
I have a vision, I can share it with her and it takes off.
The instructional coach serves as a reminder to site administrators; he or she is able to
continually revisit the established plans, goals, and expectations and let the administrators know
if they are on track or need to change direction. The site administrators also value how the
instructional coach can collaborate with coaches at other district sites and bring resources back to
their home sites that will enable them to meet the professional learning needs of their teachers.
Relationships: Trust. All administrators, both district and site-level, noted that trust

145
must first be built between instructional coaches and classroom teachers to realize successful
embedded professional learning. DA Alice shared,
Teachers need to have a voice and feel cared about; they want to be acknowledged as good
teachers. They do not want to be criticized. When they’re told they need a coach, they
think they are not up to standard; that is tricky to navigate.
Fear is often the first response to instructional coaching initiatives; teachers do not want
to feel like they are bad teachers or that they will be subject to evaluation by a peer. To address
this, administrators must first set the stage by “getting teachers on board” with professional
learning. They need to continually poll teachers for what they want and need and explain why a
particular program or activity is being implemented. Secondly, the site administrator needs to
support the instructional coach by promoting him or her to the faculty, establishing procedures
for the coaching relationship, and gently discussing the possibility of coaching with individual
teachers when needs arise. Finally, since instructional coaches do not serve in an evaluative
capacity, administrators must take care to protect confidentiality. This was strongly emphasized
by SA Angela:
I want her [IC Audrey] to be a link from the teachers to me if there needs to be one. Not
anything like – no gossiping kind of thing. They’re saying they need help with this, can
you help with that, things like that. … This is some of the things I noticed when I was on
walk-throughs. Can you maybe reach out to the teacher and just have a conversation?
I’m not sharing confidential things. I’m just saying, “Can you reach out and see if
everything is okay?” We have to be cautious of that. You can easily fall into a situation
where she’s now becoming an administrator role. We never want to breach that peer-topeer kind of situation.

146
During the focus group interviews, both site administrators and instructional coaches
indicated that it is also important for the coach to build trust by establishing credibility with the
classroom teachers. Teachers must first value what the coach has to offer before they will let him
or her into their classrooms. IC Julie accomplishes this by first implementing activities with
small groups of students so that she can better inform and coach teachers. IC Audrey establishes
this by:
Being willing to be patient because what I want to do is get in, get in, get in. I think the
whole staff meetings that we have, the whole group staff developments that [SA] Angela
has created opportunities for me to provide for the staff has allowed them to value me.
They wouldn’t have seen me as a valuable resource if I wasn’t sharing them information
as a whole. And through that, then teachers are saying, “Could you show me that? Help
me understand this or that.” Then I could say, “Would you like me to come and
demonstrate that piece?” and then that opens that door too.
Finally, IC Lynn shared that she works on being visible and approachable with the teachers. She
lets them know that she would do anything for them and provides them with her cell phone
number so that they can reach her at any time.
Challenge: Limitations. Several barriers or limitations were identified by both
administrators and instructional coaches as challenges to the successful implementation of
embedded professional learning. These include teacher resistance and multiple responsibilities.
Teacher resistance. Until positive relationships have been established, classroom
teachers are unlikely to allow instructional coaches into their classrooms to provide instructional
support. The administrators shared that the roles of instructional coaches prior to
implementation of the CCSS ELA have affected teachers’ current views of instructional

147
coaching. Teachers were used to the previous format of “sit-and-get” professional development
and thus do not expect or desire follow up. DA Jeanette shared that veteran teachers in her
district often hold a negative connotation of instructional coaches as the previous manifestation
of the role made them feel:
…like we were telling them they were bad teachers, and that's why we needed to change,
and we didn't— at the time we did not do a good job of rolling it out, explaining the why,
getting them on board before doing all this.
Some teachers just do not want to be coached; they do not share when they’ve attended
professional development sessions, refuse to schedule time with an instructional coach for follow
up, and do not welcome coaches into their professional learning communities.
Multiple responsibilities. “Our teacher leaders end up doing a lot of pieces” – DA
Jeanette’s words sum up the challenge faced by all administrators and instructional coaches –
responsibilities that compete with the coach’s ability to focus and work in-depth with teachers.
Though instructional coaches may be hired to focus upon a particular subject area, such as
literacy, they often end up taking on other subject areas or activities. SA Angela shared, “They
[instructional coaches] kind of all have to be ‘jacks of all trades’ per se, but then they also—
everyone seems to have a little edge on something, whether it's early literacy or mathematics or
science or whatever or technology.” Instructional coaches may be expected to follow up on
multiple concepts and initiatives with teachers, which could include instructional shifts, mapping
of essential standards, implementation of new curriculum, data analysis, and Kagan strategies.
DA Laurel lamented:
The issue that we run into a lot is having the literacy coaches get sucked up into a lot of
the stuff that has to happen in schools and it takes them away from what their primary

148
responsibility is and that's in the classroom with teachers coaching them. And all of a
sudden, I become the spelling bee organizer or the science fair— that is always a
challenge for us and it's a challenge for the coaches. I understand where the site admin is
coming from because there's a lot of stuff that needs to get done and here you have
someone who doesn't have a class.
Limited, absent, and new personnel were also noted by administrators as a challenge that
limits instructional coaches from engaging in their primary work. Coaches are sometimes asked
or expected to fulfill the responsibilities of absent classroom teachers and site administrators.
Instructional coaches are also often pulled off-site to attend district meetings and professional
development or to serve at other school sites. IC Julie shared,
That makes it really hard to be able to be consistent. I'm off like a week, then I'm back,
then I'm gone. That definitely does get into the way. I wish I could be here more
consistently. Again, I also said that's really nice to have that opportunity because then I
can see lots of different ideas. There have been times where I've been in a coaching
cycle and a teacher says, “Oh, you know I saw a teacher at another site do it this way,
let's try it.” That's kind of like a double-edged sword, that barrier. Sometimes there's
not enough hours in the day.
Working with new teachers can take up much of an instructional coach’s time. In
Jefferson USD, all new teachers are required to participate in two coaching cycles in their first
semester and one cycle in the second semester. This necessitates that the coach fit these teachers
into her schedule before other more veteran teachers. Lincoln USD has hired large numbers of
new teachers in recent years; many are interns that have never been in a classroom. As a result,
both SA Leon and IC Lynn shared that her primary focus is working with the new teachers.

149
Though both administrators and instructional coaches shared that it can be easier to make
inroads with new teachers than with veteran teachers, working with new teachers often requires
that significant time be spent on developing classroom management skills. This again limits the
instructional coach’s ability to fulfill his or her primary responsibilities. DA Laurel noted:
I would say a lot of their [IC] time is spent with new teachers, trying to get them caught
up on all that. And then with that comes other things like classroom management,
because you can't teach that if you can't – so they do work some on that kind of stuff. But
that's not their focus. That's sort of a byproduct of what they're trying to do in the
classroom.
The need to address classroom management was also highlighted by DA Alice:
…one of our coaches is playing with the idea of teaching one period a day and that way
she'll be a model class for all the new teachers for classroom management on developing
routines in classroom management. We're still working with people on classroom
management.
Question 5. The role of the instructional coach within a district proves to be an evolving
one. This can present challenges when administrators seek to evaluate the effectiveness of the
instructional coaches’ instructional leadership role.
Challenge: Evolving role. As noted by administrators when discussing teacher
resistance to instructional coaching, the expectations for instructional coaches are continually
evolving according to each district’s needs. DA Jeanette shared that the barriers realized by the
district’s previous model of providing intensive trainings led them to develop their current
model:
We moved everybody to a coaching role with the understanding that if you're going to—

150
research says if you're going to provide professional development, you've got to have
something on the site where they're actually trying to implement it and have them hold
the hand and do the walk-through and the reflective conversation. If you don't do that,
you're not going to get anywhere. We've already spent so much money in doing this
training and realizing that it still took us two years beyond that to get through the whole
framework, so they could actually get to the collaborative days, and we're still working
on a very – we have a long way to go still.
Administrators acknowledge that they still have work to do in achieving their goals for
instructional coaching, which include the full implementation of a coaching model. DA Alice
highlighted this by sharing,
What's finally happening in the systematic and prevalent way is the demo lessons. We're
still at that low level. Doing number talks, demo lessons; co-plan/co-teaches are coming.
That's a little easier to slide into, but the observation feedback are few and far between.
Each district has implemented or continues to implement various coaching models, which
include Jim Knight’s Big Four model, Elena Aguilar’s transformational coaching model, and
Direct Interactive Instruction. Administrators would like to see their instructional coaches
consistently utilize these models to enable classroom teachers to fully implement their district
ELA scope and sequences and new ELA curriculum adoptions.
Job descriptions define the expectations by which instructional coaches will be formally
evaluated in each of the districts. Each of the districts outlines differing requirements regarding
desired knowledge and skills. DA Jeanette pointed out, “We try to rate our job descriptions
somewhat loose, so we don't have to change them every year.” However, all districts are similar
in requiring their instructional coaches to hold a current teaching credential and from three to

151
five years of classroom teaching experience.
Each district provides their instructional coaches with frequent and varied training to
fulfill their duties as outlined in the job descriptions, though this differs by district and by year.
This may include train-the-trainer models in which instructional coaches are sent out for training
and then return to their sites to implement it, providing coaches with district-level trainings
focused on coaching resources, observation of district coaches, observation by and feedback
from district coaches, and regular collaborative meetings with the district administrator and
fellow instructional coaches.
Differing formal evaluation processes. This evolving role is evident in each of the three
districts’ differing formal evaluation processes. In Adams USD, instructional coaches are under
the direction of and are formally evaluated by the district administrator. A two-step (interim and
final) specialized evaluation process is in place for nonteaching certificated staff such as
instructional coaches. It allows for a self-evaluation and the ability for the instructional coach
and district administrator to set goals and assess progress via a rubric that is based upon
standards that are similar to the California Standards for the Teaching Profession. Instructional
coaches are also eligible to participate in an alternative evaluation process that can include
personalized project design.
Jefferson USD also established a specialized formal evaluation tool for instructional
coaches that consists of performance standards, criteria, and descriptive examples. Instructional
coaches are formally evaluated by DA Jeanette and her managers, who spend significant time
collecting “evidence that we observed and then impact to teacher learning or student learning and
then a judgment.” Instructional coaches are expected to engage in either a full evaluation cycle,
which utilizes the formal evaluation tool, or a professional growth cycle, which is primarily

152
driven by the instructional coach and consists of a personalized process of setting professional
learning goals for the year.
In Lincoln USD, the site-based instructional coaches are evaluated by their site principals
according to the standard certificated teacher evaluation process. The evaluation form consists
of a check-off list of the teaching standards that all certificated staff are expected to meet every
other year.
Relationships: Communication. Informal evaluation processes exist within the context
of the relationship between site administrators and instructional coaches, primarily in the form of
regular communication. All site administrators indicated that they meet regularly with their
instructional coaches, sometimes daily, to discuss goals and progress. SA Angela shared the
importance of this:
Audrey and I meet every week. She comes in— I have her Wednesdays and Thursdays.
She comes in on Wednesdays, we sit down in the morning and we debrief every week….
but we make a point of having that communication with each other. I think that's
probably one of biggest success stories with us, because we have that communication
with each other and it's regular.
SA Joanna’s perspective echoes SA Angela’s thoughts and adds how her own observation of the
instructional coach and the feedback provided by teachers is important to consider in evaluating
the effectiveness of the coach:
I pop in at times when she's in classrooms in her coaching cycles. We meet, like I said,
and talk. We kind of just did an informal strengths and areas of next steps recently where
we just talked through what's going really well and areas where I think she could move
forward. I don't sit in on her coaching debriefs, because we try to keep those really

153
confidential. But the feedback— I think feedback from teachers has been really positive.
If there was an issue, if I was hearing feedback that maybe wasn't as positive, I would
have a conversation with her, but she's very good.
Naturalistic generalization. Administrators consider instructional coaches to be
extensions of themselves as instructional leaders in the implementation of the CCSS ELA. They
are making a significant investment in the role in response to a data-driven need to increase
student achievement in ELA. The intentional building of relationships and regular
communication contributes to the successful provision of embedded professional learning,
though limitations or barriers can present challenges. One such challenge is the need to
continually implement and refine instructional coaching expectations, training, and evaluation
processes. Therefore, this proves to be an evolving role.
Theme Development: Case Two
After I completed data collection and finalized all documents in electronic form as
outlined in the Procedures section of Chapter Three, I uploaded the files for each Case Two
setting as a new, separate project in Atlas.ti. As with Case One, I grouped each of the documents
by setting; each group included the following files: three transcripts, one observation, one job
description, one evaluation form, one LCAP, and one SPSA.
First cycle coding. I followed the same procedures for First Cycle Coding as in Case
One, the only difference being the codes used for the Case Two research questions (see Table
20). Overall, I identified a total of 417 codes during first cycle coding.

154
Table 20
Case Two First Cycle Coding Methods
Method
Structural

Values

Descriptive

Code Labels Used
RQ2
RQ4
RQ6
V
A
B
LCAP
SPSA
Job Description
Evaluation
Model
Standards & Guidelines

Second cycle coding. I applied the same analysis procedures as Case One to my Second
Cycle Coding of Case Two data. In this case, I also identified a total of 11 categories, nine of
which were the same as Case One. There were two differences: the categories of Ignorance and
Resource instead of Evolving Role and Extension (see Tables 19 & 21). The same three themes
emerged from the categories: Challenge, Relationships, and Values (see Table 21).
Table 21
Case Two Second Cycle Coding Methods
Method
Category
Theme
Accountability
Challenge
Ignorance
Limitation
Needs
Communication
Relationships
Pattern
Resource
Support
Trust
Disposition
Values
Prior Experience
Satisfaction
To determine how the themes related to the research questions, I opened each of the
Structural Codes: RQ2, RQ4, and RQ6, in the Atlas.ti Network Editor and imported co-occurring

155
codes. This generated a visual network of all codes that co-occurred with the selected research
question. Since several of the interview questions served to provide data for multiple research
questions, not all codes were relevant to each question. Consequently, I removed the codes that
did not directly apply to the selected question. I then grouped the remaining codes to visually
organize how each theme related to the question (see Appendix K for a sample network). After
completing this for each of the three research questions, I then vertically reviewed all of the data
files by setting one final time, in this instance closely examining and coding the observation files
to corroborate my findings regarding administrators’ instructional leadership perceptions. I did
not find any disparities in the data nor find a need to generate any new codes. The following
sections discuss the themes of Challenge and Relationships within the context of responses to
research questions 2, 4, and 6 for Case Two. The Values theme was embedded throughout all
research question responses and will be addressed in the cross-case analysis.
Research Question Responses: Case Two
Question 2. All administrators acknowledged a need to provide strong instructional
leadership in ELA in response to challenges they’ve encountered with student literacy.
However, though each district has employed teacher librarians at the site level for many years,
administrators have not necessarily selected or fully utilized them to provide this instructional
leadership. This is due to the challenge of ignorance, lack of knowledge and understanding of
the instructional role of the teacher librarian.
Challenge: Student literacy. Across the board, administrators shared that their primary
instructional goal is to improve student achievement in literacy across all subject areas. SA
Richard emphasized this by clearly stating, “Our goal really is literacy and really increasing the
literacy rate for our students, identifying where they are when they enter with us and having

156
them exit better.”
SA Tomas similarly shared,
Our goals are to promote literacy. They're the district ones. They're the ones the board has
most recently adopted, and writing. When I say that's not just ELA, it's in math, it's in
science, it's in social sciences. Our kids are writing across the curriculum. Language is so
rich now with Common Core across the curriculum that they have to— they have to.
DA Manuel also noted that the CCSS ELA applies to all subject areas, which has created a need
for additional instructional support for teachers:
What does Common Core mean? It's my belief, as a curriculum director, that it's very
much— I think this is consistent with the Common Core, this isn't an ELA initiative. This
is literacy and science, literacy and technical subjects, literacy and history. And our
science teachers, our history teachers, our technical subject teachers, they weren't
necessarily adequately prepared for that type of paradigm shift.
Only one of the three settings in Case Two, Taft USD, has intentionally selected teacher
librarians to help provide instructional leadership in addressing these CCSS student literacy
needs. DA Tanya disclosed the reasoning for this:
We selected teacher librarians for a couple of reasons. One, we have a history of valuing
that role. That role as a trained role, not simply a classroom teacher who is a literacy
teacher and passionate about reading and a lot of books, but somebody really who has the
training and certification that comes with it. That's our history. We know that previously
they made a difference for every stakeholder group that you can imagine…That there's
that role that is there to manage the library on the day-to-day management level, but then
to oversee those management operations and then to be able to provide instructional

157
support is above and beyond… Because of that grounding in literacy, when we look at
that teacher librarian role, their role— they're the champions of the humanities and the
fine arts, but they also champion that literacy component with their STEM [Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math] partner. That technology piece is shared equally.
Since the district focus is upon improving student literacy, assigning teacher librarians to meet
that need was a natural fit for Taft USD.
Challenge: Ignorance of teacher librarian role. All administrators acknowledged that
the role of the teacher librarian has changed over the years. However, not all school personnel
understand or have implemented those changes. DA Rachel shared,
For as long as I've been in the district, and that's been 30 years, we've always had teacher
librarians…And you should know that at first, we called them librarians. I forget where
we changed it to teacher librarians because we want their role to change. Now can I say
that their roles have changed like everybody has understood how their roles changed, I
don't think that is so. I think the newer ones are beginning to be more teacher librarians.
Many administrators hold a traditional view of the teacher librarian that was shaped by their
prior experiences and interactions with teacher librarians at the site level. This view is of the
teacher librarian as a “keeper of the books,” not an instructional leader. DA Manuel recalled his
experience:
As I became an assistant principal in this district and principal, the interactions that I had
I could pretty objectively tell you that I didn't see a large instructional role in our
librarians -- with our librarians. They're very much advocates for the library and
advocates for student literacy but not necessarily a support to staff. That was very much
secondary, far second.

158
SA Richard reported a similar view:
My first teaching assignment at [another Roosevelt HSD site] we had a teacher
librarian and Roosevelt HSD has had a history of having teacher librarians at their
sites. She was an older lady and I like found her to be more like the keeper of the
books and I was kind of scared of her, to be honest with you, as a teacher. She'd get on
you, and there was no messing around in the library. Then I've been around one before
where I would say it was almost too old school and traditional. “We're going to go over
the Dewey Decimal system and here it is,” and it was as dry as it could be, and it's the
same one that I probably went through when I was like in fourth grade…The norm in
most of the schools I've been at is the check out, manager of the library, not the
teacher.
SA Michael also revealed his lack of understanding of the role of the teacher librarian:
When I was a teacher, I knew that our librarian was credentialed and had a master's
degree in library sciences. I remember asking, “What is library sciences? It's so
fascinating.” Maybe before I became a teacher when I was finishing my undergrad in
college I remember just thinking about that but knowing what they do beyond what we
consider a librarian in societal terms, I’ve got to be honest with you, I didn't know except
for the operational things I see.
DA Manuel pointed out that the teacher librarians in Madison HSD helped to perpetuate this
perspective of their role. He explained that they managed to avoid having their positions cut
during lean budget years by promoting their position as “keeper of the books”:
Historically, many districts had librarians in the past, and as the nature of our industry
evolved and as budgets grew tight, many districts ended up moving away from teacher

159
librarians. And we had a very rich history and a very organized group of librarians and
they ultimately made more of a fiscal argument -- because they not only oversaw the
libraries, but they very much were responsible for textbook inventories, along with the
textbook classified person.
The administrators acknowledge that there is a need to improve how teacher librarians
are utilized within their districts, especially in addressing student literacy. Currently, Madison
HSD has planned for teacher librarians to continue to provide support to teachers with the
district’s adopted curriculum and use of technology. DA Manuel shared:
There is a paradigm shift with the Common Core, with literacy, technology, our one-toone initiative, so the librarians have very much been part of our strategic plan in
supporting teachers on implementation of our new curricular documents and of our new
technology landscape…I really think the work on supporting teachers with the Common
Core and with literacy development, that still needs to happen.
DA Rachel shared a similar concern:
I always think of the library as the hub of the school. That's where things happen. If you
want to promote a reading program, if you want to promote ELA, if you want to promote
learning on that kind of scale, it's got to happen at the library, and I don't know that it
efficiently is so, but that is one thing we're working on.
Because of this lack of knowledge and understanding of the role of the teacher librarian,
the administrators acknowledged that other personnel such as part-time curriculum specialists,
resource teachers, and Teachers on Special Assignment have been assigned to provide embedded
instructional support to their classroom teachers. At Magnolia High School, SA Michael serves
as the Assistant Principal that oversees curriculum and instruction and works with the part-time

160
site Curriculum Specialists to provide professional learning in the core subjects. Speaking of TL
Monica, SA Michael revealed,
I know she's very hands-on and she loves putting on different projects and— I don't know
exactly what those are. She puts on the visual and performing arts showcase. She's very
supportive, but again, I don't know exactly what she does in that respect.
He went on to share that he had not “included her as part of my systems” because of his lack of
knowledge of the role of teacher librarian. SA Michael indicated it was an eye-opening
experience for him to consider that the teacher librarian should be included in providing support
for instructional initiatives focused on literacy:
I think the thing that's shocking to me is we don't have the institutional culture to really
defer to you on the subject of literacy. I know we're talking about libraries. It's obvious
here. I don't think it's a recent thing either, and I've been on the current administration,
myself, it's not cultural -- it's not part of our culture, Americans even, to connect the
school library maybe the past 20 years, 30 years to literacy, truly to literacy.
Even within Taft USD where teacher librarians are expected to serve as instructional
leaders in literacy, DA Tanya expressed a concern that existing teacher librarians must remain
current in the field or risk becoming irrelevant and ineffective:
My other concern is that how the people in this role see themselves and continue to
evolve with the need. And I say that because I'm seeing that happen…we know that being
literate, the definition might slide here and there a little bit, literate in what, right? But,
communication literacy, written literacy, that's human nature. That's not going to change.
It's how you do it and the modes in which you communicate that change. So my concern
is that this role also moves with that and that those practitioners see that so it doesn't

161
disappear.
Question 4. Given the lack of knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of
the teacher librarian, administrators spend little time working together with their teacher
librarians to provide professional learning within daily instructional practice. For those that do,
it is most evident within the context of relationships.
Relationships: Teacher librarian as resource. Administrators generally view the teacher
librarian as a resource in providing occasional instructional support to teachers. SA Tomas
summed up his relationship with TL Tracey and her relationship with their teachers:
I know she's a resource that a lot of teachers have come to realize that they have, and
some use her more than others. I value that she can— that she has a flexible schedule and
that she can be a resource to the staff in reading, language arts. She has a wealth of
knowledge about books, what's out there, and she's done extensive work on that kind of
stuff, so she can give you a list of books for whatever. I think I go to her more as a
resource. I put the idea in her head and she goes with it. I think that whole process of
when you come in and you don't know a staff or anything, there's that time but then as
they get to know her and as a person, as a resource that's here available, now she's always
occupied. She's back today and she's full. They know— they've come to know her as
another resource and someone that can help them with the areas in ELA, especially in
research.
He also shared that “she knows that she needs to be in classrooms. She needs to be working with
kids and teachers,” especially in providing support in implementing the new district-adopted
ELA curriculum.

162
SA Richard believes that in providing instructional leadership, it is important to ask
“what the teachers need and then being able to provide it for them as opposed to us saying this
is what you need. We want to get their input and tailor our professional development to what
their needs are.” He feels that TL Roxanne exemplifies this in her relationship with the teachers
and details how she provides instructional support for them:
She wants to be very involved and she wants to teach. So, it's typical to see her run
English classes through her library all the time, all the time, whether that be just
teaching a lesson on research or maybe it's teaching kids a lesson about a particular book
they may be reading and our teachers are used to it and they're very open it… attends the
PLC time with teachers, sends out a schedule for visitation to the library…One thing we
talked about the other day is [TL Roxanne] being out and visiting those other
departments [science, math, social studies, languages] and showing them the resources
that are available to them through the library is very important, and I've seen her do that
before. That's what I appreciate.
Challenges: Limitations. Within the focus groups, all teacher librarians proclaimed that
they would like to be more engaged in their school sites’ instructional programs but are
prohibited from doing so because of challenges relating to administrative support and limited
time.
Lack of administrative support. The lack of administrative support stems from the
challenge of ignorance; administrators that do not understand the instructional role of the teacher
librarian are not able to fully support or promote it. This was most evident in Madison HSD.
Though SA Michael oversees curriculum and instruction for his school site, he admitted that he
is not the direct supervisor of TL Monica:

163
I'm not her supervisor so I don't really have a hand in what she does…she does our
electronic book checkout and she also does our electronic device checkout. I have a
feeling knowing her that she would love to be more involved in some sort of instructional
work.
The assistant principal (AP) in charge of facilities instead serves as TL Monica’s supervisor. SA
Michael surmised this is most likely because the AP of Facilities oversees technology and the
teacher librarian is expected to provide support in the circulation, maintenance, and inventory of
student technology devices. TL Monica shared her perspective on this:
A lot of it is district vision. The district doesn't have a good vision for what librarians
can do. They keep us with a lot of materials management, which is fine, but it's a big job
and it consumes a lot of our time when our techs can handle way more of the material
management, so we can do a lot more instructional things…I think admin doesn't know
what we can do. A lot of times they don't even think that we are able to help with certain
things.
SA Michael agreed “100 percent” with TL Monica’s assertion that administrators do not
understand what teacher librarians do, adding that the teacher librarians also appear to lack
advocacy. TL Monica offered this in response:
I think district-wide, we don't have a teacher librarian at the district, so we don't have an
administrator librarian that kind of guides the vision of what a library can do so we don't
have that… the people that supervise us directly is the director of curriculum. Every
director of curriculum that we've had—the last three—has not known what we do. We
have to kind of teach them every time, and then they leave, and then we teach them, so
that’s hard.

164
This soon became the reality again for Madison HSD, as DA Manuel shared that he would be
moving to another position within the district at the beginning of the next school year.
However, he did acknowledge that changes need to be made regarding how teacher librarians
are utilized within the district:
I've been trying to make the case to get our librarians— I've talked to cabinet about this,
the superintendent, to get them out of the textbook and inventory of iPad business and
really focus on the teacher part of teacher librarian.
The lack of vision and support for teacher librarians at the district level was also evident
in Roosevelt HSD. Though she oversees professional development for the district, DA Rachel
shared that she does not actually provide direction for the district’s teacher librarians. That
responsibility belongs to another director with whom her department works, who happened to be
new to the position. As such, her knowledge of the current role of teacher librarians in the
district is limited. Regarding district vision for teacher librarians, DA Rachel admitted:
There isn't the kind of formal execution as you would think. I mean, we want our
librarians again to engage the students in the learning, to engage the other teachers to be
part of the library, to collaborate in lesson building, but I don't know how much that
happens. So, they are not as integrated into the process— they're not as integrated in the
process as we would like or at least I would like.
She also acknowledged that there are challenges in administrative support for teacher librarians
at the school sites:
It's based on their relationship. I'm sure this is so, some of our librarians are very close
to their principals and engaged in how their libraries can change and at other times, I
think it's more maybe dictated. It's a little difficult, little difficult.

165
The teacher librarians also highlighted this as a challenge, lamenting how difficult it is
to gain access to teachers to establish collaborative instructional partnerships without
administrative support. TL Monica noted that teachers do not often tell her what they are
working on and rarely seek her out for help:
Most of the time teachers don't tell me what they're doing. I find out through other means
or a kid comes in and asks for another book. They're doing this in class, then I start
looking for things to give them. On occasion, I've had teachers who’ve come in and “Can
you help me with this?” Real surprised when I say, “Of course, I can help you with this. I
can find it for you.” I find articles for people or things to help with the teaching of the
lessons. I have done that. I don't get it as often as I could, and I would be happy to get
them.
She also shared, “I don't get to do a lot of co-teaching, but I do— what I do if I can stealthily, I
try to provide things.” These things might include resources to support a class novel study, a
curriculum matrix, research resources posted on the library website, and a technology blog.
SA Richard noted that administration doesn’t necessarily initiate or direct professional
learning between the teachers and the teacher librarian at his site. TL Roxanne typically seeks
out opportunities by requesting time to speak with teachers at staff meetings and visiting
Professional Learning Communities (PLCs). At his site, SA Tomas commented that he doesn’t
need to encourage teachers to work with their teacher librarian because “it’s already happening.”
TL Tracey agreed, affirming that she is always in demand for lessons at the site. However,
during their focus interview SA Tomas did learn that he needs to provide more support to TL
Tracey by ensuring that classroom teachers understand why they must remain present while she
is teaching lessons to their students. She shared the following:

166
There are a few [teachers] that they see when I come into the classroom as an opportunity
to grade papers or run off to the workroom or something and that's where I need to say
something and let them know the importance of hearing what I'm sharing with their
students so they can carry on— especially with note-taking skills, how to determine what
to take for notes, so that they can continue…. It's the power of having two teachers in the
room. That's what I explained too, they know which students needed help and they can be
there to support.
Limited time. An additional challenge that inhibits teacher librarians from fully
engaging in their school site’s instructional programs is limited time. TL Tracey is responsible
for two school sites and finds it difficult to adequately meet the instructional needs of both:
“There's such a demand for lessons here that I even come from my other school. I'll come over
here for an hour trying to meet, but then I'm not being fair to my other school.” She shared that
difficulty is compounded when she’s expected to be available for and attend spontaneously
scheduled district meetings; this disrupts established instructional schedules and makes
rescheduling extremely challenging.
TL Roxanne also noted that scheduling can be challenging. The library is constantly
booked for lessons with the English teachers; she would like to do more with classes in other
subject areas but does not have enough time to work with every teacher and class on campus.
She already often hosts two or more classes in the library at a time to try to meet everyone’s
needs. In addition, the need to use the facility as a testing site can disrupt their established
instructional schedule. Substitute teachers can also pose a challenge as students generally
exhibit major behavior issues with them, making it impossible to work with the students. As
such, TL Roxanne generally reschedules or cancels lessons when the scheduled classroom

167
teachers are absent. SA Richard is aware of these challenges and shared that they do their best
to not utilize the library for other activities. TL Monica additionally remarked that the
management of materials can prohibit teachers and students from scheduling time in the library:
Materials management is the big barrier for us here at the library. You have to deal
with the iPads, a week dedicated to collecting iPads. That's the biggest shame
because this is when a lot of teachers want to do research projects, and this is when I
have to turn them away.
Question 6. The challenge of ignorance, or lack of knowledge and understanding of the
TL role, is again present in each of the three districts’ differing formal evaluation processes.
Though all districts require their teacher librarians to hold the California Teacher Librarian
Services Credential, none of them is able to formally evaluate teacher librarians according to
the current California standards for the teacher librarian profession. As such, administrators’
ability to formally evaluate the effectiveness of the teacher librarian’s instructional leadership
role is limited. However, informal evaluation of this role can take place in the form of
communication within relationships between the administrators and their teacher librarians and
classroom teachers.
Challenge: Ignorance. Job descriptions define the expectations by which teacher
librarians will be formally evaluated in each of the districts. In both Madison HSD and
Roosevelt HSD, teacher librarian job descriptions have not been updated since 1999. Only
Roosevelt HSD utilizes a specialized evaluation form that is aligned to the job description. DA
Rachel acknowledged that these documents need to be updated:

168
We need to change that, but we just haven't. I should say I am the we, I am the we, but
there's been conversation on how we might restructure this, loose conversation, not
formal conversation, but it doesn't always fit what we need.
Likewise, in Madison HSD, DA Manuel shared,
There's a job description, it pretty much defines the minimal job description. For the
most part that's an area that I see of needed improvement in establishing clear criteria,
because right now it's pretty much left to the discretion of the principal, but they use the
same contractual expectations.
The Madison HSD job description indicates that the teacher librarian receives general direction
from the site principal and technical direction from the Director of Curriculum. DA Manuel
clarified that teacher librarians are formally evaluated according to the standard teacher
evaluation process by the site principal.
Taft USD recently updated its teacher librarian job description to place greater emphasis
upon their instructional role. DA Tanya stated, “proportionately, you'll see a difference in what
is management and administrative duties and what are the instructional duties. It should be
about one third to two thirds, which we felt was manageable.” However, teacher librarians are
formally evaluated according to the standard teacher evaluation process, which is aligned to the
California Standards for the Teaching Profession. DA Tanya shared that the teacher librarians
“are evaluated by one of the two site principals that they're assigned to and yet the other site
principal gives input. We wish that it would be a little more aligned to their unique assignment.”
Challenge: Need for ongoing training. Though all teacher librarians are prepared to
fulfill the duties of their positions by obtaining the California Teacher Librarian Services
Credential, administrators and teacher librarians acknowledge a need for ongoing, specialized

169
training to maintain and increase their effectiveness. In Roosevelt HSD, DA Rachel admitted,
“We haven't had much professional learning for them, professional development for them
except for the meetings.” The teacher librarians meet regularly throughout the year at the
district office with one of the site teacher librarian serving as a subject area facilitator. Monthly
meetings for teacher librarians also take place in both Roosevelt HSD and Taft USD, during
which each district administrator provides information and addresses concerns.
Professional learning opportunities for teacher librarians vary by district. In Madison
HSD, the majority of teacher librarians have participated in comprehensive trainings related to
the district’s technology initiatives. These included Apple Vanguard Training, a digital
certification, and district trainings arranged by the Educational Technology department. In Taft
USD, teacher librarians are expected to participate in all of the trainings provided to classroom
teachers so that they can learn alongside the teachers. They then receive additional training
specific to the teacher librarian role. DA Tanya explained the district’s position on this:
Teacher Librarians— because in our district if you are a teacher, you go to everything
the teachers go to, which is a little bit of a top-down centralized approach, but if you are
in a specialized role, then you get additional. Even our SPED [Special Education] team,
they go to everything the Gen Ed [General Education] goes to. That's that same
philosophy for teacher librarians, you go to everything the Gen Ed goes to, and then you
get above and beyond that. Whether that's specific technology or Follett training, we
have a series of trainings formalized this year for both them and their LMAs [Library
Media Assistants].
Relationships: Communication. Informal evaluation processes exist within the context
of the relationship between some site administrators and teacher librarians, primarily through

170
regular communication with both the teacher librarian and the classroom teachers with whom he
or she works. SA Richard shared how this works in his relationship with TL Roxanne:
I think it's just basically number one, from talking with her about what she's been doing
and how her time is spent. The other one would be from feedback from teachers. I think
it's clear if you have a teacher librarian that's being used in that way where teachers are
asking her to go out and give them presentations or research materials for kids and giving
up that hour that they have to have her out, and then having her library full of classes that
teachers could easily say I'm not going to the library that day or whatever, and it's
definitely not something where the teacher is taking off during that time period either.
The teacher is in there with the librarian as well.
SA Tomas offered a similar assessment of his relationship with TL Tracey and her relationship
with the classroom teachers, stating:
There's that trust in her because she's approachable and they build a relationship. As
administrator you hear good comments. This is going good…. Just she provides me with
her schedule because she's between me and a middle school. Then she's on all my weekly
updates and whatever, so she knows what's going on. We touch base at least once a week,
face to face on what's going on…. I think I said I get feedback from teachers, I get
feedback from her. Basically, in conversation. I don't have to do anything formally.
Sometimes I walk into a room and she's giving the instruction. It's alive and kicking and
going well. I know she's a resource that a lot of teachers have come to realize that they
have and some use her more than others.
Naturalistic generalization. Despite an expressed need to improve student literacy,
administrators underutilize teacher librarians as instructional leaders in the implementation of the

171
CCSS ELA because most lack knowledge and understanding of their instructional role. Prior
experience with the traditional role of a teacher librarian as the “keeper of the books” has
negatively impacted administrators’ perception of their current role. As such, they generally
view teacher librarians as a resource in providing occasional instructional support to teachers
regarding access and use of materials and technology resources. Lack of leadership, vision,
support, and training were noted as challenges that affect teacher librarians’ ability to engage in
providing embedded professional learning.
Table 22 provides a summary of how the themes of Challenge and Relationships
correspond to the research questions in Case One and Case Two.
Table 22
Summary of Themes by Research Question
Research
Question
1, 2

Case One

2. 3, 4

Challenge: Student Achievement in
ELA
Challenge: Need for Embedded
Instructional Support
Relationships: Trust

3. 5, 6

Challenge: Limitations
Challenge: Evolving Role
Relationships: Communication

Case Two
Challenge: Student Literacy
Challenge: Ignorance of Teacher
Librarian Role
Relationships: Teacher Librarian as
Resource
Challenge: Limitations
Challenge: Ignorance
Challenge: Need for Ongoing Training
Relationships: Communication

Cross-Case Analysis
Following the within-case analyses of Case One and Case Two, I conducted a cross-case
analysis by establishing word tables that displayed each case’s categorical data (see Tables 22 and
23) to identify similarities and differences within the themes (Yin, 2015). I also noted areas of
similarities and differences in my reflective journal as I analyzed each case’s data.

172
Table 23
Comparison of Categorical Data within Themes
Themes

Challenge

Relationships

Values

Case One
Categories
Needs
Accountability
Limitation
Evolving Role
Support
Trust
Communication
Extension
Prior Experience
Disposition
Satisfaction

Case Two
Categories
Needs
Accountability
Limitation
Ignorance
Support
Trust
Communication
Resource
Prior Experience
Disposition
Satisfaction

Similarities. Across the cases, there were three similar categories within each of the
themes of Challenge, Relationships, and Values.
Challenge. Within the theme of Challenge, three categories were similar across the
cases: Needs, Accountability, and Limitations. Administrators in both districts strongly
emphasized the need to improve student achievement in ELA with a targeted focus on student
literacy. In both cases, the implementation of the CCSS ELA presented administrators with a
related challenge: a need to provide embedded instructional support.
Regarding accountability, administrators in both cases shared similar difficulties in
evaluating the effectiveness of instructional coaches and teacher librarians. First, since these
individuals are classified as certificated teachers and are subject to the bargaining agreement of
the district’s teacher’s union, administrators can encounter obstacles with the union when
seeking to design alternative job duties, evaluation processes, and hiring procedures.
Administrators shared that it is important to build a strong relationship with union leaders and
work within that relationship to make changes that benefit both parties. Both administrators and

173
the unions want what is best for their teachers. Secondly, administrators communicated a need
to demonstrate how instructional coaches and teacher librarians are directly impacting student
achievement. In Case One, DA Jeanette explained that her district’s Board of Education is
concerned that the district is receiving a return on its financial investment in instructional
coaches:
One of things we have to do is help the Board to see why it's important because it's not
cheap. They are looking for data to show we're making growth. If we look at both the
framework and we also look at Common Core implementation when we're showing them
that.
In Case Two, DA Tracey noted a similar need to utilize data to show how teacher librarians are
affecting student achievement:
We'll do a data dig into our CAASSP [California Assessment of Student Performance and
Progress] data and look at then our job, our role as teacher librarian. Last year, what they
did from that work we went into the claims, the literacy claims, and they identified that
the research inquiry claim was one that they could actually be most impactful and
accountable to…I really want to do everything in my power to show through data they
impact. Previously in our district we didn't have that. There wasn't a direct correlation for
how students did on our state tests. We couldn't differentiate. The people who are making
the decisions couldn't differentiate. All we could point to is the affect, which is
wonderful. But when you're rubbing two nickels together, affect is going to lose every
time.
She went on to explain how they plan to continually revisit the research inquiry claim data point
to examine teacher librarians’ efficacy over time.

174
Challenges to the successful implementation of embedded professional learning were
evident as limitations in both cases, though mostly in differing ways. One similar limitation
noted between cases was that of scheduling conflicts. Given the limited instructional time
available in the school day and year, participants in both cases lamented how difficult it is to be
able to provide adequate and consistent support to teachers when the instructional coach or
teacher librarian is pulled off-site to attend meetings or professional development, temporarily
serve at another school site, or is split between schools.
Relationships. Support, Trust, and Communication were the categories of similarity
between cases within the theme of Relationships. Administrators were unanimous in sharing that
serving as an instructional leader is a priority for them, but that they are not able to fulfill that
role to the degree they would like because of competing responsibilities. In Case One, SA Leon
responded that he has been able to engage “not a tenth as much as I would like to” with the
instructional program at his site, elaborating, “It’s always hard because it’s so easy to get bogged
down with everything else.” In Case Two, SA Richard echoed these thoughts:
It’s not enough.…There’s that whole thing about the management part of the school and
the instructional piece. And then also, too, what I want to spend time on, too, is the
planning piece in the future. There’s never enough time.
As such, administrators found a need to distribute instructional leadership tasks to other
site leaders to provide instructional support. DA Alice of Case One summed this up when
explaining why her district repurposed the role of the instructional coach:
There was no support at all. If it was a high-need school with a lot of discipline, the
principal would be inundated. It was foreign for them to even get out to classrooms and
walk through, like couldn't even carve out an hour a day because the needs were so great.
Coaches were then assigned to schools.

175
DA Tanya of Case Two provided a similar perspective in speaking of teacher librarians
providing that necessary instructional support:
That there's that role that is there to manage the library on the day-to-day management
level, but then to oversee those management operations and then to be able to provide
instructional support is above and beyond. Again, we value that. We know that that
position affords us that opportunity.
Trust was also evident as a category across both cases: the need to build trust within
relationships to facilitate successful embedded professional learning. Administrators in both
cases noted that teachers need to have a voice and feel valued; professional development should
be based upon their needs and wants. SA Richard explained the importance of:
…asking what the teachers need and then being able to provide it for them as opposed to
us saying this is what you need. We want to get their input and tailor our professional
development to what their needs are.
In addition, administrators in both cases value being able to provide support to their teachers.
Speaking of the instructional coach, SA Joanna shared, “I just think it's an incredible opportunity
that our teachers have that they're able to work with someone who can be a second pair of eyes in
their classroom and provide support.” Likewise, SA Tomas emphatically declared, “Who can
say no to support? Whether it's a coach, whether it's the LMT [Library Media Teacher], you have
another person it's in their job description to be there to support staff.”
Administrators, instructional coaches, and teacher librarians are able to build trust with
classroom teachers by being personable, approachable, visible in the classroom, and available.
Trust is also built by establishing credibility through engaging in the same work as the teachers
and leading by example. SA Angela shared her experience with this: “If you can't wow them or

176
learn from them— they can't learn from you, they don't— it's shut down. It's completely shut
down.” SA Leon expanded upon this by emphasizing how important it is “to be coachable in the
fact that when you do something, you need to be able to have your teachers to be able to go up to
you and tell you, ‘You could have done this better.’”
Communication between administrators and instructional coaches or teacher librarians
was also a prominent category within the theme of Relationships in both cases, with SA Angela
declaring, “Communication is so key in that role because you could easily go into that room and
never see that person.” Most administrators shared how they valued meeting regularly or being
in constant digital contact with their instructional coaches or teacher librarians to discuss
expectations, procedures, needs, and to monitor progress. Listening to the needs of the
instructional coach or teacher librarian was deemed important alongside verbal communication.
Concerning this, SA Richard shared: “My main level of support for her is finding out what her
desires are and what her vision is for that library and then just supporting her.” All
administrators also valued receiving communication from teachers regarding their experiences
with the instructional coach or teacher librarian.
Values. Prior Experience, Dispositions, and Satisfaction were three categories of
similarity found across both cases, embedded within responses to all research questions. Each of
these categories affect how administrators value the role of the instructional coach and teacher
librarian.
Prior Experience. All administrators discussed how their prior experiences with
instructional coaches and teacher librarians have primarily shaped their knowledge and
understanding of these roles. Administrators in both cases had much more experience with the
role of the instructional coach, having either served as one or closely worked with one in the

177
past. As noted in Table 17, DAs Jeanette, Manual, and Tanya and SAs Joanna and Tomas
previously served as instructional coaches. Several district administrators discussed how their
prior experiences with Resources Teachers prepared them to understand and work with the role
of the instructional coach. DA Alice recalled, “As a Resource Specialist, one of the things that I
felt was part of my responsibility was teaching my colleagues.” DA Laurel similarly described,
“Because as a Resource Teacher, you do a lot of that type of working with teachers.” DA Rachel
commented on how she supervises her district’s population of Resource Teachers, which serve in
roles similar to those of instructional coaches: “Our Resource Teachers up here have been out to
sites and they do some coaching. [A university consultant] has shown us how to do some
coaching. She works with a couple sites…and she actually does coaching with them.”
Except for DA Tanya, none of the other administrators had prior experience in serving as
a teacher librarian. DA Tanya shared how her experience as a teacher librarian impacted her
service:
In that role, it really broadened my understanding and my scope of the field, in particular
in what support is needed for a classroom teacher. They do get bound by their walls and
by their 24 little cherubs or 32 or what have you and by schedules and things like that.
Also, in my experience there isn't ample time for meaningful preparation of content,
which includes being able to differentiate. That library role really expanded my vision
and my scope to see how I could be of more service. Then it also expanded by
understanding of that outreach to community more so than just parent involvement. It
really took on a broader definition in terms of firstly the whole school was my immediate
community. Every student was one of my students. Every teacher I was there to serve and
support.

178
Like the administrators in Case Two, administrators in Case One shared that they have
little experience with the instructional role of a teacher librarian. A few had only encountered
the traditional role as “keeper of the books.” DA Laurel described her experience:
Most of the librarians that I have worked with— I haven't done that in California at all,
but in Arizona, Texas and Ohio, there was one at the school that I subbed a little bit in in
Ohio, they seemed to just do book checkout. They didn't do any type of instructional or
any standards or anything like that. It was mostly just managing the books, resources.
Two administrators had no knowledge of the teacher librarian position. When asked how
she learned about the role of the teacher librarian or if she knew what that was, SA Angela
responded, “No, I don’t know what that is and I’m not even exactly sure what that is.” SA
Joanna similarly admitted,
I really don't. What I'm familiar is what we have is our library media tech. When you—
when this kind of came our way, your research study came our way, IC Julie and I have
been like, “Huh, what is this all about?” Here, our library media assistant and our
[International Baccalaureate] instructional coach, their roles are so vastly different and
so we've been very curious to learn more about “What is this?” It seems like such a—
that it couldn't overlap, but I think it's something that I just don't know about.
Impact of Models. Administrators in both cases also discussed how models have
impacted their understanding of the roles of the instructional coach and teacher librarian. Several
administrators commented on how their experiences with coaching within the Reading First and
Reading Recovery programs impacted their understanding of the role and implementation of
coaching within their districts. SA Tomas recalled how his experience with Reading First
shaped his understanding of the instructional coach:

179
I was a part of that change agent kind of thing to what are we doing as a staff as a school
to help our students move in the right place and then soon after that came Reading First
Initiative…They [coaches] would offer— as a Reading First, later when I became one, I
understood that there was a nice— some nice training from Sacramento that you knew our
teachers need this. This is a good module. This is— working with fellow coaches and
looking at the module, how do we tweak it, so it fits these teachers' needs. That
collaboration piece was important. Some things you can do by yourself, but sometimes
you need that collaboration. Let's bounce some ideas off of each other.
DA Laurel similarly shared how her district’s experience with instructional coaches began with
Reading First: “I think the first time we started having instructional coaches was with Reading
First. If I'm not mistaken that's when we first made up the job descriptions.”
Previous working relationships with an instructional coach or teacher librarian served as
positive or negative models for administrators. DA Manuel shared how an instructional coach
positively modeled the role for him when he was a new classroom teacher:
The coach that was assigned to me, our school was—along with one other school—
was assigned a [local university] science coach. It was— my relationship with her I
think led to the most transformative time pedagogically that I've ever experienced.
Because she began very strategically with the assumption that I very much wanted to
improve, and she really allowed me to do deep work around areas that I felt were
important for improvement, and she very much took the approach of gathering
evidence and debriefing in a nondirective inquiry-based way. I just remember that year
and a half just thinking about my practice, the types of questions I'm asking, who has
access to the thinking involved with those questions, the level of depth in those

180
questions, the wait time that I was giving the students, the methods I was using to elicit
responses. The climate— I was ultimately in a classroom that gave students that were
predominantly English learners to practice in a safe space before they perform with
their colleagues. All of that deep meaningful work that was in my early— towards the
end of my second and third year with this coach had a profound impact, and I was a
science teacher that really didn't have too much educational pedagogy in my training,
and I think it was just real timely. Along with my credential, I saw that the real
learning was going on with my coach and my classroom.
DA Alice of Case One similarly shared how a negative model impacted her perception of the
role of the teacher librarian:
When I first came to this district, we were out of compliance and we were assigned a
retired teacher librarian, and no offense, she was like 100 years old and she was all about
the Dewey Decimal System and keeping track of our collection. That is not what we're
after. We can't have that.
She also revealed that after working with a new consulting teacher librarian, her view changed to
the point that she “would like to see us restore teacher librarians.” However, she found that
others in her district do not share this view, lamenting, “I brought that up to LCAP meetings time
and time again and nobody sees the value in it.”
SA Angela described how their district’s model of formal teacher evaluation has
influenced her view of instructional coaching:
There was a point where evaluation shifted to coaching, like having a coaching mind-set
to do an evaluation. We started learning more about that when we were starting to look at
evaluating a teacher, the purpose of what your walk-through is. We're not doing for

181
evaluation purposes, we're doing it to improve instruction in your classroom. It's meant to
coach basically.
SA Michael similarly shared how district expectations and models have influenced his
understanding of instructional coaching:
Also as part of my job duties, I observe teachers and I’ve implemented a coaching model
that is pretty unique that I learned from my principal. That is, I call in teachers
individually and give them ten minutes to talk and I talk for ten minutes. My English
department, I tested it with them and it works really well. I meet with each person once
every three weeks and that's based on what I observed in their classroom. I get to see and
it's building trust and relationship things.
Models of training have also influenced administrators’ understanding of the roles of the
instructional coach and teacher librarian. Two administrators, DA Alice and DA Rachel, shared
how excited they were to receive training focused on Elena Aguilar’s (2013) book, The Art of
Coaching, and how they would like to implement her coaching model in their districts. DA
Tanya recalled how “even in my undergraduate work, there were instructional coaches in place
in various capacities and duration” and that her teacher education program included assignments
that required candidates to consider how they might work with an instructional coach. DA
Manuel summarized his training experiences with both roles:
In terms of— not specific to librarians, but I have received pretty extensive training on
different models of support and coaching. I attended an 8-day cognitive coaching
training. I've attended numerous coaching sessions throughout my career. My master's
thesis was on instructional coaching. I would say that I have received quite a bit of
training on coaching, but not the role of the teacher librarian as a professional developer

182
or someone that helps with teacher professional growth.
Dispositions. DA Alice noted, “It takes a certain personality and a certain skill set” to
serve as an instructional leader. All administrators discussed dispositions that they believe to be
essential to the role of an instructional leader, whether they serve in that role themselves or it is
fulfilled by an instructional coach or teacher librarian.
Administrators strongly believe that instructional leaders must maintain a goal-oriented
focus. It is imperative that they focus upon fulfilling the district’s mission and vision and
serving students. SA Jeanette summarized her view on this:
We believe very strongly if you don't believe in what it is we're trying to do here in
Jefferson USD, then you absolutely can't be a teacher leader. There's no— there's room
for discussion about the how we're going to do it, but not what we're going to do. Our
goals are very clear. If you don't believe we can do that and your role is pivotal, then you
probably need to find a different place to be.
Administrators appreciate how focused instructional coaches and teacher librarians can support
them in achieving the district’s mission and vision. As such, it is important for these individuals
to, as DA Jeanette declared, “know your district before you try to do anything other.”
Additionally, they must believe that students can learn and achieve the district’s instructional
goals. SA Leon described his concerns with this in implementing the CCSS ELA with his
teachers:
It's trying to get them [classroom teachers] to understand how the kids have to go deep
and they have to be able to do it by themselves. We're afraid to let go because we don't
think they can do it.
Though some of his site’s teachers have difficulty in believing their students can succeed, he

183
believes that they can and continually models a positive attitude about this to his staff.
Administrators discussed how important it is for instructional leaders to continually learn
and improve while on the job. SA Angela declared her passion for this:
I always make sure that if we do any kind of professional development, I am sitting right
there with them. If I'm not delivering it myself, I'm sitting right there with them learning
it …I'm learning it with them or before them.
SA Tomas similarly shared how he strives to remain current in the field:
I kind of need to get my feet wet and know how it goes. I kind of invite myself to come in
and do lessons and things like that and engage in a conversation with my teachers, just so
I know.
Regarding the need to continually improve, SA Leon offered his thoughts:
It sounds funny, but literally, I can still do stuff better. You can do this better, okay, even
when sometimes they're wrong, and you go okay and work on it and improve and find
ways to get better. You can always get better.
Self-motivation, the ability take charge of and follow through on tasks with little
direction, is valued by administrators. SA Joanna described how she appreciates that IC Julie is
“kind of a very self-motivated person. I kind of— we have a conversation, then she really goes
with it and we check in and it seems to work well.” SA Richard also noted the essential nature
of this disposition in connection with meeting instructional goals: “If you don't have somebody
that is a self-starter and they have that vision to be really involved in all areas of campus, then it's
hard to force that on somebody.”
Administrators shared that respectability is a quality that instructional leaders must
demonstrate. This is developed by listening to the needs and concerns of teachers and exercising

184
patience with them; being personable, approachable, flexible, and trustworthy; and modeling in
professional development what they expect to see in the classroom. DA Jeanette strongly
emphasized the importance of this disposition in an instructional leader:
You've got to really know how to teach and then you've got to know how to share that
with adults who may or may not want to work with you…We're looking for
someone…who is respected by their colleagues and has confidence to be able to stand up
in front of their colleagues, that's important.
Satisfaction. All administrators affirmed that they love working with K–12 students, are
motivated to do “what’s best for kids,” and find great satisfaction in making a positive difference
in their lives. SA Joanna simply stated, “I love working with kids and I love teaching.” SA
Michael expanded on this thought by explaining why he moved into administration: “I loved
teaching, and then I saw that I could have a bigger impact— the way I do things, I could have a
bigger impact as an administrator, so I moved in to administration.”
Administrators noted that they greatly value having another instructional leader inhouse who can continually encourage them in achieving this satisfaction. Speaking warmly
of IC Audrey, SA Angela shared:
This job, you can get lost in some of the negative pieces of the job. It can be very
discouraging…if I start feeling down and I'm starting to lose the luster that I always
have when I'm here, which it happens, I'm not going to lie, she brings that back out.
SA Leon similarly praised IC Lynn’s ability to keep him motivated:
With her, she keeps me motivated because she's— honestly, she's a cheerleader and
she keeps me motivated…she’s like, “Come on, we're making a difference, let's
go!” When I start to get down, it's like, “You're right, okay, let's go. We're good.”
Differences. There were two notable areas of difference across cases within the

185
themes of Challenge and Relationships that affect how administrators work with
instructional coaches and teacher librarians to provide instructional leadership.
Challenge. The greatest difference in challenges between Case One and Case Two is
evident in what inhibits the ability of administrators to distribute instructional leadership tasks to
instructional coaches and teacher librarians. This was evident in the categories of Evolving Role,
Ignorance, and Limitations. In Case One, the evolving role of the instructional coach requires
administrators to invest significant amounts of time in establishing and refining expectations,
conducting training, and implementing coaching models. The time required by instructional
coaches to be spent off-site in training or fulfilling other responsibilities was noted as a particular
area of concern in providing consistent instructional leadership. Additionally, limitations such as
teacher resistance, the need to manage multiple subject areas and initiatives, and working with
new teachers and classroom management were identified as potential barriers to the effective
implementation of embedded professional learning. In contrast, in Case Two, ignorance of the
instructional role of the teacher librarian prevents many administrators from viewing and fully
utilizing teacher librarians as instructional leaders. This has resulted in limitations unique to the
role of the teacher librarian: lack of administrative vision, leadership, support, and on-going
training specific to the role.
Relationships. How administrators view their relationship with their instructional
coaches or teacher librarians differed across cases, as seen in the categories of Extension,
Resource, and Support. In Case One, administrators consider their instructional coaches to be
extensions of themselves as instructional leaders. In Case Two, administrators view teacher
librarians as experts in research and the management of instructional materials whom they can
call upon as a resource. The types of instructional support administrators expect instructional
coaches and teacher librarians to provide to teachers also differed across cases. Administrators

186
in Case One expect their instructional coaches to continually work in-depth with teachers
through coaching models that include modeling, co-teaching, reflecting, and providing feedback.
They also expect instructional coaches to regularly examine data, implement instructional
strategies, and assist teachers in developing classroom management skills. In Case Two,
administrators expect teacher librarians to provide occasional resource-based support to teachers.
This might include access to instructional materials and technology resources, assistance with the
implementation of new curriculum and technology initiatives, and the teaching or co-teaching of
research lessons.
Summary
From the results of the within-case and cross-cases analyses I developed an assertion of the
meaning of the cases (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). Across cases, administrators expressed a datadriven need to provide embedded instructional support to teachers in the implementation of the
CCSS ELA but acknowledged that they are incapable of fulfilling this need by themselves. They
value having another instructional leader on site to provide this necessary support, one that
possesses particular dispositions and is able to encourage them in meeting their goals. Building
strong relationships and engaging in regular communication are considered essential to the
successful distribution of instructional leadership.
Administrators’ personal values influence their decisions to select and utilize
instructional coaches or teacher librarians to provide instructional leadership. Prior experiences
with either role have both positively and negatively impacted their ability to understand and
work with individuals in these roles. Consequently, instructional coaches are considered to be
extensions of administrators as instructional leaders while teacher librarians are considered to be
resources that can be called upon to provide occasional instructional support.

187
CHAPTER FIVE: CONCLUSION
Overview
The purpose of this collective case study was to develop an understanding of why
California K–12 public school administrators distribute instructional leadership responsibilities
to either instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how the two roles compare within the
context of the implementation of the CCSS ELA. This chapter provides a summary of the
study’s results with a discussion of the findings and their implications. It also outlines the
study’s delimitations and limitations and recommendations for future research.
Summary of Findings
In both Case One and Case Two, administrators acknowledged that they are incapable of
providing sufficient instructional leadership by themselves. They value having another
instructional leader on site to provide teachers with embedded instructional support, one that
possesses particular dispositions and is able to encourage them to meet their instructional goals.
Administrators’ personal values influence their decisions to select and utilize instructional
coaches or teacher librarians to provide instructional leadership. Prior experience with either
role has both positively and negatively impacted their ability to understand and work with
individuals in these roles.
Research Questions
1. Why do administrators select instructional coaches to help them provide instructional
leadership?
Administrators select instructional coaches to help them provide instructional leadership
in response to a need to assist teachers in implementing the CCSS ELA in order to improve
student achievement.

188
2. Why do administrators select teacher librarians to help them provide instructional
leadership?
Despite an expressed need to improve student literacy, administrators either do not select
or underutilize teacher librarians to help them provide instructional leadership in ELA. This is
due to a lack of knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of the teacher librarian.
3. How do administrators and instructional coaches work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?
Administrators consider instructional coaches to be extensions of themselves as
instructional leaders; they work as a team to achieve the administrator’s instructional vision by
providing professional learning via embedded instructional support. This support consists of the
administrator directing an instructional coach to work in-depth with teachers on the examination
of student data, implementation of instructional strategies, and classroom management via a
coaching model that includes modeling, co-teaching, reflection, and feedback. The intentional
building of relationships and regular communication between administrators, instructional
coaches, and classroom teachers contributes to successful embedded instructional support.
Limitations such as teacher resistance, the need to manage multiple subjects or initiatives, and
working with new teachers and classroom management were identified as potential barriers to
the instructional coach’s effective provision of support.
4. How do administrators and teacher librarians work together to provide professional
learning within daily instructional practice?
Lack of knowledge and understanding of the instructional role of the teacher librarian has
prevented many administrators from working closely together with their teacher librarians to
provide professional learning within daily instructional practice. Administrators generally view

189
teacher librarians as experts in research and the management of instructional materials whom
they can call upon to provide occasional instructional support to teachers. This support may
include access to instructional materials and technology resources, assistance with the
implementation of new curriculum and technology initiatives, and the teaching or co-teaching of
research lessons. This provision of support can be limited by a lack of administrative vision,
leadership, support, and on-going training for the role.
5. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional coaches’
instructional leadership roles?
The instructional coach position proves to be an evolving role within districts, one that
requires continual implementation and refinement of expectations, training, and evaluation
processes. Some districts utilize formal evaluation processes that allow an administrator to
specifically evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional coach’s instructional leadership role.
However, regular communication between administrators and instructional coaches is a common
method of informal evaluation in all settings.
6. How do administrators evaluate the effectiveness of the teacher librarians’ instructional
leadership roles?
Lack of knowledge and understanding of the teacher librarians’ instructional leadership
role inhibits administrators from evaluating the effectiveness of this role. Since none of the
districts’ formal evaluation processes are aligned to the current California standards for the
teacher librarian position, administrators are not able to specifically evaluate the effectiveness of
the teacher librarian’s instructional leadership role. Some administrators informally evaluate
teacher librarians via regular communication with them and the feedback provided by the
classroom teachers with whom they work.

190
Discussion
This study’s findings corroborate, extend, and diverge from the prior theoretical and
empirical research in the field.
Theoretical
This study’s findings corroborate the previous research on instructional leadership and
distributed leadership (Hallinger, 2005; Hallinger & Murphy, 2013; Spillane, 2006). Within the
context of the implementation of the CCSS ELA, administrators in both cases affirmed that they
need and want to provide strong instructional leadership. However, they acknowledged that they
do not possess the capacity to fulfill this role. This necessitates that they distribute instructional
leadership tasks to other school site leaders that possess particular skill sets and dedicated time to
focus upon engaging in curriculum and instructional improvements (Neumerski, 2013; Spillane
2006): instructional coaches and teacher librarians. These tasks primarily include the
implementation of a valued form of professional learning to achieve the school’s mission
(Hallinger & Murphy, 2013): embedded instructional support (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017).
Distributed leadership theory served as a lens for generating insights into how leadership
might be practiced more effectively within the implementation of the CCSS ELA in this study.
It provided a foundation for considering how the aspects of this situation enabled and constrained
leadership through the cooperative interactions of leaders and followers (Johnston, 2015;
Spillane, 2006; Tian et al., 2016). As seen in this study’s findings, the distribution of
instructional leadership tasks to instructional coaches or teacher librarians was heavily
influenced by administrators’ prior experiences with these roles. This also affected how well an
administrator was able to cooperatively work with an instructional coach or teacher librarian. A
mutually supportive relationship that was focused on achieving a common vision was found to

191
enable the successful distribution of instructional leadership. Intentional building of trust and
regular communication were considered essential to establishing mutually supportive
relationships. Limitations were found in both cases to constrain the effective provision of
embedded professional learning.
Empirical
In both cases, administrators noted that they consider embedded instructional support to
be the most effective form of professional learning (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017) and desire to
consistently provide this to their faculties.
Case one. The Case One findings corroborate much of the prior research on instructional
coaches, with two exceptions. The finding that the instructional coach position is an evolving
role within K–12 school districts confirms the research that there is no common definition,
model, or certification for instructional coaches (Neumerski, 2013). The finding that
instructional coaches are expected to serve as non-supervisory experts that provide personalized
individual support to teachers with the expressed purpose of encouraging sustained
implementation of new instructional behaviors was also confirmed (Galluci et al., 2010; Knight,
2007; Kretlow & Bartholomew, 2010). In addition, the finding that districts in Case One do not
require their instructional coaches to hold an advanced credential or degree above their basic
teaching credential but expect them to have knowledge of a variety of instructional practices and
possess certain skills and dispositions confirms previous research (Aguilar, 2013; Galluci et al.,
2010; Knight, 2007). Finally, several barriers to instructional coaching identified in the existing
research were confirmed in this study: teacher resistance, lack of time, and competing
responsibilities (Bean et al., 2010; Galluci et al., 2010; Lowenhaupt et al., 2014; Lynch &
Ferguson, 2010).

192
There were two areas in which the findings of Case One either extended or diverged from
the prior research on instructional coaching. First, the Case One findings serve to extend the
limited research that demonstrates why administrators value the instructional role of the
instructional coach (Selvaggi, 2016). Secondly, the Case One findings demonstrate that two
barriers to instructional coaching identified in prior research were not present in these settings:
limited support from administration and lack of training (Stock & Duncan, 2010). On the
contrary, administrators in Case One provided a high level of support and frequent training
opportunities for their instructional coaches.
Case two. The finding that administrators lack knowledge and understanding of the
instructional role of the teacher librarian and that they primarily learned about this role through
prior experience corroborates the previous research in the field (Church, 2008, 2010; Levitov,
2013; Shannon, 2012; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). The Case Two findings extend the prior
research by providing an in-depth understanding as to why administrators lack this knowledge
and understanding.
Implications
The results of this study have generated theoretical, empirical, and practical implications
for various stakeholders related to California’s K–12 public schools.
Theoretical
This study’s findings demonstrate that there is a need for administrators of California K–
12 public schools to distribute leadership to other leaders, especially when faced with a new
initiative. The implementation of the CCSS ELA requires major instructional shifts and new
curriculum, which in turn has necessitated large-scale professional learning efforts with
classroom teachers. Administrators agree that embedded instructional support provided by site-

193
based teacher leaders is the best form of professional learning. As such, school districts need to
make it a priority to employ site-based teacher leaders such as instructional coaches and teacher
librarians, even during lean budget years. However, district personnel should seek to make
meaningful, reflective hiring decisions when selecting such teacher leaders to meet specific
needs. As evidenced in this study, instructional coaches and teacher librarians were not
intentionally selected by the participating districts to implement the CCSS ELA. Instead, the
roles of existing personnel were slowly adapted or occasionally called upon to provide the
necessary support.
To minimize limitations that can inhibit the effective provision of embedded instructional
support, school districts also need to set the standard for how instructional leadership will be
distributed at the site level. Since an administrator’s prior experience impacts how he or she will
work with an individual in this role, districts must seek to employ district-level administrators
that have prior experience working as a site-level instructional coach or teacher librarian who can
develop a vision and provide appropriate support for the population and the site-based
administrators and teachers with whom they work. This district-level support should include (a)
organizing the instructional coach and teacher librarian populations within the district’s divisions
of Educational Services, Curriculum and Instruction, or Professional Development; (b)
establishing and maintaining job descriptions and formal evaluation processes that are aligned to
current professional standards; (c) clearly identifying within the district’s LCAP how the
population will serve as instructional leaders; and (d) providing on-going specialized
professional learning opportunities for the population.
In addition, districts and organizations that prepare instructional coaches and teacher
librarians for their positions need to focus upon teaching trainees how to work with

194
administrators in providing effective instructional leadership. Trainees should be taught the
importance of developing a mutually supportive relationship with an administrator. Strategies to
accomplish this include: (a) learning the administrator’s values by inquiring about his or her
professional experience and the dispositions he or she values in leadership; (b) building trust
with the administrator by striving to develop those dispositions in himself or herself; (c) learning
the administrator’s instructional vision and continually supporting him or her in achieving it; and
(d) engaging in regular communication with the administrator.
Trainees should also be taught the importance of keeping a data-driven mindset by
continually reviewing the district and school mission statements, LCAP and SPSA goals, and
student achievement data. They should learn to connect all instructional activities to these
sources and work on incorporating research-based professional learning standards and strategies
such as the CDE’s Quality Professional Learning Standards into their daily practice. Finally,
trainees should be advised to keep a servant-minded attitude in working with administrators and
classroom teachers.
Empirical
To minimize limitations that can inhibit the effective provision of embedded instructional
support in ELA, district administrators that oversee instructional coaches and teacher librarians
should regularly consult with the professional organizations that develop standards and provide
specialized professional development and on-going support for these populations. These
organizations include the California School Library Association, American Association of
School Librarians, International Literacy Association, and International Society for Technology
in Education.
Since administrators are under pressure to increase student achievement in a high-stakes

195
testing environment, there is a tendency for districts to reduce or eliminate funding for positions
that do not directly impact student achievement. Thus, there is a need to establish a clear causal
relationship between the work of instructional coaches or teacher librarians and student
achievement in ELA.
Practical
This study presents practical implications for a variety of stakeholders.
Administrators. Administrators should carefully consider the needs of their schools
when choosing between a teacher librarian and an instructional coach. If the priority is to
improve student achievement in ELA or student literacy across all subject areas, a credentialed
teacher librarian might be a better choice considering that he or she is a certified expert in
collaborating with teachers to integrate 21st century skills and multiple literacies into the
curriculum, which closely aligns to the CCSS ELA. Therefore, when seeking to distribute
instructional leadership to a site-based teacher leader, it would be wise to explore either hiring or
fully utilizing a teacher librarian currently employed at the site. Fully utilizing a teacher librarian
to provide embedded professional learning in ELA may eliminate the need for districts to employ
additional personnel such as part- or full-time ELA instructional coaches, curriculum specialists,
or teachers on special assignment.
Though the teacher librarian provides added value to a school site by administering the
school’s library program, his or her ability to fully engage in the school’s instructional role is
restricted by the absence of adequate library support personnel. When support personnel are
missing, the teacher librarian must default to managing the library’s physical space rather than
engaging in the instructional program. Therefore, administrators must ensure that appropriate
classified personnel are in place to take care of the site library program’s daily operational tasks

196
so that the teacher librarian can focus primarily upon the school’s instructional program.
Administrators can review the CCTC’s 2017 edition of The Administrator’s Assignment Manual
and the MSLS for guidance in staffing the school library.
California Department of Education. As detailed in Chapter Two, it is currently
impossible to determine how many instructional coaches are employed in California’s public
schools. The district administrators in Case One reported that they use the following CALPADS
job classification categories to report their instructional coach staff assignments: Other
Certificated Non-Instructional Assignment, Resource Teacher, and Other Instructional Support.
The ability to obtain accurate statistics on the number of instructional coaches statewide would
demonstrate how great the need is for distributed leadership. As such, the CDE should establish
a CALPADS job classification code that is specific to the role of an instructional coach.
California Commission on Teaching Credentialing. The evolving role of the
instructional coach requires the California public school districts in this study to invest a
significant amount of time and money in establishing and refining expectations, conducting
training, and implementing coaching models. These districts require their instructional coaches
to hold only a basic teaching credential and 3–5 years of classroom teaching experience, yet
expect them to have knowledge of and be able to work with multiple subject areas and
initiatives, implement instructional and classroom management strategies, and analyze student
data. Instructional coaches that meet only the basic job requirements may not yet possess or
have mastered this knowledge, resulting in a need to provide them with a high level of training
and support. This can negatively impact the amount of time they are able to spend working
directly with teachers.
Like the teacher librarian position, the CCTC should consider establishing an advanced

197
credential for the instructional coach position that clearly outlines the expectations for the role.
Requiring individuals to complete a credential preparation program outside of the school district
would reduce the financial and temporal burdens on districts to establish expectations for the role
and train these individuals. Instructional coaches would then enter the profession better prepared
and able to begin working with site administrators to provide strong instructional leadership to
their teachers on their first day of employment. Holding an advanced credential might also
change teachers’ perceptions of instructional coaches to that of an instructional expert rather than
a peer, thus reducing resistance to working with individuals in the role.
Given that the administrators in this study learned about the roles of instructional coaches
and teacher librarians primarily through prior experience, the CCTC should also consider
incorporating specific language about these roles into the California Professional Standards for
Education Leaders. This would then require administrative preparation programs to provide
specific learning experiences focused on how to effectively distribute leadership to individuals in
these roles.
Professional development providers. Since many administrators hold negative views
of the teacher librarian position due to prior experience with more “traditional” teacher
librarians, there is a need to assist these individuals in developing into effective instructional
leaders that are current in the field. School library professional organizations and teacher
librarian preparation programs need to design and provide professional learning experiences
specific to this population. Such learning experiences should include instruction in the current
standards in the fields of school librarianship and educational technology and methods for
advocating for and marketing the role of the teacher librarian.
Teacher librarians. Teacher librarians currently employed in California schools need to

198
be cognizant that an administrator’s view of the teacher librarian position will be primarily
shaped by his or her experience with them. As such, they must strive to establish a mutually
supportive relationship with their administrators. In order to provide a positive model of the
teacher librarian profession and function as an effective instructional leader, they must also strive
to remain current in the field and continually work toward fulfilling the MSLS Program Standard
of delivering at least 20 hours of instruction per week.
Delimitations and Limitations
The delimitations for this study addressed the selection of the settings and participants.
The context for this study was comprehensive K–12 California public school districts in which
instructional coaches or teacher librarians were employed at individual school sites. I selected
California public school districts as the context since they are governed by California Education
Code and held accountable for instructing students according to content standards adopted by the
California State Board of Education. I sought to identify school districts that employ multiple
instructional coaches or teacher librarians as they were more likely to have established job
descriptions, training procedures, and evaluation documents established for these roles. To
generate similar results within and across Case One and Case Two, I worked with each setting’s
district administrator of instructional coaches or teacher librarians to identify a “typical case.” A
typical case illustrated what the district administrator considered to be “normal” or “average” in
regard to the working relationship between a site administrator and instructional coach or teacher
librarian within the district.
Limitations included generalizability of results beyond the participants in this study (Yin,
2014) due to factors related to school site demographics and participant availability and
knowledge. Several factors related to district settings may have limited the comparison of

199
administrators’ perspectives. First, none of the districts specifically hired instructional coaches
or teacher librarians to assist with the implementation of the CCSS ELA. They simply used the
personnel that were already in place prior to the publication of the standards. Secondly, not all
settings in this study employed full-time site-based instructional coaches or teacher librarians.
There was one half-time instructional coach participant and one half-time teacher librarian
participant in each case. Third, each case included settings of varying levels. Case One included
two elementary sites and one middle school site and Case Two included two high school sites
and one elementary school site. Fourth, the working relationship between the site administrators
and instructional coaches or teacher librarians varied in length from less than one year to five
years. Fifth, student population varied across districts in each case, resulting in differing
numbers of instructional coaches and teacher librarians.
School site demographics and participant availability and knowledge presented several
limitations that may have also affected administrators’ perspectives. Given the small population
of teacher librarians in California, it was difficult to locate school districts that employed teacher
librarians at each school site and that did not also employ site-based instructional coaches. This
also limited my ability to locate settings in different regions California and settings in which I
had no prior knowledge of or experience with teacher librarians currently employed in those
settings. When contacting potential settings, several administrators of teacher librarians either
declined to participate or referred me to other administrators, citing lack of knowledge or
experience with the role. Though I attempted to select districts that employed ELA-only
instructional coaches, I found that job descriptions had changed or that the ELA instructional
coaches had been directed to work with other subject areas. Finally, though I requested to work
with a “typical case” in each district, I found that I ended up being referred to an ideal case in

200
many of the settings. I learned this during interviews when several site-based participants
informed me that they probably represented the desired working relationship between an
administrator and instructional coach or teacher librarian in their district.
Recommendations for Future Research
Several recommendations and directions for future research can be derived from this
study. First, since limitations may have affected the comparison of administrator perspective
across cases, it would be beneficial to replicate this collective case study with only two settings
of similar populations of students with the following characteristics:
(a) One district that primarily employs full-time site-based instructional coaches and one that
primarily employs full-time site-based teacher librarians to provide embedded
instructional support in ELA. This population is under the direction of a district
administrator who has prior experience serving as an instructional coach. The district has
a job description and formal evaluation process specialized for instructional coaches.
(b) One district that primarily employs and fully utilizes full-time site-based teacher
librarians to provide embedded instructional support in ELA. This population is under the
direction of a district administrator who has prior experience serving as a teacher
librarian. The district has a job description and formal evaluation process specialized for
teacher librarians and aligned to the current standards of the profession.
Participants would include the district administrator and all site administrators and the
instructional coaches and teacher librarians with whom they work in the district. Topics to
explore would include the examination of the relationship between site administrators and
instructional coaches and teacher librarians, comparison of these relationships across sites within
each district across each case, and determination of what is considered a “typical case.”

201
Additional areas to explore might include the examination of how the district supports their
population of instructional coaches or teacher librarians and how district expectations of the roles
are implemented at school sites.
A related area for future study might consist of a case study of a district that employs
both site level instructional coaches and teacher librarians to explore and compare how these
personnel are being utilized as instructional leaders.
Another direction for future study would include cases studies to examine the barriers or
limitations that inhibit instructional coaches and teacher librarians from effectively providing
instructional leadership. Topics to explore might focus upon:
•

Examining the perspective of instructional coaches and teacher librarians – to what
degree are they able to fully engage in instructional leadership? What barriers or
limitations prevent them from providing a high level of embedded instructional support to
classroom teachers? How can these barriers or limitations be minimized?

•

Examining the perspective of classroom teachers regarding the provision of instructional
leadership by instructional coaches and teacher librarians. What are the factors that
contribute to teacher resistance?
Finally, a quantitative study is needed to determine if there is a clear causal relationship

between the work of instructional coaches or teacher librarians and student achievement on the
Smarter Balanced ELA tests.
Summary
This collective case study fills a gap in the research by providing an in-depth
understanding of how the roles of the instructional coach and teacher librarian compare in
providing instructional leadership in ELA from the administrator’s perspective. The results

202
demonstrate why it appears that administrators value instructional coaches over teacher
librarians. Administrators’ prior experience with either role greatly affects their decisions to
select and distribute instructional leadership tasks to instructional coaches or teacher librarians.
Instructional coaches are considered to be extensions of administrators as instructional leaders in
ELA while teacher librarians are considered to be resources that can be called upon to provide
occasional instructional support in ELA. The results also demonstrate that the effective
distribution of instructional leadership occurs within a mutually supportive relationship focused
on achieving a common vision.