THE USE OF REFLECTIVE QUESTIONING AS A PEER COACHING STRATEGY IN AN
ASYNCHRONOUS ONLINE COGNITIVE APPRENTICESHIP

By
Jennifer Ashley Scott Brown

The cognitive apprenticeship framework melds situated, authentic learning with social
learning theory. The learning strategies included in a cognitive apprenticeship are modeling,
coaching, scaffolding, articulation, reflection, and exploration. Previous research indicates that
the most beneficial strategy for the learner is coaching, and is also the most time-consuming
strategy for the instructor. However, no previous research has been conducted to determine
which coaching strategies can be utilized in order to lessen the burden on the instructor, while
being beneficial to the learner.
The purpose of this study was to explore the use of guided reflective questions as a
strategy for enhancing cognitive presence in peer dyad groups. These dyads were created in
order to provide a platform for peer coaching in an online, asynchronous professional
development course designed using the cognitive apprenticeship framework for the professional
development of professional programming librarians and paraprofessional programmers.
The current study found a significant difference in cognitive presence levels between the
control and treatment groups, and no significant difference in learning outcomes between the two
groups. Additionally, the study highlighted the challenges faced by participants, such as lack of
time to devote to professional development and lack of peer engagement from their peer coach.
Participants also valued the fresh perspectives that they experienced during peer interactions and
the availability of resources that were provided during the course. Discussion of the results
highlights constraints, limitations, challenges, and positive aspects of participation in an

iv

asynchronous online cognitive apprenticeship. Discussion of the results also sheds light on
questions worthy of future research in order to develop best practices for the use of cognitive
apprenticeships in professional development and online contexts.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION & LITERATURE REVIEW
Academic and school libraries have required the use of instructional design strategies and
pedagogy to develop information literacy instruction in primary and secondary schools (school
librarians) and higher education (academic libraries). This is a natural relationship as librarians
are seen as educators, and the knowledge of instructional methods is listed in the profession’s
core competencies (ALA, 2009). The main focus of this integration has been in academic
(Dewald, 2000; Thompkins, 2016) and school libraries (Cooper & Bray, 2011; Turner &
Naumer, 1983) as these librarians are responsible for providing information literacy and 21st
century skills instruction directly to students (AASL, 2007; ACRL, 2016).
When it comes to instruction, public libraries have been neglected, even though the
primary focus of public libraries is to provide access to information and promote lifelong
learning (IFLA, 2012). Libraries accomplish this by providing programming from preschool
storytimes, where the focus is early literacy for both children and caregivers, to learning how to
knit, building a website, and even using 3-D printers (ALA, 2016). Accredited library and
information science programs are not required to provide a dedicated course in instructional
design or pedagogy in their core curriculum (ALA, 2015). Additionally, unlike school and
academic libraries, public librarians are not always the one responsible for designing,
developing, and implementing programs. Oftentimes paraprofessional staff with varying
education backgrounds, who do not possess the necessary skills, are creating and delivering
programs (Brown & Stefaniak, 2016).
While accredited library and information science programs have a core curriculum that
must be covered by all ALA accredited programs, many librarians have found that the skills they

2

need to adequately perform their job, have been acquired on the job or through professional
development opportunities (Clyde, 2005; Julien & Genuis, 2011; Sullivan, 1997). Like many
other professions, professional development in the digital age, for librarians and library
paraprofessionals typically takes the form of webinars provided by professional organizations,
online, asynchronous courses that offer continuing education credits, and through participation in
face to face conferences (Martin, Johnston, Guilmartin, & Williams, 2015).
Brown and Stefaniak (2016) provided training opportunities to paraprofessionals who are
responsible for designing, developing, and implementing storytimes for preschool aged children
using the Every Child Ready to Read curriculum (Association for Library Service to Children
and Public Library Association, 2011) that focuses on providing educational opportunities both
for the children enrolled in the program and their parents. The goal of the Every Child Ready to
Read curriculum is to provide children with the opportunity to gain and practice early literacy
skills that are necessary for acquiring the ability to learning how to read. Due to the fact that
parents and caregivers are the child’s first teacher, the primary goal of the program is to educate
parents and caregivers about early literacy, and model how they can practice early literacy skills
with their children at home. It is important to note that the paraprofessionals in the Brown and
Stefaniak (2016) study, who were responsible for developing these storytime programs had a
wide range of educational backgrounds, ranging from former teachers, to zero experience in
developing educational programs. The authors utilized a cognitive apprenticeship approach to
developing the necessary storytime programming skills and saw an increase in confidence in
participants.
Extensive research has been conducted on the benefits of coaching, mentoring, and
guiding individuals in many different environments (Allen, 2013; Anstey & Clarke, 2010; Elder

3

& Padover, 2011; Gallwey, 1972; Gallwey, 2001; Passmore & Fillery-Travis, 2011; Wong &
Nicotera, 2003). While much of the research into coaching and mentoring are not empirical,
however, there is qualitative and anecdotal evidence for the benefit of coaching and/or mentoring
individuals; for example, increased confidence (Brown & Stefaniak, 2016) and self-efficacy
(Costa & Garmston, 1989; Costa & Garmston, 1994; Edwards & Newton, 1995; Ross, 1992).
Additionally, research into coaching teachers has found that teachers who are coached are mor e
likely to implement changes than teachers who do not participate in any kind of coaching
(Garmston, Linder, & Whitaker, 1993; Showers, 1992).
Brown and Stefaniak (2016) developed a cognitive apprenticeship that pairs an expert
and a novice together to demonstrate the cognitive processes necessary to design a meaningful
program based on the ECRR curriculum, and to practice and acquire the necessary skills to
accomplish this goal on their own. While the focus of this study was on providing professional
development and guidance for paraprofessionals, it is important to note that professional
librarians often find themselves in similar situations, not knowing how to design, develop, and
implement meaningful programming for public library patrons (Brown & Stefaniak, 2016).
Additionally, with the increased usage of online, asynchronous, distance education,
comes the problem of interaction between students and their peers, and students and their
teachers. Not only is interaction in general a concern, but specifically how to create an
environment conducive to interaction that promotes understanding and critical thinking (Akyol
& Garrison, 2011; Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2010; Garrison, and Anderson, & Archer,
1999). Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (1999) propose a learning environment that utilizes
strategies to promote teacher presence, cognitive presence, and social presence to enhance the
learner’s experience and to promote higher levels of understanding and application. This paper is

4

particularly concerned with cognitive presence, as it measures the learner’s understanding
through conversational interactions with peers and the instructor. Garrison et al. (2001)
developed a tool to guide the process of coding discussion board posts and conversations to
measure the level of cognitive presence. Cognitive presence ranges from a triggering event in
which the learner is simply clarifying information they have received, to resolution in which the
learner has already identified a problem, collected data or information to formulate a possible
solution, and finally to test the solution. Not only did Garrison et al. (2001) identify the various
levels of cognitive presence, but identified indicators for each level of cognitive presence to
assist in coding discussion board posts for analysis.
Statement of the Problem
Cognitive apprenticeships have been found to combine aspects of cognitivism,
behaviorism, constructivism, social learning theory, and situated learning theory to provide a
robust model for demonstrating and transferring cognitive and problem-solving skills from an
expert to a novice. The model consists of a number of strategies that include modeling,
scaffolding, coaching, reflection, articulation, and exploration.
Modeling is a strategy in which the expert demonstrates a skill such as solving a
particular problem while verbally expressing the cognitive processes taken in order to solve the
problem or perform the procedure. This strategy is utilized in order for the learner to develop a
mental model to refer back to when presented with a similar problem (Bandura, 1971; Jonassen,
1999). After the skill is demonstrated by the expert, the goal is for the learner to practice a
similar skill on his or her own. Initially the task should be more difficult than the learner’s
current ability, so the instructor is able to utilize scaffolding to provide hints or prompts directing
the learner to think about certain aspects of the problem that is being solved (Vygotsky, 1986;

5

Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). As the learner becomes more experienced, the scaffolding will
fade away until the learner is able to perform on his or her own.
Coaching coincides with scaffolding as a strategy to encourage and direct learners toward
a solution and to provide feedback. Immediate and meaningful feedback is essential for ensuring
learners are moving in the right direction, understanding the material and do not have
misconceptions. Coaching in the form of feedback may occur when the learner approaches the
expert with clarifying questions, or the expert notices something about the learner’s performance
and provides immediate feedback, giving the learner new direction (Hattie & Timperley, 2007).
Reflection is the process the learner takes to compare his or her product with that of the
expert. During the reflective process, the learner uses the expert’s process as a model and
determines what they did the same, and what could have been done differently. This helps the
learner determine whether or not they have mastered the content, and where there may be
knowledge gaps that they can seek the expert or peers for coaching (Brown, Collins, & Duguid,
1989; Collins, Brown & Newman, 1987; Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1991; Schön, 1987).
Articulation occurs when the learner explains their thought process and justification for the
solution they developed to the problem. This allows the expert to determine if there are any gaps
or knowledge misconceptions and is used to evaluate the learner’s process for understanding
(Brown et al., 1989).
Exploration is a strategy that allows learners to explore a variety of information,
resources, and various strategies for solving a problem. The learner may seek other models or
explanations from peers or other information sources. At the beginning of the cognitive
apprenticeship, the expert should provide the learner with trusted sources for exploration to
ensure misconceptions do not form. As the learner becomes more experienced and knows what

6

kind of information to seek, the learner should be encouraged to conduct independent exploration
to develop solutions to problems (Collins, Bown, & Newman, 1987; Collins & Kapur, 2006).
Much of the research on cognitive apprenticeship have explored one or two strategies
associated with the cognitive apprenticeship model. However, there have been a few studies
focusing on the cognitive apprenticeship model as a whole, utilizing all of the strategies. These
holistic studies have indicated that while cognitive apprenticeships provide the novice with
insight into how the expert thinks and solves problems, the process is very time consuming,
especially in regard to coaching individuals (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016; Woolley & Jarvis,
2007). This time dedication, makes it difficult to justify the use of a cognitive apprenticeship,
especially when the instructor, or expert, has other job responsibilities. Additionally, the time
commitment required to mentor individuals makes it difficult to implement a cognitive
apprenticeship for a large number of learners. The strategy that has been associated with costing
the most amount of time is the one on one relationship between the expert and the novice. If the
expert is working with more than one novice at a time, the expert may have difficulty with time
management, especially when juggling other responsibilities (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016;
Woolley & Jarvis, 2007). One possible solution, as proposed by the author of this paper, is the
use of peer coaching to decrease the work load of the instructor.
While there has been extensive research on some aspects of these strategies, there is a
paucity of research pertaining to specific strategies used to coach individuals. There is a
proliferation of literature defining coaching, coaching models, and scenarios in which coaching
should be utilized, however, there is a lack of literature on specific strategies related to how to
coach an individual, let alone, how to successfully incorporate peer coaching into an online,
asynchronous learning environment.

7

Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study was to determine whether providing learners with a list of
reflective questions will assist learners in coaching one another. Participants were enrolled in a
professional development course on the topic of designing, developing, and implementing a
library program for public libraries. The instruction provided was designed using the cognitive
apprenticeship model, utilizing peer coaching instead of one on one, expert-novice coaching
between the instructor and the learner in an attempt to lessen the work load of the instructor. In
the case of this study, coaching took the form of peer coaching, in which individuals in the
coaching relationship were equals. The intent of the study was to determine whether learners
who were given a list of suggested reflective questions to ask each other will achieve greater
cognitive presence, higher levels of critical thinking, and design and develop a higher quality
product at the end of the course, as opposed to learners who are not given a list of suggested
reflective questions to ask their peers.
The study attempted to answer the following questions:
1. What is the level of cognitive presence in discussion board posts between peer dyads that
received the guided reflective questions (treatment) and the peer dyads that did not
receive the guided reflective questions (control)?
2. What difference exists in learner outcomes between the treatment and control groups?
3. What challenges do learners experience when participating in peer coaching?
4. What are learner’s perceptions regarding the utilization of peer coaching in an online,
asynchronous, cognitive apprenticeship for professional development?
5. What types of questions do peer coaches ask while participating in an online
asynchronous cognitive apprenticeship?

8

Significance of Study
This research found many significant implications for the future design of professional
development courses for library programmers, specifically in online learning environments.
These findings support the fact that cognitive apprenticeship can be utilized for the instruction of
a large number of library programmers, if the proper strategies are in place. This is beneficial for
professional development courses offered by professional organizations in place of webinars that
have little interaction between the presenter and the participant. Results from this study provide
implications for the use of peer coaching strategies in large professional development courses,
specifically for library staff, in an attempt to lessen the burden on the expert leading the course,
by placing the responsibility of coaching on peers enrolled in the course. While the use of peer
coaching has not been studied in a library setting for professional development, the current study
provides insights into the benefits of peer coaching for programming staff, both professional
librarians and paraprofessionals.
There are further implications for the sociology aspect of cognitive apprenticeships.
These implications include the fact that learners not only need to interact with the instructor, but
their peers. Additional research into the sociology of social learning and pertinent learning
strategies can be conducted to inform best practices for incorporating sociological learning
strategies not in cognitive apprenticeships, including what format learners prefer to interact with
each other.
The most significant finding of this study has to do with the use of peer coaching a
substitute for expert-novice coaching. Not only does peer coaching lessen the time burden on the
instructor, but changes the relationship between the relationship between the expert and novice
during the cognitive apprenticeship, placing a higher emphasis on the interactions between the
expert and novice during the modeling stage, and facilitating interactions between peers during

9

the coaching, scaffolding, reflection, and articulation components of the cognitive
apprenticeship. The use of peer coaching and reflective questions not only provides opportunity
for peers to learn from one another, but in an online learning environment, allows for five out of
six of the strategies outlined by Collins et al. (1987) to occur simultaneously.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The following literature review explores and describes the theoretical context of
cognitive apprenticeships, the use of cognitive apprenticeships as an instructional model, the use
of coaching in professional development, the importance of interaction in a community of
inquiry, and how to measure cognitive presence in online discussions using a community of
inquiry data collection tool.
Theoretical Context
The proposed research study was theoretically informed by cognitive learning theory,
social learning theory, and situated learning theory.
Cognitive Learning Theory. Cognitivism was developed in response to behaviorism.
Unlike behaviorism, cognitivism is concerned with the internal processes and structure of
memory and how it works to assist in learning (Burton, Moor, & Magliara, 1996; Ertmer &
Newby, 2013; Tennyson & Morrison, 2000). For cognitivists, learning occurs when the brain
processes information from the environment (or instruction) in the working memory and
transfers the information to long-term memory where it is stored for later retrieval (Ertmer &
Newby, 2013; Tennyson & Morrison, 2000; Winn & Snyder, 1996). By imposing structure and
organization of information, it can be easily remembered when needed (Winn & Snyder, 1996).
Essentially the cognitivist recognizes the stimulus-response behavior associated with
behaviorism, but cognitivists want to understand how instructional and generative strategies

10

assist the learner in remembering what response goes with each stimulus. Cognitivism also
recognizes that there are other internal processes that may impact an individual’s ability to learn
such as motivation (Tennyson & Morrison, 2000), prior knowledge and experiences, whether or
not the learning is meaningful (van Merrienboer & Sweller, 2005), and the learner’s interaction
with the content, as the learner plays an active role in the process of learning (Ertmer & Newby,
2013).
The theory of cognitivism is an umbrella theory that contains many ‘sub theories’. For
example, communication theory looks at how we process information as it is input through the
auditory and visual channels (Richey, Klein, & Tracey, 2011). Schema theory looks at the
organization of information within memory and strategies for building associations, and later
accessing the information (Anderson, 1984). Schema theory believes knowledge is organized
through a series of associations so that it can be recalled easily (Ertmer & Newby, 2013;
Tennyson & Morrison, 2000). These associations are called schema. Schema can either be newly
created (assimilated) or existing schema can be modified to include new information
(accommodation) (Morrison, Ross, Kalman, & Kemp, 2011). Elaboration theory is concerned
with the organization of instruction from simple to complex, and by incorporating it within a
meaningful context (Reigeluth & Stein, 1983). This meaningful context helps the learner make
associations with prior knowledge and experience, thereby building on preexisting schema that
make for a more organized memory, and easier recall. Cognitive load theory studies how much
information and/or processes can be contained in working memory before working memory is
overwhelmed and becomes inefficient (van Merrienboer & Sweller, 2005). This theory informs
strategies that can be utilized in order to reduce cognitive load and make for a more efficient
learning experience.

11

Instruction based on cognitivism lends itself well to more complex learning. Learners
who are taught using good design from a cognitivist perspective can reason and solve welldefined problems, or problems that typically have a correct answer. Ill-defined problems lend
themselves well to instruction created from a constructivist perspective (Ertmer & Newby, 2013;
Jonassen, 1999). Cognitive instruction may be used for learners who have enough prior
knowledge and experience to be able to make associations between multiple concepts or schema.
They are able to see patterns, begin to critically think about an issue and be able to start problem
solving.
Social Learning Theory. Bandura (1971) bridged the gap between behavioral and
cognitive psychology by determining strategies for modeling behaviors. He believed that learners
learn best when learning from an expert, being able to witness an expert’s behavior and
recreating the behavior when given a similar stimulus. Bandura termed his theory as social
learning because he did not believe learning could occur without the social interaction between
the novice and the expert.
Bandura (1971) further found that students who were able to observe an experts’
behavior from start to finish were able to create a mental model of this behavior. This model
could then be internalized and stored in long term memory and then recalled when presented
with a similar situation that required the same behaviors (Bandura & Schunk, 1981). In addition,
through studying the interactions between the expert modeler and the novice learner, Bandura
(1977) discovered that the internal processes that the expert model is thinking about when
demonstrating the intended behavior must be expressed or else the learner will not know the
rationale for the behavior and cannot make the connection between the scenario, variables, or
other defining attributes of recognizing when the learned behavior should be used.

12

Research on modeling continues to grow from Bandura’s social learning theory. The
relationship between witnessing a behavior, understanding the cognitive processes behi nd the
behavior, and learning directly from an expert are the basis of Brown, Collins, and Duguid’s
(1989) cognitive apprenticeship model. Collins, Brown, and Holum (1991) go so far as to say
that modeling is the most important strategy of the apprenticeship. If an appropriate expert is not
chosen, and does not bring attention to the cognitive processes, and necessary steps, content, or
strategies associated with the content and problem solving, then misconceptions may arise and
create an inaccurate mental model.
Wood, Bruner and Ross (1976) acknowledged the social nature of learning in a paper
outlining how tutoring can help children with problem solving. In their article, the authors coin
the term scaffolding, which is the process by which a learner is given help from an expert in
order to complete a task. The authors suggest that the expert take the role of directing the learner
toward the solution, demonstrating how to reach the solution, and the expert or “adult
‘controlling’ those elements of the task that are initially beyond the learner’s capacity” (p. 90).
Vygotsky (1986) developed a similar theory decades before in revolution plagued Russia.
Like many of his successors, Lev Vygotsky also recognized the importance of social
interaction for learning; however, his research did not leave Russia until decades later, due to the
politics of the time. Vygotsky (1986) believed much like Bandura (1971) and Wood, Bruner, and
Ross (1976) that learning begins as a social activity and through rehearsal becomes internalized
and stored in long term memory to be recalled when similar problems or situations occur.
Vygotsky (1986) is most famous for his development of the zone of proximal
development (ZPD). ZPD is a zone in which a learner is given a task that is too difficult to
accomplish on his or her own. However, if the learner is paired with an individual who has

13

already mastered the task, who takes the time to assist and lead the learner, then the learner is
able to complete the task with assistance. This pairing of peers, one being more experienced, one
being less experienced is the basis for Showers’ (1984) peer coaching model which will be
discussed in greater detail throughout this paper.
Situated Learning Theory. During the 1980s and 1990s instructional research began
focusing on why it is difficult for students to learn in traditional classrooms. Researchers began
theorizing that the cause of the lack of learning and retention from traditional instruction was
because concepts and principles were being taught out of context. For example, learning the
dictionary definition of a word is not as meaningful as learning the word in context and
constructing meaning through experience. If the learning is not meaningful then the schemas and
cognitive associations are not as strong, and the information is not organized, internalized, and
stored in long term memory to be recalled later (Brown et al., 1989; Collins et al., 1991;
Henning, 2004; Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Lave & Wenger (1991) began to look at learning from an anthropological and social
perspective by studying cultures that still utilize apprenticeships to teach skills and problem
solving such as tailor shops. In the mid to late 1970s, Lave (1996) studied a tailor shop in Liberia
that housed 250 individuals, a mixture of apprentices and masters. During this time Lave sought
to determine the social and beneficial aspects of teaching a skill through an apprenticeship as
opposed to a more formal and structured teaching environment such as classroom teaching. As
Lave reflected on her experience, she recognized that learning occurs when the learner
participates in his or her environment, which is a stark contrast to the state of affairs in education
at the time. Through participation, the learner interacts with peers, masters, and their
environment. By doing so, they construct their own personal meaning from the experience.

14

Becoming a participant within the community can be translated to a classroom setting by
providing opportunities and experiences that situate learning content, concepts, and principles in
the environment in which those skills will be utilized in the real world (Lave & Wenger, 1991;
Brown et al., 1989; Collins et al., 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991). For example, if the goal of math
instruction is to be used to determine the distance between the sun and Jupiter, then the math
should be taught within that context so the learner can construct meaning and make the
appropriate associations between math and science and better able to recall the concepts and
principles when solving problems in that context.
Cognitive Apprenticeships
Humans have been learning from one another for millennia. When the first person
discovered how to create fire, his or her peers learned the process through interacting with the
discoverer. During the middle ages, many professions such as blacksmithing, masonry and even
medicine and law were taught through the use of an apprenticeship. An apprentice would live
and immerse himself in a guild where he would learn his craft. These apprentices learned from
an expert or more advanced apprentice who would often provide the learner will small tasks to
complete projects until they mastered those skills. Once skills were mastered, the expert would
allow the learner more and more responsibility until they were able to complete the entire task or
project on his or her own with no supervision. As the apprentice was learning the skill, the
relationship was typically a one-to-one relationship between the expert and the apprentice. The
apprentice also had the ability to learn from his apprentice peers that lived at the guild that may
be more advanced.
The cognitive apprenticeship model was designed with this concept in mind; however,
the goal is not to teach a craft, but complex procedures or content, and problem solving. The idea
is to not only show learners how to accomplish something, but to explain how the expert

15

developed a solution within the context of the environment in which the learner will encounter
similar problems (Collins et al., 1991).
Due to the emphasis placed on the interactions between the expert and the learner, and
the learner and his peers, the cognitive apprenticeship model is embedded in social learning
theory (Bandura, 1971, 1977, 1991; Bandura & Schunk, 1981) and sociocultural learning theory
(Vygotsky, 1986). The placement of the learning in an authentic context is informed by situated
learning theory (Lave & Wenger, 1991). While cognitive apprenticeships are heavily rooted in
learning theories, there is little research in how to apply the model to large groups. The majority
of research that have utilized cognitive apprenticeships have utilized groups consisting of less
than 30 participants (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 1016; Enkenberg, 1994; Jarvela, 1995; Liu,
2005). However, there are many situations such as professional development classes, large
introductory university classes, and Massive Open Online Classes (MOOCs) that far exceed 30
participants. The question then becomes whether or not the cognitive apprenticeship model can
be utilized for large groups with the assistance of online technology, and strategies such as peer
coaching to lessen the work load for the instructor, or if cognitive apprenticeships are better for
smaller groups.
Research on Cognitive Apprenticeships
Following the creation of the cognitive apprenticeship model, researchers began utilizing
the six components in design research, primarily in K-12 (Enkenberg, 1994; Jarvela, 1995;
Jarvela, Bonk, & Lehti, 1999; Kuo, Hwang, Chen, & Chen, 2012), pre-service teachers (Dickey,
2008; Liu, 2005), and nursing (Oriol, Tumulty, & Snyder, 2010; Woolley & Jarvis, 2007)
contexts. Only studies that have incorporated all six components of a cognitive apprenticeship
will be discussed (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016; Chee, 1994; Dickey, 2008; Jarvela, 1995;

16

Jarvela et al., 1999; Kuo et al., 2012; Liu, 2005; Oriol et al., 2010; Wang & Bonk, 2001;
Woolley & Jarvis, 2007; Yang, 2011).
Much of the research that has been conducted on cognitive apprenticeships has been
qualitative in nature. Researchers have sought to determine how learners react to the structure of
a cognitive apprenticeship (Casey, 1996), whether learners were motivated to integrate the skills
they were exposed to in the real world (Dickey, 2008), which strategies learners felt were the
most important (Dickey, 2008) and how the instructional designer integrated technology such as
video (Liu, 2005; Woolley & Jarvis, 2007), simulations (Jarvela, 1995), online learning
management systems (Liu, 2005; Wang & Bonk, 2001; Yang, 2011), and utilizing technology to
complete a task (Enkenberg, 1994; Jarvela, 1995).
Several studies determined important design implications that should be taken under
advisement for future design and research. Firstly, the importance of interaction between the
learner and the instructor (Casey, 1996; Jarvela, 1995; Liu, 2005; Wang & Bonk, 2001).
Researchers have found that the most important of the cognitive apprenticeship strategies are
modeling, coaching, and scaffolding (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016; Dickey, 2008). These
three components of the cognitive apprenticeship are interaction intensive in terms of the amount
of time devoted to an individual student. It is the expert’s responsibility to properly model
behaviors and knowledge so learners are able to replicate processes and complex problem
solving. If this level of interaction fails, learners will not achieve objectives. Scaffolding is
heavily influenced by interaction as the expert is required to determine the learner’s current
ability level and provide structure and support until the learner has mastered the task. Finally,
coaching is important as the expert must be available to provide feedback for each individual as
well as answer any questions that may arise (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016; Dickey, 2008).

17

Therefore, it is important to note that the level of interaction required of a cognitive
apprenticeship makes the model both resource and time consuming (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015,
2016; Woolley & Jarvis, 2007).
Much of the research on cognitive apprenticeships have only outlined what instruction
looks like using a cognitive apprenticeship design (Oriol et al., 2010; Wang & Bonk, 2001).
There have been very few studies that take a quantitative look at whether cognitive
apprenticeships are more effective in learning material than traditional, lecture style instruction.
Liu (2005) utilized a pretest, posttest design to test whether there is a difference in learning
between a group that is provided traditional instruction on instructional planning and a group that
is provided web-based instruction using a cognitive apprenticeship. Liu found a difference in
pretest and posttest scores for both groups, meaning both groups learned the content. However,
there was a significant difference in post test scores between the two groups, meaning the webbased cognitive apprenticeship was more effective than the traditional, in person instruction. In
addition, the participants in the cognitive apprenticeship group exemplified a better attitude
toward the content of the instruction. Enkenberg's (1994) study was not quantitative in nature,
however, based on assignment evaluations, he found that the assignments produced by learners
following the cognitive apprenticeship were quality products and included detailed explanations
of the strategies used to create a model of a servo mechanism utilizing a computer.
Kuo et al. (2012) compared three groups with slightly different designs. The experimental
group utilized a web-based cognitive apprenticeship design with collaborative learning
strategies. Control group one was designed based on a cognitive apprenticeship, but with
personal learning. Control group two was designed based on personal learning and direct
instruction. The researchers found that participants in the experimental group outperformed the

18

participants in the control groups. The implications of this research indicate, like other studies on
cognitive apprenticeship that interaction between peers is important for learning to occur (Casey,
1996; Jarvela, 1995; Liu, 2005; Wang & Bonk, 2001).
While there has been a decent amount of research concerning cognitive apprenticeships,
it should be noted that there are many limitations. For example, when sample sizes are
mentioned, many samples are less than 30 learners (Brown & Stefaniak, 2015, 2016; Enkenberg,
1994; Jarvela, 1995; Liu, 2005). Kuo et al. (2012) utilized a sample of 88 participants, however,
the total amount of participants were split between three groups. Small sample sizes make it
difficult to generalize findings to broader contexts and designs.
Coaching
Though there has been research conducted on cognitive apprenticeships that take into
account all six of the instructional strategies, authors fail to provide examples or explanations of
the kind of coaching that was provided to learners during the cognitive apprenticeship. Jarvela
(1995, 1998; 1999) mentions that during the cognitive apprenticeship the instructor would walk
around the room, listen to conversations being conducted regarding the assignment, and would
give feedback or ask questions to provide direction to students. However, the types of feedback
or questions were not discussed.
Collins, Brown, and Holum (1991) included coaching in the cognitive apprenticeship
model, emphasizing the importance of the relationship between the expert and the novice without
providing guidance on how to implement and provide appropriate coaching strategies during
instruction. There are many different definitions of coaching. Commonalities in definitions
include the focus on the development of the learner (Fletcher & Mullen, 2012; Grant & Palmer,
2002; O’Connor & Lages, 2007) regardless of context and can include both behavioral and
cognitive development. Coaching is typically seen as a partnership between the coach and

19

coachee by having a conversation related to the coachee’s goals (Bates, 2015; Fletcher &
Mullen, 2012), past experiences (Bates, 2015), and jointly exploring solutions to problems
(Fletcher & Mullen, 2012). Bates (2015) places an important emphasis on the conversational
properties of the coaching relationship, indicating that communication is not one sided. In fact,
the coachee is responsible for reflecting on experiences and the coach is responsible for
providing feedback to the coachee.
While there is an important relationship between the coach and the coachee, it should be
noted that the coachee provides direction for the coaching sessions. The coachee should direct
the coaching interaction by developing goals, reflecting on the current state and future state of
development, and providing solutions to problems and actions to reach the goal (Bates, 2015;
Cox, Bachkirova, & Clutterbuck, 2010).
If much of the direction of the coaching interaction is set by the coachee, one might begin
to question the role of the coach. This is where the field of coaching begins to become polarized.
One camp places an emphasis on questioning (Bates, 2015; Cox et al., 2010; O’Connor & Lages,
2007). These questions are aimed at assisting the coachee to reflect on their current situation or
problem while also aiming to direct the coachee in the right direction, while at the same time
allowing for the coachee to directly determine the direction of the coaching session, which is
important for adult learning theory (Fletcher & Mullen, 2012). On the opposite end of the
spectrum is the camp that emphasizes the need to tell the coachee (Burton, Brown, & Fisher,
1984; Cox et al., 2010). In this case, the coach utilizes their experience and mental models to tell
the coachee what they need to do and how they can do it. Cox et al. (2010) emphasizes this
strategy in order to bring the coachee’s attention to a problem and potential solutions that may be
used in order to solve said problem. Burton, Brown, and Fisher (1984) talk about the need to

20

inform the coachee of the what and the how. The example they use is teaching somebody how to
ski. The coach may tell the coachee that they need to put their weight forward (what), and to
accomplish this they need to lean back on the skis (how).
It is interesting to note that while Burton et al. (1984) place an emphasis on telling the
coachee what to do, when coaching coaches, there is a lack of information in the literature about
how to appropriately coach, or what coaching strategies have been shown to work. There is
plenty written on the what of coaching, but next to nothing on the specifics regarding the how of
coaching. This disparity will be discussed further below.
Fewer definitions emphasize the importance of instruction over the relationship between the
coach and the coachee. Druckman and Bjork (1991) place particular interest on “offering hints,
feedback, reminders” to redirect the learner’s progress if headed in the wrong direction.
Mentoring vs. Coaching. While there is disagreement regarding the definition of
coaching, there is even more disagreement about the differences between mentoring and
coaching. Fletcher and Mullen (2012) attempted to pull together the various perspectives on
coaching and mentoring to provide a comprehensive look at the fields. One definition provided
by Fletcher and Mullen (2012) describes the disparity below:
Some use the term 'coaching' to refer to approaches that are more directive, involving a
more skilled practitioner advising other or showing them how to do thing, and 'mentoring'
as less directive process, involving guidance and support for individuals in questioning
and reflecting on learning. For others the use of these terms is reversed (p. 201).
The last line of the above statement clearly demonstrates a lack of understanding between
mentoring and coaching. Cameron & Ebrahimi (2014) define a stark difference between the two.
For example, mentoring is when a novice works with a more experienced member of an
organization to gain further insight into the organization’s values, policies, etc. Essentially the
novice is gaining insight through the expert’s own experiences and knowledge, rather than

21

constructing their own. In coaching, the coachee is encouraged to explore and discover solutions
on their own, instead of being given the answer by the coach. In mentoring, the novice is given
the answer and is being pruned to become an extension of the mentor rather than developing
their own values and sense of self. In coaching, the coachee determines what they want their
future to look like and then begins by exploring possibilities. The coach is there to gently guide
the process of exploration and goal attainment through reflective questioning.
Coaching Contexts. Coaching has strong origins in sports. One of the most influential
books on sports coaching is Gallwey’s Inner Game of Tennis. Gallwey (1972) wrote about
having two selves. The creative self and the judgmental self. The creative self is always in
danger of not being able to see possibilities and to try new things or new paths because the
judgmental self continuously stands in the way saying things like “that’s stupid” or “that’s not
possible”. Other key concepts Gallwey provides from his experience as a tennis coach is to
become aware of the current state and to reflect on that state. Determine what you are doing,
whether it is working and why or why not. From simply reflecting on the current state, the
coachee is able to determine what they would like to change, set goals, and move toward
achieving those goals. Gallwey recognized that the framework he outlined for the game of tennis
could be applied to the working world, and thus wrote The Inner Game of Work (Gallwey, 2001).
Coaching has also been used in business (Passmore & Fillery-Travis, 2011), extension
services (Allen, 2013), preparing and developing teachers (Anstey & Clarke, 2010; Elder &
Padover, 2011), and professional development (Wong & Nicotera, 2003). However, little
research exists on the use of coaching in an online learning environment. The following is an
overview of different types of coaching. It is important to note this is not an exhaustive list.

22

Cognitive coaching. Cognitive coaching was developed by Costa & Garmston (1994) as
a strategy to prepare teachers for developing instructional plans in the classroom. Cognitive
coaching incorporates a planning conference, observation, and reflective conference. During the
planning conference the coachee identifies and develops their goals and objectives for an
upcoming class that they are going to teach. The coach’s role is to question the coachee on how
they are going to handle certain things. For example, if there is a disruptive student in the class,
how is the coachee going to correct the behavior. Or if the coachee decides to use technology in
the classroom, and it fails, how does the coachee plan on handling that situation. The coach is
essentially asking the coachee to reflect on all possible outcomes and develop a plan for how
they are going to handle the outcome.
During the observation phase of cognitive coaching, the coach observes the teacher in
action, makes notes, especially on the teacher’s classroom management and instructional
strategies, and collects information from artifacts such as student projects or achievement. This
information will be brought to the reflecting conference and will be used to assist the coach in
developing questions aimed eliciting reflection from the coachee (Costa & Garmston, 1994).
Finally, in the reflecting conference the coach summarizes his observations of the lesson,
bringing in information from various avenues of observation and begins asking questions to get
the coachee to reflect on his/her experience, and to determine what steps should be taken in the
near future (Costa & Garmston, 1994). Overall the ultimate goal of cognitive coaching is to
provide the learner with enough feedback and practice to allow them to be their own coach by
self-monitoring and reflecting on their own curriculum planning and implementation and making
changes and improvements as necessary (Garmston et al., 1993).

23

Cognitive coaching is used to help assist teachers in developing the skills necessary to
allow them to make necessary changes in their teaching and curriculum that are guided by
administration, and improving decision making skills. As stated above, a cognitive coach assists
the coachee in developing the abovementioned skills to the point where they are able to critically
think and reflect on their own decisions and actions and make necessary adjustments without the
guidance of a coach (Costa & Garmston, 1989).
Cognitive coaching research focuses heavily on self-efficacy, or the individual’s belief
that they can do something (Bandura, 1977). In the case cognitive coaching, this would be the
teacher’s belief in teaching and impacting student achievement (Costa & Garmston, 1989, 1994;
Garmston et al., 1993). Edwards and Newton (1995) studied a group of teachers who were given
training on cognitive coaching. The researchers wanted to determine whether there was an effect
on the individual teacher’s self-efficacy and sense of empowerment in the classroom. Not only
did the authors utilize self-reported scales, but they included an experimental and treatment
group. The treatment group received training on cognitive coaching, and was compared with
teachers who did not receive training on cognitive coaching. The researchers found that those
who received cognitive coaching scored higher on empowerment and self-efficacy scales, and
overall teachers who trained on cognitive coaching found their teaching careers to be much more
rewarding than those who were not trained.
Powell and Kusuma-Powell (2007) utilized cognitive coaching strategies to enhance
critical thinking and writing skills of 14 students in Kuala Lumpur. The researches utilized
multiple coaching strategies such as the use of pausing to allow participants the opportunity to
think about how to answer questions, paraphrasing in order to clarify dialogue between the coach
and the coachee, and the use of probing questions. Additionally, students were asked to keep a

24

reflective journal to reflect on each coaching session. The researchers found all 14 students who
participated in the study demonstrated an improvement in their writing as reported by their
teachers.
Henry (2012) conducted a mixed methods study to determine if there was a difference
between a group of teachers who received cognitive coaching and a group of teachers who did
not receive cognitive coaching. Henry conducted a content analysis of reflective journals that
were kept by all participants, regardless of treatment group. Based on data analyzed from the
reflective journals, the author found that teachers that were exposed to cognitive coaching
demonstrated a progressive change in their state of mind, as identified by Costa and Garmston’s
(1994) Cognitive Coaching Model that demonstrated a teacher’s self-efficacy, their ability to be
flexible as issues arise, and being aware of their individual teaching situation.
As Garmston, Linder and Whitaker (1993) state, cognitive coaching is about identifying
teacher strengths, and reflecting and evaluating their current practices to increase their selfefficacy as well as their instructional practices. However, the literature does not explain what
kind of questions should be utilized in order to guide the coachee’s critical thinking process.
Reflection in action (Schon, 1983, 1987) and reflective inquiry (Shapiro & Reiff, 1993) (which
will be discussed further in this paper) may lend insight into the types of questions peers can ask
one another to elicit critical thinking used for improving instructional planning and delivery.
Peer coaching. Peer coaching is defined as one or more individuals who are peers and
work together to move toward changing a practice. Showers and Joyce (1996) identify a number
of principles in regard to peer coaching:
1. All members of the group must agree to be part of the process and to support one
another through the coaching session.

25

2. Feedback is not important. The goal of peer coaching is to plan and develop
instruction together that meets the goals the group is working toward.
3. In peer coaching, there is still a coach and a coachee. When individuals are observing,
they are the coachee, and the individual who is being observed is the coach.
4. There is more to coaching than simply observing an individual’s practice. Following
an observation, the peer coaches should reflect on the experience and offer advice
when necessary.
Showers (1984) focused her work on peer coaching for teachers. She recognized that
while teachers have the ability to acquire new skills and strategies through professional
development, continuing education, and workshops, that the research demonstrated that teachers
were less likely to transfer and apply those skills in the classroom without some other form of
reinforcement. If teachers are paired with a peer in their school after a professional development
workshop, they are more likely to transfer new knowledge and skills into curriculum
development by collaborating with other individuals who are working toward the same goal.
Though, not in a peer coaching setting, but in a one on one coaching setting, Blackman (2010)
also reached the same conclusion.
Showers and Joyce (1996) further stated the importance of modeling and think alouds
during peer coaching. Members of the peer coaching team should be able to discuss their
planning process, what strategies they plan on using in the classroom, and for the presenter to be
open to feedback from the observers or other members of the peer coaching team.
Showers (1992) studied the impact on student learning of 256 students taught by 17
different teachers. The author compared teachers who implemented new teaching strategies
taught during professional development and reinforced through coaching. Students of these

26

teachers were compared with teachers who did not receive coaching after professional
development and who did not implement the new teaching strategies. There was a significant
difference in student achievement between the two groups. Students in the treatment group had
higher essay and recall scores than did students in the control group. The findings of this study
and subsequent studies (Baker, 1983; Cordingley, Bell, Thomason, & Firth, 2005; Ross, 1992)
that support the use of coaching in tandem of simply receiving information from a workshop or
webinar, reinforce the need to have an environment in which learners are able to practice the
skills they have learned, receive feedback from others, and to reflectively think about their
processes. These findings are all significant, as they not only fit within the frame of the cognitive
apprenticeship model, but provide support for the potential success of utilizing peer coaching
within the cognitive apprenticeship framework to lessen the work load and stress on the expert
when providing instruction for a large number of learners.
Like most research conducted on coaching, research on peer coaching is highly anecdotal
and qualitative. Asghar (2010) utilized peer coaching as a formative assessment tool in a first
year college clinical course. Students were grouped together and assessed together, to the point
that the success of the student relied on the success of the group. Knowledge and information
was articulated by group members and students then had to provide feedback to one another so
each individual was able to perform the skill on his or her own without the assistance of other
team members. During the formative assessment, one student in the group was chosen to
demonstrate the skill. If the student was successful, the whole team succeeded. If the student was
not successful, then the group would have the opportunity to continue working on the skill and
be assessed again (Asghar, 2010).

27

The researchers utilized a qualitative research design using a phenomenological approach
to explore the experiences of the students as they participated in the study. After evaluating
transcripts from student interviews, the author found three themes related to participating in the
reciprocal peer coaching process. Those themes were motivation, especially in the sense of
providing feedback and assisting each other through the learning process, because the
individual’s success relied on the success of the group. The other two themes were learning in
groups and context of learning. Context of learning was found to be important because learning
occurred in a situated, authentic, clinical context that gave students real life experiences that can
be transferred to the work place (Asghar, 2010).
Ross (1992) studied 18 teachers in a Canadian school who were implementing a new
history curriculum. Teachers were given the new curriculum materials, attended a three-day
workshop and were given the opportunity to work with coaches. However, the teacher had to
seek help from a coach by setting up a meeting or inviting a coach into their classroom. Only two
out of the 18 teachers took advantage of this opportunity, and only for the coach to model a
lesson in the classroom, not to actually provide feedback to the teacher. Teachers were also
encouraged to seek help from their colleagues within the school who were experiencing the same
curriculum change.
Ross (1992) sought to determine whether or not teachers who sought out coaching had an
impact on student achievement. The author also wanted to determine whether or not teacher selfefficacy had an impact on student achievement. In both cases, a positive effect was determined.
However, as Ross noted in the paper, this could be due to the fact that teachers with high selfefficacy feel that their actions will have an impact on student achievement, and therefore seek
and take advantage of opportunities that will enhance their teaching abilities.

28

Technology-based coaching. One of the earliest studies on coaching was conducted by
Burton and Brown (1979) to explore the use of coaching in an educational game for elementary
school students. The researchers compared a control group that did not have coaching embedded
in the game with a treatment group that did. It was found that students that were in the controlled
group got stuck less frequently and enjoyed the game more. The authors suggest students who
were coached enjoyed the game more because they were proud of their successes and were
motivated to continue.
Researchers have continued to look at how technology can be used to support and assist
coaching efforts. Benson and Cotabish (2014) discuss how they utilized technology such as
Skype, video call software, webcams, and tablets to assist in coaching students enrolled in a
graduate program in teaching, specifically to observe student teaching strategies and later to
provide feedback to students. Most students found the use of this technology to be beneficial as
student engagement and interaction was not disturbed. Participants felt the observation that was
captured in this manner was more authentic then if the observer was implanted directly into the
room. Additionally, participants were receiving immediate feedback from the observer using
Skype and could integrate suggestions in real time (Benson & Cotabish, 2014).
Other kinds of technology that have been used include bug in the ear technology for
teacher development. This allowed for a coach to speak directly to a coachee during a teaching
session to provide them with guidance during observation. Teachers found this method to be
successful and the researchers found an improvement of the implementation of improved
teaching strategies, and student engagement also increased (Rock et al., 2009).

29

While the technology integration discussed above provided feedback in real time, it is
also important to discuss instances in which coaching is provided in an asynchronous
environment, in which feedback and guidance may not be provided in a timely manner.
Roney and Davies (2007) explored the use of online learning tools to help support the
professional development of teachers. The goal of the professional development program was to
allow interns a platform and opportunity for discussion and to reflect with other individuals
participating in the internship. However, it should be noted that the authors focused on student
experience using the tool and for what purpose they used the tool during the entirety of the
internship. Use included pre and post observation reflection, the development of electronic
portfolios, exploration using an online library, among other things.
Zhang, Liu and Wang (2016) collected self-reported data regarding their participation in
an online professional development learning environment for teachers that provided a platform
for professionals to interact with peers outside of their organizations and to participate in various
courses. The authors found that participants primarily utilized the online learning environment
for “academic support, technical support, emotional support, and reflective support” (pg. 1).
The researchers designed specific activities to support the use of peer coaching. Some of these
activities included the co-design of lesson plans utilizing ICT (information and communication
technology). During the first week, an expert teacher modeled how to design a lesson plan
utilizing ICTs. Next, groups of teachers co-created a lesson plan and peers provided feedback on
the design. During the final weeks of the course, teachers uploaded video recorded observations
of implementing the lesson and again, provided feedback on implementation. The design of these
activities follows Showers and Joyce’s (1996) four part definition of peer coaching.

30

While this study incorporated instructional design based on peer coaching principles, the
study was still highly qualitative. The self-reported data that was collected in the form of surveys
indicated that the interactions between individuals were both reflective, emotional, technical, and
academic, and teachers believed themselves to be able to provide above average support to their
peers in these categories, it is still inconclusive as to whether or not the design of the online
learning environment had an impact on learner achievement. Further studies need to be
conducted in order to determine specific strategies that can be utilized in an online peer coaching
setting that will support overall learner achievement. Showers and Joyce (1996) already found
that learners who not only attend professional development, but utilize peer coaching following
the professional development utilized new teaching strategies in their classrooms significantly
more than teachers who do not participate in peer coaching. However, it is unclear w hat kind of
strategies can be utilized in order to support peer coaching and encourage interaction between
individuals, especially in a setting where peers may be spread across a distance and may never
have had contact with one another previously, and therefore the personal connection between
individuals may be lacking.
Coaching strategies. While there is contention about whether or not coaching should
involve more questioning (Cornett & Knight, 2009; Costa & Garmston, 1994; Cox et al., 2010;
O’Connor & Lages, 2007; Parsloe, 2009) as opposed to direct instruction or feedback (Burton &
Brown, 1978; Burton et al., 1984; Fletcher & Mullen, 2012) there are some commonalities that
are present regardless of the coaching model that is being discussed (Stober & Grant, 2010). In
fact, O’Conner and Lages (2007) pulled these commonalities together and created an Integrated
Model of Coaching where the goal is change and includes three steps the authors found in every
model investigated. The three steps are the following: (1) guide the coachee and bring their

31

attention to aspects of their behavior that need to be changed, (2) provide feedback and ask
questions to assist the coachee in creating their own meaning (3) assisting the coachee in
developing an action plan.
Summary. As many authors on coaching have stated, there is a lack of empirical
research as to whether or not coaching actually works, and what specific strategies should be
used in a successful coaching strategy (Stober & Grant, 2010). One of the primary strategies that
has been associated with the ability to coach an individual is for a coach to question the coachee,
and leading the coachee to the answer without giving the answer away. This becomes especially
important in peer coaching situations in which individuals receive little to no instruction on how
to be a peer coach.
Due to the time burdens on the expert, in the expert-novice relationship of the cognitive
apprenticeship framework, one purpose of the current study is to investigate coaching strategies
that decrease the level of involvement from the expert, especially when it is necessary for the
expert to coach a classroom-full of students, and the ratio between experts and novices is rather
high. Showers (1984) peer coaching model pairs individuals together into pairs who are working
toward the same goal, but who have relatively the same experience, and are equals in many
ways. Therefore, the coaching relationship referenced in this current study is peer-peer coaching
as opposed to expert-novice coaching as described in Collins et al.’s (1987) cognitive
apprenticeship model.
If peer coaching is being utilized, with an introduction to what peer coaching is, and if
coaching is primarily asking questions, then the question becomes what kind of questions should
a peer coach ask in order to lead and guide their peer partner toward achieving their goal? If the
goal of questioning is to encourage the coachee to actively think and reflect on their previous

32

experiences and what they can do to improve an outcome in the future, it stands to reason that
reflective questions can be used to encourage this kind of critical thinking. We can look at
Schön’s (1983, 1987) work on reflection in action and research on reflective inquiry (Shapiro &
Reiff, 1993) for guidance on the kinds of questions to provide learners in a peer coaching setting.
Reflection in Action
Schön, a philosopher by trade, had a great interest in John Dewey’s theory of inquiry and
began looking at how professionals act and think professionally, specifically looking at architects
and psychologists (Schon, 1983, 1987). The following section will delve into Dewey’s theory of
inquiry, in which an individual is presented with a situation or problem that may be considered
confusing, or not make any sense to the individual. The act of resolving the situation, presenting
a solution, or making overall sense of the situation is what Dewey called inquiry. The individual
must reflect on the situation to determine the exact cause of the problem in order to determine a
solution (Schon, 1992). Later Schön expanded on Dewey’s theory to further explain how
professionals critically think and reflect on problems, drawing on their personal experience in
order to solve unique problems they are presented with in professional work. Schön’s work on
reflection in action was developed to give new professionals insight into the thinking processes
of expert or experienced professionals (Schon, 1983, 1987).
Schön recognized that professionals participate in what he calls ‘reflection in action’.
This is when a professional thinks about a situation, identifies a problem, and reframes the
problem to develop possible solutions. Once a solution is developed, it must be tested or
evaluated to determine whether or not it solved the initial problem (Schon, 1987). The question
for Schön, was how can instructors take the attributes identified in professionals that have
become part of the expert professional’s repertoire based on their personal experience, and teach
these attributes to up and coming professionals? The answer for Schön was pairing an expert

33

with a novice, and coaching the novice through problem solving. The expert practitioner may
model their thought process for the learner, and may ask the learner questions to guide them to
think about a problem and how to reframe it. The expert may also ask questions or give direction
regarding possible solutions and how to test for those solutions. By having the expert
professional verbally demonstrating their thought process by thinking aloud, working through
problems, especially those that they did not anticipate encountering, shows the novice
professional that even experts run into problems when working on a problem, the difference is
how they approach the problem and work toward a solution by reflecting on the situation (Schon,
1983, 1987). The goal of reflection in action is to demonstrate and assist the novice with problem
solving until they have the metacognitive skills to be able to reflect on their own and selfregulate their problem solving process to reach a viable solution.
Schön’s (1987) reflection in action is almost a cognitive apprenticeship in and of itself.
The novice works with an expert who models their thought process related to problem solving.
The expert assists the learner through a problem, and eventually fades away support and allows
the learner to explore new solutions on their own. However, research into reflection in action
may lend itself to determine what kind of reflective questions may be useful in facilitating peer
coaching in an online learning environment.
Reflective Inquiry
Schön gave insight into the benefits of working with an expert professional and having
them model their thought process, however, Schön did not provide systematic heuristics on how
to successfully ‘reflect in action’. Shapiro and Reiff (1993) wanted to further bridge the gap
between theory and practice by developing strategies for encouraging reflection in action for
blossoming professionals and developed their model for reflective inquiry that incorporates five
steps. Shapiro and Reiff (1993) contend that this is very difficult to accomplish reflection in

34

action, especially in the midst of action, and therefore their reflective inquiry model focuses on
reflection after the action occurs.
The model begins in the very broadest, theoretical terms at level one, and moves toward
more concrete, actionable interventions at level five. While the model is based in theory of
practice, the actual use of reflective inquiry is inductive, thereby bridging the gap between theory
and practice and providing strategies to promote professional reflective inquiry following the
professional’s actions. The professional is essentially interviewed by an individual trained in
reflective inquiry techniques. The professional is asked to provide a case study which they have
already experienced, to assist the professional in reflecting upon the experience to gather relevant
information in relation to the professional’s critical thinking and problem solving capabilities.
Additionally, a professional may be asked to provide a scenario that may be considered to be
difficult to solve. In this case, the professional outlines the case or the problem, and the
interviewer is responsible for asking questions that lead the professional toward a viable solution
(Shapiro & Reiff, 1993).
The goal of the reflective inquiry model is the same as that of coaching: change (Costa &
Garmston, 1989, 1994; Garmston et al., 1993; Shapiro & Reiff, 1993; Showers, 1984). Reflective
inquiry and coaching also utilize the same strategy: questioning (Shapiro & Reiff, 1993; Stober
& Grant, 2010), the difference being there has been empirical research conducted on reflective
inquiry.
Mason (2012) explored the use of questioning using ICTs in an online learning
environment to enhance critical thinking in learners. The author focuses on the use of journalist
questions – who, what, when, where, why, and how. Mason asserts the first four question elicit
explanatory answers, whereas the last two, why and how, elicit more reflective thinking. While

35

the author focuses on current and future ICT innovations and research to enhance scaffolding
through questioning, the focus on why and how questions being central to reflective inquiry is
important and has implications for designing learning environments in which learners are
consistently asked reflective questions that improve their practice (Mason, 2012).
Graesser and Person (1994) identified previous research that indicated students do not
frequently ask questions in a classroom setting, however they wanted to determine whether or
not the same results occurred in an environment in which students worked directly with a tutor as
opposed to being in a classroom full of other students and what impact this may have on the rate
of questions asked by students. The authors found students in tutoring sessions were more likely
to ask questions, and after they gained experience, asked higher quality questions. When
determining whether or not there was a correlation between the number of questions asked and
student achievement, the authors determined there was no significant difference. However, when
determining if there is a correlation between the quality of student questions and student
achievement, there was a significant correlation.
Graesser and Person’s (1994) findings have implications in terms of how to get learners
to ask the right questions. The authors identified a number of strategies tutors or teachers can
utilize in order to encourage students to ask high quality questions. The researchers performed a
content analysis on the kinds of questions that elicited deeper meaning and found that questions
that began with “why, why not, how, and what if,” (p. 127) were associated with critical thinking
and deep meaning, in a one-on-one tutoring relationship (Graesser & Person, 1994).
Additionally, these findings beg the question of how do learners learn how to ask the
right questions? Is it that learners ask higher quality questions as they gain experience asking
questions? Or can a scaffolded approach, in which learners are given a list of suggested

36

questions, help learners to ask the right kind of questions from the start? The current study aimed
at partially shedding light on these questions by comparing a group that is given guided
reflective questions in an online learning environment using peer coaching and determining
whether or not high levels of cognitive presence, and critical thinking occur as compared with a
control group that is not given a list of guided reflective questions.
Interaction
As has been described in the definitions of coaching that have thus far been discussed,
one important aspect of any kind of coaching is the relationship between the coach and the
coachee. Anytime a relationship, conversation, or questioning occurs, interaction is occurring
between the participants. In the proposed study, participants will be paired into groups of two
and will serve as each other’s peer coach. Through various forms of asynchronous interaction
within groups, the learners will collaborate, interact, and construct meaning through those
interactions. An overview of interaction theory and computer supported collaborative learning
will be discussed below.
Interaction Theory
Social learning theory as described earlier falls under the theory of cognitivism.
Cognitivism is concerned with the internal processes and structure of memory and how it works
to assist in learning (Burton et al., 1996; Ertmer & Newby, 2013; Tennyson & Morrison, 2000).
For cognitivists, learning occurs when the brain processes information from the environment and
temporarily stores this information in working memory and transfers the information to long
term memory, adding to previously established schema and associations, and is stored for later
retrieval (Ertmer & Newby, 2013; Tennyson & Morrison, 2000; Winn & Snyder, 1996).
Social learning theory places an emphasis on learning within a social context, specifically
from other individuals by modeling behavior and verbalizing internal processes (Bandura, 1971,

37

1977). This interaction between two or more individuals assists learners in constructing meaning
through visual and auditory cues in a situated context. Vygotsky’s (1986) social development
theory also places an emphasis on interaction between two or more individuals working together
to solve a problem or task. The learner is given a task that is difficult enough that they are unable
to complete on their own. However, when paired with a slightly more advanced individual, who
guides them through the process, the learner is able to complete the task, and eventually, through
internalization and practice, is able to complete the task on his or her own. At this point the task
must be altered and difficulty increased. The emphasis in assigning two or more individuals to
work toward a solution is encompassed in interaction. The learner and the partner must talk
through the problem, discuss problems they are experiencing while solving the problem, and the
more experienced partner must explain their thought processes associated with reaching a
solution so the novice will construct their own meaning from the experience, store that meaning
within their schema, and be able to recall the experience when presented with a similar situation.
Over the course of the evolution of distance education, online, asynchronous learning
environments have become extremely important for busy adults who are balancing school, work,
and family. The same can be said of professional development opportunities that are offered
through online learning management systems and webinars. One main concern with online
education is the fear that learners are missing out on interactions that they would normally get in
the classroom. While they have no trouble interacting with content, the concern has been learner
ability to interact with the instructor and other students in the online learning environment,
especially in cases where the learner never visits campus. There are multiple models that have
been developed in order to lessen the effect of the lack of face to face interaction with students

38

and teachers. The model that will be examined more closely and utilized in the design of the
learning environment of this study is Community of Inquiry (CoI) (Garrison et al., 1999).
Community of Inquiry
Garrison, Anderson and Archer (1999) argue that the text-based asynchronous learning
environments that are present in learning management systems allow for a greater amount of
critical thinking, as the amount of time between initial discussion posts and responses allows for
reflection on the content. Essentially, critical inquiry is a reflective process in which the learner
reflects on general, shared knowledge based on their personal experience. When the individuals’
construction is shared with the group, a conversation may ensue that allows for individuals to
continue to socially construct their own meaning
The authors then researched and developed the Community of Inquiry (CoI) model to
describe elements that lend themselves to critical thinking and are necessary for the creation of
knowledge in an online learning environment: cognitive, social, and teaching presence, each of
which will be discussed further (Garrison et al., 1999).
Cognitive Presence. Garrison, Anderson and Archer (1999) describe cognitive presence
as the ability to construct meaning from the environment and other participants. There are
multiple steps to the creation of cognitive presence. First, a triggering event that causes the
learner uncertainty or dissonance between what they believed to be correct and what actually is,
or overall ‘unease’ or lack of confidence resulting from an experience.
The second step is based completely on exploration. The learner begins to search for
information that helps them make sense or regain understanding of the problem that they
experienced. This process helps the learner focus their attention on an aspect of the experience in
an attempt to gain understanding. From here, the learner then begins to formulate ideas or
concepts surrounding their experiences by integrating the knowledge they have gained from the

39

exploration stage. By this point the learner has begun to develop potential solutions to the
problem and during step four, the learner begins applying the developed solution to test whether
or not it will work (Garrison et al., 1999).
During the integration level of cognitive presence, the learner begins to utilize the
information they collected during the exploration phase to determine possible solutions to a
problem (Garrison et al., 2001). This is when critical thinking begins to happen as the learner is
identifying patterns and making sense of the triggering event. Finally, during the resolution level,
the learner has chosen the solution they want to focus on, and has begun working toward the
solution. During this phase, the learner will also reflect on whether or not the chosen solution is
adequate (Garrison et al., 2001; Garrison et al., 1999; Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007).
CoI can be an iterative process. The learner must then reflect on the results of applying
the solution to determine whether or not it worked or was an acceptable solution to the problem.
If the solution did not work, then the learner must reflect on what went wrong as this can be
considered another triggering event, and begin exploring and developing alternate solutions.
Social Presence. As has been repeatedly described, the social aspect of learning is
important in constructing meaning and thereby supporting learning. Garrison, Anderson, and
Archer (1999) propose that in order for critical thinking and meaning to be constructed, it is
important for learners to participate in the community throughout instruction. To participate, the
learner is providing details regarding previous experiences, or their own knowledge construction
and making this meaning available for the greater group, with the intent of other members of the
community constructing meaning of their own.
Oftentimes social presence takes the form of humor, self-disclosure, open communication
and results in group cohesion. Self-disclosure is essential for social learning, as the learners

40

divulge information about their previous experiences, others can learn from said experience. The
more an individual is willing to share, the more willing others are willing to share, which creates
a robust and sharing community of learners (Garrison et al., 2001; Garrison et al., 1999; Garrison
& Arbaugh, 2007).
Teaching Presence. The role of the teacher is to design and develop an appropriate
learning environment and instruction that will aid learners in the construction of meaning.
Essentially, it is the teacher’s role to provide the content and various strategies that facilitate
learning and knowledge creation. Additionally, it is often the teacher’s responsibility to facilitate
the interactions between learners. However, Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (1999) contend that
the role of facilitator may be occupied by either the teacher or other members of the community.
In the case of coaching, the role is shared between the coach and the coachee, as the relationship
is seeped in mutual respect, and the direction of the coaching sessions are driven by the goals and
objectives outlined by the coachee. In the case of a peer coaching scenario, two or more learners
are responsible for ensuring understanding and knowledge construction is occurring, and
therefore, must facilitate the direction of the conversation between peers, including the use of
reflective and direct questioning to illicit understanding of the coachee’s metacognitive and
problem-solving processes when arriving at a solution.
Oftentimes teaching presence takes the form of facilitation between the content and the
learner. This can take the form of instructional design strategies, discussion moderation, and
ensuring that the group size and content is manageable (Garrison et al., 1999).
Research Exploring Community of Inquiry
Much like research conducted on cognitive apprenticeships, research on CoI often only
looks at one aspect of the CoI framework: either cognitive, social, or teaching presence, instead
of the entire framework as a whole (Shea & Bidjerano, 2009). Additionally, research on the CoI

41

framework is often qualitative in nature, focusing on self-reported information regarding whether
or not learners experienced cognitive, social and teacher presence (Arbaugh, Bangert, &
Cleveland-Innes, 2010; Shea & Bidjerano, 2009). There of course are exceptions to the rule.
Researchers have utilized mixed methods approaches to attempt to triangulate findings from selfreported surveys, content analysis of discussion board posts, and student achievement (Shea &
Bidjerano, 2009; Shea et al., 2010). Shea et al. (2010) utilized a mixed methods approach to a
CoI to determine differences in depth of discourse levels based on content analyses of discussion
board threads. The authors found that while all levels of cognitive presence were present, the
types of cognitive presence that were most common were the triggering and exploration stages
(Shea et al., 2010). If the goal of CoI is to encourage deeper reflective and critical thinking, and
typically only two levels of cognitive presence are common during CoI, the question then begs
whether or not additional strategies can be implemented to encourage deeper levels of
understanding and knowledge construction.
Research has also been conducted to determine if there is a correlation between how and
the amount of use a student uses a learning management system, and the level of cognitive
presence a student reaches through interaction. Shea and Bidjerano (2009) clustered users into
profiles based on their usage of the learning management system, and then analyzed the content
of 1747 messages from online discussion forums using the CoI coding instrument. The authors
found relationships between the student profiles and the amount of cognitive presence. For
example, students who were members of clusters that rarely accessed the learning management
system to read assignments or interact with other learners had lower levels of cognitive presence.
While the information gleaned from this study is correlational, and therefore direct conclusions

42

cannot be made, a strong case is made for Garrison et al.’s (1999) CoI model to include
opportunities for teaching, cognitive, and social presence.
Researchers have investigated what kind of disciplines lend themselves to CoI. Arbaugh
et al. (2010) looked at a number of classes in various disciplines and administered the CoI survey
to participants. It was found, based on self-reported data that students who were enrolled in
classes that were considered to be pure fields such as the humanities often only reached the
cognitive presence level of knowledge application. Students that were enrolled in classes that
were considered applied fields, such as engineering, demonstrated cognitive presence levels of
integration and application. The authors assert that the reason for higher levels of cognitive
presence in applied fields is because these students were taught and provided with projects and
assignments that were more authentic and the information and knowledge applied from the
content of the course could be directly applied. These findings have implications for the design
of instruction utilizing the cognitive apprenticeship models, and supports situated learning
theory. In effect, higher levels of learning occur when instruction is designed in an authentic
learning context, and learners must apply the knowledge they acquire from the class into projects
and assignments that are authentically situated, relevant, and meaningful. Additionally, this is the
purpose of professional development. To provide meaningful knowledge, information,
techniques, and skills to be applied to the field in which the participant is working.
Akyol and Garrison (2011) triangulated data collected through a mixed methodology
approach to determine if there is a link between student perceived cognitive presence via
transcript analysis of student discussion board participation, a CoI survey of perceived learning,
learning outcomes as demonstrated via assignments, and student interviews. The authors
compared learner achievement scores with student perceived learning, and found that there is a

43

correlation between the two. Students who were high achievers on assignments, often had a high
perception of cognitive presence and perceived learning. However, it should be noted that the
total sample size for this study was only 27 students, it is difficult to generalize the findings.
Very few studies have focused on comparing two strategies for creating a CoI. Zydney,
deNoyelles, and Seo (2012) also used a mixed methods approach to determine whether or not
using a protocol improves student achievement and the presence of the three aspects of CoI:
cognitive, social, and teacher presence. The treatment group was given a protocol that set
expectations for student participation in the online learning environment. These expectations
included amount of student participation, timeliness of the conversation, kind and length of the
conversations, how many times students should post to the discussion board, etc. The treatment
group was compared to the control group in which students did not receive a protocol. The
authors found that through the use of the protocol, students more often facilitated their own
conversations instead of relying on teacher facilitation, which in turn eased the workload of the
instructor. While at the same time, the protocol and student facilitation still accomplished a high
level of interaction and cognitive presence within the environment.
Zydney et al. (2012) findings support the researcher of the current study’s decision to
utilize suggested questions in the treatment group to determine whether or not the availability of
quality questions will help to increase interaction between students, provide more critical and
reflective thinking between students in grouped dyads, while demonstrating a high level of
cognitive presence between group members during the coaching phase of the cognitive
apprenticeship. The aim is not only to provide learners with a strategy to facilitate peer coaching,
but to lessen the workload of the instructor, especially in cases where the instructor is responsible

44

for a large class, and is unable to devote the necessary one on one attention to each student to
ensure the student is able to achieve their academic goals within the course.
Protocols in Community of Inquiry
Not only did Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (1999) develop a model for incorporating
interaction throughout a text-based asynchronous learning environment, but they also developed
a tool for measuring the amount of critical thinking to determine if deeper learning and
understanding is being created through interactions (Garrison et al., 2001).
Garrison et al. (2001) developed a content analysis tool to determine the level of critical
thinking and reflection present in online, text-based discussions between students. The content
analysis tool provided descriptions and indicators for the four levels of cognitive presence:
initiation (asking questions for clarification), exploration (exploring information and resources to
develop possible solutions), integration (developing a solution), and resolution (carrying out a
solution and assessing whether or not it was viable).
The protocol also known as the practical inquiry model was tested using a variety of
student levels (graduate and undergraduate) and across multiple subjects to ensure validity of
results. Since coding is highly subjective, a team of researchers worked together to code the
transcripts and to reach an agreement upon the codes, again, to increase the validity of the tool.
Garrison et al. (2001) found the majority of the online discussions fell within the exploration
phase of cognitive presence, meaning learners where exploring information, opportunities, and
bouncing ideas off one another to eventually develop solutions to problems. These results are
supported by subsequent studies (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007; Liu & Yang, 2012; Rodriguez,
2014; Swan, Garrison, & Richardson, 2009).
The practical inquiry model continues to be used for content analysis of online
discussions to this day (Bangert, 2009; Liu & Yang, 2012; Munoz & Culton, 2016; Swan et al.,

45

2009), and is considered to be a valuable tool for categorizing the phases of cognitive presence
outlined by the CoI research.
While the practical inquiry model is a tool for categorizing the cognitive presence of
online discussion board conversations between learners, researchers understand that this measure
cannot be the only measure of critical thinking for the learner. In fact, Bangert (2009) makes it
clear that while the tool is powerful for content analysis, and providing feedback on where
learners currently are and are progressing, it does not evaluate the effectiveness of the online
course, and additional information should be collected and evaluated to triangulate results
(Bangert, 2009; Garrison et al., 2010).
Liu and Yang (2012) contend that while the CoI model is effective in building in
interactions between teachers, students, and content, it is important to fully train all mentors who
will be responsible for providing learner assistance, especially if their role in the course is to not
only communicate with learners in the course, but to provide opportunities and prompting for
reflective thinking for learners.
Summary
As has been stated previously, researchers have found that the majority of online
conversations fall within the exploration phase of cognitive presence (Garrison et al., 2001;
Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007; Liu & Yang, 2012; Rodriguez, 2014; Swan et al., 2009).
Through online discussions, the majority of learners exhibit traits of the exploration stage of CoI,
and few learners are making it to the integration phase of the practical inquiry model, which
coincides with a level of reflective thinking. If the goal of CoI is to design an environment that
promotes cognitive presence, critical and reflective thinking, what strategies can be utilized in
order to ensure this is occurring for students? There is a lack of research into the kinds of
strategies that can be used to prompt student discussion toward reflective thinking. Maybe

46

students are not reflectively thinking during group conversations because they don’t know how
to ask the right questions. When learning new content, we don’t expect learners to be experts
right away, instead we scaffold their learning through the use of supports. What would happen if
learners supported one another during their time participating in an online course through peer
coaching? What if learners were trained on how to be supportive and how to be a peer coach,
while also being given further support through the use of guided reflective questions to enhance
conversations occurring between learners?
Purpose of Study
The purpose of this study was to investigate the use of peer coaching as a coaching
strategy as opposed to the expert-novice coaching strategy outlined in Collins et al.’s (1987)
cognitive apprenticeship framework, in an attempt to lessen the burden on the expert. As has
been described above, one of the main aspects of a coaching relationship is the act of questioning
in order to assist the coachee with reflecting on his or her own experiences. Therefore, the
researcher wanted to investigate whether or not providing participants with a list of guided
reflective questions would assist with this process, and create a more interactive environment
that elicited critical thinking. In order to measure critical thinking between peer dyads, cognitive
presence levels were measured to determine if there was a difference between the control and
treatment groups.
In addition to measuring the cognitive presence levels between the two groups, the intent
of this study was to determine if the use of peer coaching, and specifically the inclusion of
guided reflective questions had an impact on individual learning outcomes using the cognitive
apprenticeship model, and to determine if there was a correlation between the peer coaching
strategy and course performance. And finally, this study garnered information regarding the

47

learners’ experiences and challenges they faced when interacting with their peer coach in the
online cognitive apprenticeship. The study was informed by the following research questions:
1.

What is the level of cognitive presence in discussion board posts between peer dyads that
received the guided reflective questions (treatment) and the peer dyads that did not
receive the guided reflective questions (control)?

2. What difference exists in learner outcomes between the treatment and control groups?
3. What challenges do learners experience when participating in peer coaching?
4. What are learner’s perceptions regarding the utilization of peer coaching in an online,
asynchronous, cognitive apprenticeship for professional development?
5. What types of questions do peer coaches ask while participating in an online
asynchronous cognitive apprenticeship?
Answers to these questions inform the design of cognitive apprenticeships utilizing a peer peer coaching strategy as opposed to the traditional novice-expert coaching relationship, as well
as the experts’ role in facilitating learning in a cognitive apprenticeship. The results from the
qualitative portion of this study also help to inform future practices for developing professional
development for public library staff.

48

CHAPTER II
METHODOLOGY
Research Design
The study utilized a posttest-only control group design. Participants were randomly
placed in either the treatment or control group. Participants in the treatment group received a list
of guided reflective questions (Appendix A) that participants were encouraged to use while
working in dyads discussing their program design. They received instruction on what peer
coaching is, and were informed of the availability of the guided questions. Participants in the
control group only received instruction on what peer coaching is. Participants in the control
group did not receive a list of guided reflective questions. Directly following the study,
participants were given a survey to determine what challenges they faced in a peer coaching
environment and how they felt about utilizing peer coaching in professional development. The
survey was distributed electronically.
Setting
In this study, data was collected via a learning management system (LMS) that was made
available to both librarians and paraprofessionals on the topic of program creation. All learning
materials and assessments were provided in the LMS. Content provided focused on learning
theory, instructional design principles, learning strategies, and models. Participants were
randomly placed in either the control or experimental group.
Participants
Participants were comprised of librarians and paraprofessionals who work in public
libraries, who already provide programming to patrons, or would like to provide programming to
patrons in the future. The sampling was a convenience sample and comprised of volunteers who
were looking for professional development through the Virginia Library Association, and
Facebook groups such as ALA Think Tank, Library Support Network, and VLA Region III

49

Library Socializers. The study was also marketed through the use of listservs and on professional
development webpages. Participants registered for the training, at which point the investigator
provided participants with an Informed Consent From (Appendix B), and were then randomly
placed in either the control or experimental group. Following placement in their respective
groups, participants were given a pre-test (Appendix C) in order to gauge participant prior
experience, programming specialty, and over all comfort with program planning. Following
recruitment, a total of 123 participants registered for the course.
Variables
The independent variable was the coaching strategy, which was either peer coaching
without the inclusion of guided reflective questions (control), or peer coaching with the inclusion
of guided reflective questions (treatment). Quantitative dependent variables included the level of
cognitive presence demonstrated during online discussion, and the quality of the program outline
completed by each individual.
To answer the qualitative research questions, the dependent variables included challenges
participants faced during the implementation of peer coaching and how participants felt about
using peer coaching during online, asynchronous, professional development.
Instructional Materials
Two almost identical professional development classes were developed in an online
learning management system (LMS). Participants were randomly placed in either Class A
(controlled group) or Class B (treatment group). All participants were either programming
librarians or paraprofessionals who are responsible for designing, implementing and evaluating
programming for public libraries, or would like to program plan in the future. Both groups
included participants who had a range of programming experience, from being very experienced
to having absolutely no experience. Additionally, participants had varying programming interests

50

and responsibilities, and could be categorized as Youth and Family Services, Adult Services, and
Technology. Additional information related to the makeup of each group can be found in Table 4
and Table 5.
Participants in both Class A and Class B were originally placed in groups of two. Each
dyad was given a private discussion board to discuss projects and assignments they were
working on, and provided each other with guidance on how to proceed. However, as participants
began to drop the professional development course, in order to ensure each participant was
partnered with somebody, there were a few ‘dyads’ that included three peers. Both classes
received instruction on what peer coaching is and were encouraged to utilize peer coaching when
developing their final products for the class. Participants in Class B (treatment group) also
received a list of suggested questions and were encouraged to use these or similar questions
when discussing the process of programming with their partner.
The instruction was designed based on the cognitive apprenticeship model. Details are
outlined in Table 1.
Table 1
Cognitive Apprenticeship Instructional Methods and Descriptions
Instructional Method

Description

Context

Public Libraries. All participants work in public libraries; therefore, all
instruction was be placed within this context
Participants were shown a design document to allow participants the
opportunity to see what the objective of the class will be
Next, participants were exposed to new terms, concepts, and models that
were used to develop their design document
Conducted using video with audio, recorded using Camtasia to model the
thought process used to develop a design document
Participants were given an advanced organizer to that included questions
and prompts to work on a design document together in assigned peer dyads
Primarily took the form of peer coaching within paired dyads. The
instructor monitored discussion board conversations and intervened if
necessary

Global Sequencing
Local Sequencing
Modeling
Scaffolding
Coaching

51
Fading

As participants gained experience in designing and developing their
programs through the practice assignments, assistance from the instructor
faded, and was only be provided if the learner directly asked for it
Participants were provided with reflective journals and journal prompts to
guide students toward comparing their process with other students and the
instructor
As part of the final assignment that included the creation of a design
document, participants were asked to provide a detailed explanation
regarding their design process for creating the program
Participants were given a list of resources they can use to explore new
programming, or get ideas for how to approach designing and developing a
program
A community of practice was developed to allow students forum for
discussion topics, getting feedback, and to be exposed to different ways for
reaching a solution

Reflection

Articulation

Exploration

Sociology

Figure 1 demonstrates the differences between expert-novice coaching and peer-peer
coaching as it relates to the six strategies of the cognitive apprenticeship model.
Figure 1. Expert-novice coaching vs. peer-peer coaching as it relates to the cognitive
apprenticeship model.

Expert

Expert-Novice Coaching Relationship

Procedure

Novice
Coaching
Scaffolding
Exploration
Modeling

Articulation
Reflection

52

Peer-Peer Coaching Relationship

Expert

Peer

Modeling
Exploration

Peer

Coaching
Scaffolding
Articulation
Reflection
Exploration

Procedure
The researcher received internal review board (IRB) approval for this study to ensure
participants would not be harmed during implementation (Appendix D). The researcher
approached professional organizations and Facebook groups to discuss the study and requested
assistance in marketing the program on their website and through email and listserves. An
information sheet was provided through all avenues of communication to inform potential
volunteers of the opportunity. Individuals interested in the participating were to register for the
class via Eventbrite. Once registered, participants were randomly assigned to either Class A or
Class B.

53

The class took place during a five-week period, with approximately two hours of
instruction and practice a week, and was housed on an LMS. Participants had the ability to
participate on their own time, wherever they had access to the internet. While the instruction was
asynchronous, due to the reliance on peers for discussion and coaching, participants received a
schedule that outlined content and assignments to be completed each week. Each week’s
instruction was delivered using screen capture software and voice over to deliver information
regarding each topic. Following this delivery, instructional methods were utilized to reinforce
content and participants were given prompts or assignments to work on within their paired
dyads. The class schedule (Table 2) was used to direct the timing of the course and keep
participants accountable.
Table 2
Instructional Topics, Strategies, and Assignments by Week
Week Topic

Strategy

Assignment

1

Introduction to
program
planning

Global sequencing & Examples
- Show a complete
program outline
- Briefly explain why each
element is included
- Explain this is what they
will be creating by the
end of the course

2

Audience &
Context/Enviro
nment

3

Objectives,
Strategies/Acti
vities, materials

Think aloud modeling
- Define audience and
context
- Model how to determine
characteristics of the
audience
- Model how to determine
constraints of the
context/environment
Think aloud modeling
- Define objectives,
strategies/activities, and
materials

Discussion board post:
- Begin thinking about a program you
want to deliver at your library. What is
the topic?
- What is your experience level with
program planning?
- How is this method different than what
you are used to?
- What is your impression of program
planning?
Discussion Board Post:
- As you are thinking about your
program, how do you define your
audience?
- What context will your program be
placed?
- What are the constraints?

Discussion Board Post:
- As you are thinking about your
program, what is the overall objective
of your program?

54
-

4

Marketing/Eval
uation

5

Final
Assignment
Due

Model how to create
objectives
- Examples of strategies for
different types of
objectives
- Examples and resources
for exploration on how to
align strategies with
program activities
- Developing a materials
list based on activities
Think aloud modeling
- Define program
evaluation and explain
the importance
- Examples of types of
program evaluation
- Explain the importance of
having a Plan
- Example of when a Plan
B was needed
Provide feedback on final
assignment

-

-

What strategies/activities will you use
during the program?
What resources did you find most
helpful in developing activities for your
program?
What materials will you need for your
program to be successful?

Discussion Board Post:
- How will you evaluate whether or not
your program was successful?
- How will you market your program?

Final Assignment
- Completed individually
- Program outline with justifications

Participants were required to design a program design document using the content
presented in the course. This program design document was evaluated based on a rubric that
assessed the learner’s ability incorporate and justify all appropriate elements of a program
(Appendix E). Final product scores were compared between the two groups to determine if there
was a difference in learning outcomes between the control and treatment groups.
Directly following the conclusion of the class, participants were given an online survey to
determine how they felt about the overall instructional design of the course in order to answer
research questions three and four.
Once the study was complete and all data was collected, the following methods were
utilized in order to determine if there was a significant difference between the treatment and
control groups. To answer research question one, regarding difference in cognitive presence

55

between the two groups, the portion of the practical inquiry model that focuses on identifying
levels of cognitive presence (Appendix F) was utilized to analyze transcripts and performed a
content analysis of online conversations between the peer dyads. All transcripts were coded by
both the researcher and a research assistant until a consensus was reached on all interactions.
In order to determine whether or not there was a difference in learner outcomes between
the treatment and control group, participant final projects were graded using a rubric (Appendix
E). The scores from each group were compared to determine if there was a significant difference
between groups.
Finally, to ascertain the learner’s experience in the online peer coaching environment,
participants were asked to fill out an online survey (Appendix G) aimed at gathering information
regarding challenges and how they felt about participating in an online cognitive apprenticeship
that utilized peer coaching, as well as overall experiences of participants.
Data Analysis
Data collected to answer RQ1 was analyzed using a Mann Whitney U test to determine if
the use of guided reflective questions had an impact on cognitive presence. A Mann-Whitney U
test was utilized, as the assumption for homogeneity was not met and therefore a One-Way
ANOVA test could not be performed. RQ2 was analyzed using a one way, between groups
ANOVA in order to determine if the independent variable had an effect learning outcomes
(RQ2).
The surveys that were conducted to answer RQ3 and RQ4 were analyzed using content
analysis through a phenomenological lens. Phenomenological qualitative research designs are
used in order to analyze how the participants experience a phenomenon (Larkin, Watts, &
Clifton, 2005). In this case, the researcher evaluated how the participants experienced an online
cognitive apprenticeship as well as the use of the reflective questioning as a peer coaching

56

strategy. The researcher and a research assistant analyzed transcripts collected from participant
surveys, reached a consensus and determined trends in the data to decrease the chance of
researcher bias. As trends were identified, the researcher and research assistant continued to code
the trends and categorize them into broader, more global themes (Larkin et al., 2005). For a
comprehensive view of each research question and the associated variables, methods, and
analysis, see Table 3.
Table 3
Research Questions and Associated Variables, Methods, and Analysis
Research Question

Variable

Data Collection Method

Data Analysis

RQ1: What is the
level of cognitive
presence in discussion
board posts between
peer dyads in the
treatment group and
the control group?
RQ2: What difference
exists in learner
outcomes between the
treatment and control
group

IV: guided
reflective
questions
(Appendix A)
DV: Cognitive
Presence

Practical Inquiry Protocol
(Appendix F)

Mann-Whitney U test

IV: guided
reflective
questions
(Appendix A)
DV: final
product grade
IV: guided
reflective
questions
(Appendix A)
DV:
Challenges
faced
IV: guided
reflective
questions
(Appendix A)
DV: Feelings
about peer
coaching

Graded Final Product utilizing
pre-determined rubric
(Appendix E)

One-way, Between
groups ANOVA

Online Survey (Appendix G)

Phenomenological
Content Analysis

Online Survey (Appendix G)

Phenomenological
Content Analysis

Online Discussion Board Posts

Content Analysis

RQ3: What challenges
do learners experience
when participating in
peer coaching?

RQ4: How do learners
feel about utilizing
peer coaching in an
online, asynchronous,
cognitive
apprenticeship for
professional
development?

RQ5: What types of
questions do peer
coaches ask while
participating in an

57

online asynchronous
cognitive
apprenticeship?

58

CHAPTER III
RESULTS
Data was collected from discussion board conversations between peer dyads, graded final
assignments, and from a post-class survey. This study sought to answer the following questions:
1. What is the level of cognitive presence in discussion board posts between peer dyads
that received the guided reflective questions (treatment) and the peer dyads that did
not receive the guided reflective questions (control)?
2. What difference exists in learner outcomes between the treatment and control groups?
3. What challenges do learners experience when participating in peer coaching?
4. What are learners’ perceptions regarding the utilization of peer coaching in an online,
asynchronous, cognitive apprenticeship for professional development?
5. What types of questions do peer coaches ask while participating in an online
asynchronous cognitive apprenticeship?

Sample Characteristics
A total of 123 programming librarians and paraprofessionals registered for the online
professional development course. Participants were randomly placed in either the control or
treatment group and were placed in a peer dyad for the duration of the study based. Of the 123
original registrants, 23 participated in the weekly discussion board posts for the control group
(Group 1), and 19 participated in the weekly discussion board posts for the treatment group
(Group 2) for a total of 42 participants, 34% of the original sample size. Further descriptors of
each group can be found in the Table 4 and Table 5:

59

Table 4
Characteristics of the Control Group (Group 1)
Total Participants

23

Average number of weekly
discussion board posts
Total number of interactions
analyzed
Gender

3.8 out of 5

Location

Programming Specialty

Programming Experience

53
1 Male (4%)
22 Female (96%)
11 Virginia (47.8%)
2 North Carolina (8.7%)
2 Illinois (8.7%)
1 Hawaii (4.3%)
1 Maine (4.3%)
1 Ontario (4.3%)
1 Pennsylvania (4.3%)
1 South Carolina (4.3%)
3 Non Response (13%)
10 Youth and Family Services (43.5%)
6 Adult (26.1%)
1 Technology (4.3%)
3 Non Response (13%)
3 No Programming Experience (13%)
20 Previous Experience (87%)
3 No Programming Experience (13%)

Table 5
Characteristics of the Treatment Group (Group 2)
Total Participants
Average number of weekly discussion board
posts
Total number of interactions analyzed
Gender

19
3.1 out of 5
40
1 Male (5.3%)
18 Female (94.7%)

60

Location

Program Specialty

Programming Experience

9 Virginia (47.4%)
2 Tennessee (10.5%)
1 Alabama (5.3%)
1 Arizona (5.3%)
1 California (5.3%)
1 Georgia (5.3%)
1 Kansas (5.3%)
1 Michigan (5.3%)
1 North Carolina (5.3%)
1 No Response (5.3%)
6 Youth and Family Services
(31.6%)
8 Adult (42.1%)
1 Technology (5.3%)
4 No programming experience
(21.1%)
15 Previous Experience (78.9%)
4 No Programming Experience
(21.1%)

On Monday of every week, a weekly lecture was posted related to an aspect of program
planning, along with discussion board prompts for each peer dyad. Participants in the treatment
group were reminded to utilized the guided reflective questions in order to keep the conversation
going throughout the week. Since the course focused on planning a public library program,
participants were asked to submit a final program outline at the conclusion of the class as their
final product. Participants were given feedback and a grade based on their performance.
Of the 123 original participants, only 23 participated in the weekly discussion board posts
for the control group, and 10 participated in the weekly discussion board posts for the treatment
group. It should be noted that not all participants in each dyad that posted to the discussion board
interacted with their partner. There were some instances in which only one peer posted
throughout the five weeks, with no interaction from the second peer. Table 6 shows the number
of participants that interacted, as well as the number of interactions per week for the control

61

group, and Table 7 details the same information for the treatment group. Only dyads that
interacted were included.
Table 6
Frequency of Interactions by Peer Dyads in the Control Group
Weekly Group
Designation
DYAD 1/ WEEK 1
DYAD 1/ WEEK 2
DYAD 1/ WEEK 3
DYAD 1/ WEEK 4
DYAD 1/ WEEK 5
DYAD 2/ WEEK 1
DYAD 2/ WEEK 2
DYAD 2/ WEEK 3
DYAD 4/ WEEK 1
DYAD 4/ WEEK 2
DYAD 4/ WEEK 3
DYAD 4/ WEEK 4
DYAD 4/ WEEK 5
DYAD 8/ WEEK 1
DYAD 8/ WEEK 2
DYAD 8/ WEEK 3
DYAD 8/ WEEK 4
DYAD 8/ WEEK 5
DYAD 9/ WEEK 1
DYAD 9/ WEEK 2
DYAD 9/ WEEK 3
DYAD 9/ WEEK 4
DYAD 9/ WEEK 5
DYAD 12/ WEEK 1
DYAD 12/ WEEK 2
DYAD 12/ WEEK 3
DYAD 12/ WEEK 4
DYAD 12/ WEEK 5
DYAD 13/ WEEK 1
DYAD 13/ WEEK 2
DYAD 14/ WEEK 1
DYAD 14/ WEEK 2
DYAD 14/ WEEK 3
DYAD 14/ WEEK 4
DYAD 14/ WEEK 5
DYAD 17/ WEEK 1

# of Participants
Interacting
3
2
2
2
1
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
2
3
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
1

# of
Interactions
6
4
3
5
1
3
4
2
6
3
4
3
7
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
7
5
4
2
3
3
1
9
6
4
2
2
1

62

DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD

17/ WEEK
17/ WEEK
17/ WEEK
17/ WEEK
18/ WEEK
18/ WEEK
18/ WEEK
18/ WEEK
18/ WEEK
20/ WEEK
20/ WEEK
20/ WEEK
20/ WEEK
20/ WEEK
21/ WEEK
21/ WEEK
21/ WEEK

2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3

1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1

1
1
1
1
7
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
1

Table 7
Frequency of Interactions by Peer Dyads in the Treatment Group
Weekly Group
Designation
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD

1/ WEEK
1/ WEEK
1/ WEEK
1/ WEEK
1/ WEEK
2/ WEEK
2/ WEEK
2/ WEEK
2/ WEEK
3/ WEEK
3/ WEEK
3/ WEEK
4/ WEEK
6/ WEEK
7/ WEEK
7/ WEEK
8/ WEEK
8/ WEEK
8/ WEEK
8/ WEEK

1
2
3
4
5
1
2
4
5
1
2
3
1
2
1
2
1
2
3
4

# of
Participants
Interacting
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1

# of
Interactions
2
3
2
2
1
3
2
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
2
1

63

DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD
DYAD

8/ WEEK 5
11/ WEEK 1
14/ WEEK 1
14/ WEEK 2
14/ WEEK 3
14/ WEEK 4
14/ WEEK 5
16/ WEEK 1
16/ WEEK 2
16/ WEEK 3
18/ WEEK 1
18/ WEEK 2
18/ WEEK 3
21/ WEEK 1
21/ WEEK 2
21/ WEEK 3
21/ WEEK 4
22/ WEEK 1
22/ WEEK 2
22/ WEEK 3

1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
5
2
7
7
4
5
2
3
1
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
1
1

Following the study all original 123 participants that registered for the course were given
a post-course survey in order to determine participant challenges and experiences while
participating in the course. Additionally, the researcher and a research assistant analyzed all
weekly posts and assigned them a cognitive presence score.
Cognitive Presence Levels
Cognitive presence was measured using the Practical Inquiry Protocol (Rodriguez, 2014).
There was a total of 53 weekly interactions for the control group (Group 1) and 40 weekly
interactions for the treatment group (Group 2). A Mann-Whitney U test was conducted in order
to determine what difference in cognitive presence existed between the two groups. SPSS
software was utilized in order to complete the statistical test. The confidence level was set at
0.05.
Table 8 highlights the descriptive statistics and Table 9 is a presentation of the MannWhitney U Test. The mean cognitive presence score for the control group was 2.87 and the

64

mean cognitive presence score for the treatment group was 2.43. The control group’s cognitive
presence scores were significantly higher than the treatment group, U=805, p<.05.
Table 8
Descriptive Statistics for Research Question 1
N
CP_Score 93

Mean

Std.
Minimum
Deviation
.969
1

2.68

Maximum

25th

50th

75th

4

2.00

3.00

3.00

Table 9
Results of the Mann-Whitney U Test for Research Question 1

CP_Score

Group
1
2
Total

N
53
40
93

Mean Rank
51.81
40.63

Sum of Ranks
2746.00
1625.00

CP_Score
Mann-Whitney U

805.000

Wilcoxon W

1625.000

Z

-2.098

Asymp. Sig (2-tailed)

.036

Differences in Learner Outcomes
The final assignment, which resulted in a program outline was assessed using a rubric
(Appendix B). A total of 19 participants turned in a final copy of a program outline. Of those
participants 11 were in the control group (Group 1) and 8 were in the treatment group (Group 2).
A One-Way ANOVA test was conducted in order to determine what difference in cognitive
presence existed between the two groups. The test for homogeneity found that there was not a
significant difference between groups. SPSS software was utilized in order to complete the
statistical test. The confidence level was set at 0.05.

65

Table 10 highlights the descriptive statistics and Table 11 is a presentation of the OneWay ANOVA Test. There was no significant difference between the control and the treatment
group, F(1, 17) = 5.68, p= .462.
Table 10
Descriptive Statistics for Research Question 2

1
2
Total

N

Mean

11
8
19

15.18
16.75
15.84

Std.
Deviation
3.545
5.548
4.425

Std.
Error
1.069
1.962
1.015

Lower
Bound
12.80
12.11
13.71

Upper
Bound
17.56
21.39
17.98

Minimum

Maximum

9
6
6

19
22
22

Table 11
Results of the One-Way ANOVA Test for Research Question 2

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Levene Statistic
.825

Sum of
Squares
11.390
341.136
352.526

df1
1

df

Mean Square

F

Sig.

1
17
18

11.390
20.67

.568

.462

Test of Homogeneity of Variance
df2
17

Sig
.376

Directly following the five-week course on program planning, all participants who
originally registered for the course were asked to complete an online survey in order to
determine any challenges they encountered. Since only 34% of the original registrants
participated, it was important to capture reasons why those who did not participate, failed to
complete the course, and therefore to determine barriers and challenges they encountered. Of the
35 respondents, 24 completed and participated in the course, and 11 respondents did not. The

66

researcher and research assistant reviewed responses from the post-course survey and determined
a number of themes which will be discussed below.
Challenges Learners Experience Participating in Peer Coaching
The themes associated with the challenges participants experienced were lack of time and
lack of peer engagement. The themes are further outlined and defined below:
Lack of Time. Participants were originally excited about attending the course, and
believed the content would help them with their current positions or in advancing their careers.
However, oftentimes they reported it became difficult to prioritize professional development and
other work responsibilities and obligations.
“Almost immediately after signing up, I got assigned to be the liaison for a project that
has had to take up a lot of my time. The rest of my time had to be dedicated to the
upgrade to our ILS, which required some effort in learning and purchasing as many
books as our budget would allow before the upgrade bogged down acquisitions. In short,
I didn’t expect to lose all of my extra time I thought I would be able to put towards
participating in this course.” (Participant 5)
Participant 5 talks about her intention of participating in the course, but she was given an
unexpected project at work, a project that required her to take the time to learn a new system.
The free time she was expecting to have in order to devote to the class was taken over by
unforeseen work obligations which made it difficult not only to keep up with the content of the
course, but to be accountable to her peer coach.
“Time management was huge. Most of us are working full time while being enrolled in
the class and had various work responsibilities to juggle. I often couldn’t get blackboard
to load on my laptop at home so I had to listen to the class lectures at work. Oftentimes I
wouldn’t respond or get a response from my teammate until well into the next week of
class. I felt like we communicated well when we did respond but I could have gotten
more out of the class if we had responded to each other more quickly.” (Participant 69)
Participant 69 hits on a number of challenges that participants in the asynchronous peer
coaching experienced. For one, time management in general. She indicated that she had to juggle

67

all of her work responsibilities on top of the course responsibilities, which often made her late to
respond to her peer coach. She attempted to utilize her free time outside of work in order to
participate in the course, but found it difficult to access the material and was therefore, forced to
complete the coursework during work hours. Additionally, Participant 69 indicates that had the
conditions of the peer coaching been ideal, and her and her partner could communicate on a
more regular and frequent basis that she would have been able to get more out of the class.
Lack of Peer Engagement. Participants indicated that aside from time management, one
of the biggest hurdles was engaging their peer coach, often being met with a lack of response
from their partner.
“I admit that making it a priority was difficult for me especially since my peer I was
supposed to be interacting with was not present it seemed like a one way conversation. I
also went on vacation half way through the class and didn’t have computer access to
complete the course.” (Participant 61)
“Not knowing if the other person was around, or on schedule. (And then I fell off, so it
sucked knowing I let my partner down).” (Participant 46)
Participant 61 and 46 both had peers that did not participate in the weekly discussions.
Since their peer did not participate, they felt little accountability for participating in the course
themselves, even though each week had discussion board posts related to the content presented
in the lectures. They did not feel the need to interact with the content, because they lacked
somebody to converse with and work through the discussion board prompts, and did not feel the
need to reflect on the content on their own.

68

Learners’ Perceptions
The themes associated with participant experiences with asynchronous peer coaching
were fresh perspectives and access to resources. Each theme is defined and further discussed
below. Since challenges were related to RQ3, they are not discussed in this section.
Fresh Perspectives. Participants who had an engaged peer coach enjoyed the experience
as it provided feedback and different perspectives on the program planning process.
“I enjoyed interacting with my partner! I found it very helpful to have someone to bounce
ideas around, point out what might not work, what she’d already done that did work. It
was also refreshing to hear that we go through the same things in trying to plan/present
programs in our very different library areas.” (Participant 91)
“I liked being able to talk to others in a similar position to me since I work at a small
library where I don’t get to talk to people who are also in charge of programming very
often.” (Participant 105)
Participants who had an engaged peer found it very useful in order to share ideas,
brainstorm, receive feedback and share differing perspectives. This was especially important for
librarians and programmers who work in small library teams and are the sole person responsible
for programming within the library. In these instances, unless they are members of online
listservs or programming groups, they rarely have the opportunity to interact with other
professionals and paraprofessionals who are in similar positions and dealing with similar
problems.
“Overall, I think it was very informative and a great way to connect with other librarians
and see what they’re doing with programming in their area and how they approach
planning a program for their specific audience” (Participant 69)
“To some extent, yes. But I think the program overall gave me ideas on how to handle
things, and also gave me tips about things I hadn’t thought about (such as what to do with
the kids that would be present at my program.” (Participant 91)
Not only did interacting with somebody in similar positions bring different perspectives
on problems, or kinds of programs being offered, but it also allowed participants like Participant

69

69 and Participant 91 the opportunity to see the planning process other programmers use when
designing and developing their programs, and to give them a fresh perspective on things to
consider that they may not have considered previously. For example, Participant 91indicated that
by interacting with her peer, an issue was brought to her attention regarding what she should do
with children that would probably be brought to a program that focused on highlighting
preschools and daycares in the participant’s city, as parents who are looking for preschools or
daycares more than likely are the primary caregiver for their child. This led to Participant
91incorporating storytime and other children’s activities at the same time in order to ‘distract’
the kids while their caregivers can obtain valuable information related to childcare and
preschool.
Access to Resources. Participants acknowledged that one of the more useful aspects of
the asynchronous, cognitive apprenticeship, was access to centralized resources, as participants
had the ability to download lectures, and continue to access the list of resources made available
to the class, even after the course ended.
“I liked being paired with a teammate and that allowed us to focus on sharing information
with one person as opposed to sharing information with every student and responding to
50 new posts a week instead of just one. I liked the format of the lectures (power point
with voice over lecture) and that we could download the power points and videos
afterward. I also like the questions that were asked in each lecture that helped us think
about how we wanted to plan our program for our assignment.” (Participant 69)
“Having access to the link resources (Youth and Family, Teen, Adult) and a general
program outline document were extremely helpful in finishing the assignment for this
course as well as planning future programs” (Participant 69).
Participant 69 highlights the usefulness of how the course was structured, as it not only
allowed participants to download resources and keep them for future program planning, but also
allowed them continued access to the course so they can continue to refer to the resources, be it

70

the lectures, outlines, questions to ask themselves, or actual websites with valuable programming
information.
“No, but we did inspire each other with giving advice on programs we are doing now and
want to implement in the future. I assisted my teammate with advice about running an
anime program for teens and she gave me insight on running a daycare/preschool open
house for the community at the library”(Participant 69).
“The opportunity to do some networking; I connected with a librarian in my area, and I
think it will be a beneficial relationship for both parties” (Participant 37)
“I enjoyed it … It was good to talk to someone in a similar position as me but with more
experience” (Participant 105).
Participants not only found the digital resources valuable, but those who had an engaged
peer found their peers to be valuable resources for many reasons, such learning from their peer s’
previous experience, and finding somebody they can connect with outside of their own library
system.
Questions Asked in Peer Dyads
In an attempt to better understand the kind of communication that happens between peers
in online discussion boards. Questions were categorized based on how they were phrased and
were analyzed based on frequency. Data that were collected can be found in Table 12 and Table
13. Only discussion board prompts that received a response were included.
Table 12
Questions Posed by Peer Dyads in the Control Group
WEEKLY GROUP
DESIGNATION
Dyad 1/ week 1

Dyad 1/ week 2
Dyad 1/ week 3
Dyad 1/ week 4

Question

TYPE OF QUESTION

Do you have a concentration in
library school (reference, children’s
services, etc?)
N/A
N/A
N/A

Yes/No

N/A
N/A
N/A

71

Dyad 1/ week 5
Dyad 2/ week 1

Dyad 2/ week 2
Dyad 2/ week 3
Dyad 4/ week 1
Dyad 4/ week 2
Dyad 4/ week 3
Dyad 4/ week 4
Dyad 4/ week 5
Dyad 8/ week 1
Dyad 8/ week 2
Dyad 8/ week 3
Dyad 8/ week 4
Dyad 8/ week 5
Dyad 9/ week 1
Dyad 9/ week 2
Dyad 9/ week 3
Dyad 9/ week 4
Dyad 9/ week 5
Dyad 12/ week 1
Dyad 12/ week 2
Dyad 12/ week 3
Dyad 12/ week 4
Dyad 12/ week 5
Dyad 13/ week 1
Dyad 13/ week 2
Dyad 14/ week 1

Dyad 14/ week 2
Dyad 14/ week 3
Dyad 14/ week 4
Dyad 14/ week 5
Dyad 17/ week 1
Dyad 17/ week 2
Dyad 17/ week 3
Dyad 17/ week 4
Dyad 17/ week 5
Dyad 18/ week 1
Dyad 18/ week 2
Dyad 18/ week 3

N/A
Do you have any experience with
program planning or something
similar?
How large is your library system?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
What about you Lee?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Do you guys go out and ask patrons
what they want?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Any thoughts or advice?
How far ahead do you plan
programs?
What do you think?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Do you think you would only have
programs in the library or venture
out?

N/A
Yes/No

Background info
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Reflective
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Yes/No
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Reflective
Background Info
Reflective
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Yes/No

72

Dyad 18/ week 4
Dyad 18/ week 5
Dyad 20/ week 1
Dyad 20/ week 2
Dyad 20/ week 3
Dyad 20/ week 4
Dyad 20/ week 5
Dyad 21/ week 1
Dyad 21/ week 2
Dyad 21/ week 3

How does your library handle
program proposals/outlines?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Background Info
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Table 13
Questions Posed by Peer Dyads in the Treatment Group
WEEKLY GROUP
DESIGNATION
Dyad 1/ week 1
Dyad 1/ week 2
Dyad 1/ week 3
Dyad 1/ week 4
Dyad 1/ week 5
Dyad 2/ week 1
Dyad 2/ week 2
Dyad 2/ week 4
Dyad 2/ week 5
Dyad 3/ week 1

Dyad 3/ week 2

Dyad 3/ week 3

QUESTION

TYPE OF QUESTION

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
How is database usage at your
library?
How have you been determining
program needs at your library?
N/A
How would you market and
evaluate?
What is your experience with
program planning?
What topic are you thinking of
presenting?
What needs assessment methods are
you using or planning on using?
Have you had luck with surveys?
What kinds of questions do you ask
on them?
What is your target audience for
your program? And is it going to be
educational, experiential, or
exploratory?

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Background Info
Reflective
N/A
Reflective
Reflective
Background Info
Reflective
Background Info
Background Info
Reflective

Reflective

73

Dyad 4/ week 1
Dyad 6/ week 2
Dyad 7/ week 1
Dyad 7/ week 2
Dyad 8/ week 1

Dyad 8/ week 2
Dyad 8/ week 3
Dyad 8/ week 4
Dyad 8/ week 5
Dyad 11/ week 1
Dyad 14/ week 1

Dyad 14/ week 2

Dyad 14/ week 3

Dyad 14/ week 4

Dyad 14/ week 5

Do you have a large library with a
lot of space? Or are you limited in
size?
N/A
Have you planned any programs
before or do you have any coming?
N/A
N/A
What kind of stations would you
have?
Does your library have ways they
gather public input to analyze what
type of programming to offer?
N/A
N/A
What do you think?
N/A
N/A
Is there a way you can learn from the
way they developed the program?
A small staff is always difficult- are
you able to have help from the
bigger branch?
What challenges did you face when
trying to determine what your
community needs?
Which day and time would be
better? A Saturday program, a
weekday afternoon, or an evening
for an upcoming event?
If we had the Healthy Heart program
on a weekday evening would we
have more attendance?
Are you thinking about doing the
program for Children or Young
Adult?
What things do you have in mind?
How’s your outline coming?
How is your development for your
program coming along? Are you
developing one on one sessions or a
round robin class?
Are you planning it as a family
activity or mainly kids to young
adult?

N/A
Background Info
N/A
N/A
Reflective
Background Info

N/A
N/A
Reflective
N/A
N/A
Reflective
Background Info

Reflective

Reflective

Reflective

Background Info

Reflective
Background Info
Background Info

Background Info

74

Dyad 16/ week 1

Dyad 16/ week 2
Dyad 16/ week 3
Dyad 18/ week 1
Dyad 18/ week 2
Dyad 18/ week 3
Dyad 21/ week 1

Dyad 21/ week 2
Dyad 21/ week 3
Dyad 21/ week 4
Dyad 22/ week 1
Dyad 22/ week 2
Dyad 22/ week 3

So, for a quick question do you have
a Teen/Young Adult Advisory
Group/Council/Board at your
library?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
We are no longer able to provide
food of any kind in our system, are
you able to offer popcorn?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Background Info

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Background Info

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

The frequency of the type of questions can be found in Table 14.
Table 14
Question Frequency
GROUP
Control
Control
Control
Treatment
Treatment
Treatment

TYPE OF QUESTION
Yes/No
Background Info
Reflective
Yes/No
Background Info
Reflective

FREQUENCY
4
3
3
0
13
13

Summary
This chapter explained the results of the analysis of the data collected during the study.
While there was no statistically significant difference between groups in terms of learning
outcomes, there was a significant different between groups in terms of level of cognitive
presence, with the control group having a higher level of cognitive presence than the treatment
group. Themes related to participant challenges were lack of time and peer engagement.

75

Participants experienced fresh perspectives from their peer partners, and appreciated the access
to resources that they had during the course, including websites, lectures, and other individuals.
Chapter 4 will go into further discussion related to the results and the implications for the field of
instructional design, opportunities and constraints related to professional development, and
future research.

76

CHAPTER IV
DISCUSSION
The goal of this study was to determine if cognitive presence could be enhanced through
the use of guided reflective questions, specifically through the use of peer coaching. Peer
coaching strategies were used in order to decrease the workload on the instructor and place the
coaching strategy of a cognitive apprenticeship within the purview of students as opposed to the
instructor with some guidance in the form of reflective questions. This section attempts to
provide meaning related to the results that were presented in the previous chapter. Limitations,
implications for the practical aspects of the field of instructional design, library sciences
professional development, and suggestions for future research related to the current study will
also be discussed.
The current study sought to answer the following research questions:
1. What is the level of cognitive presence in discussion board posts between peer dyads
that received the guided reflective questions and the peer dyads that did not receive
the guided reflective questions?
2. What difference exists in learner outcomes between the treatment and control groups?
3. What challenges do learners experience when participating in peer coaching?
4. What are learners’ perceptions regarding the utilization of peer coaching in an online,
asynchronous, cognitive apprenticeship for professional development?
5. What type of questions do peer coaches ask while participating in an online
asynchronous cognitive apprenticeship?
Difference in Cognitive Presence Levels

77

Results indicated that the control group’s cognitive presence scores were significantly
higher than the treatment group’s scores. This is an interesting finding, considering the control
group did not receive any guided reflective questions. However, it is important to note that the
control group had more participants who actually interacted on a weekly basis, with a total of 53
interactions over the course of the five weeks of instruction. The average number of weekly
discussion board posts for this group was 3.8 (Table 6) and the average number of weekly
discussion board posts for the treatment group was 3.1 (Table 7) with a total of 40 weekly
interactions over the course of five weeks. Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (1999) had proposed
that in order for critical thinking and learning to occur, there must be a high level of social
presence in which the learners interact with one another, constructing meaning through
conversations and exploring past experiences. The finding in the current study in which the
participants in the control group exhibited a higher level of cognitive presence supports this
assertion and further supports the idea that learning is a social experience (Bandura, 1971).
While the number of interactions between the peer dyads was not considered in this current
study, it is important to note that based on the fact that the control group had a statistically
significant higher level of cognitive presence, that this may be a contributing factor to the
increased amount of cognitive presence. It would be worth looking into what specific factors
enhance critical thinking. Is it the quality and amount of questions that group members ask each
other? Or is it the number of interactions between individuals, regardless of whether or not
questions are asked? This information can provide guidance for instructional designers who are
designing in an online environment, in order to increase understanding, critical thinking, and
higher levels of learning.

78

Another factor that may have impacted the results for this research question is the fact
that the discussion board prompts that were given on a weekly basis included questions that
began with How, and Why, which are indicative of reflective questions (Graesser & Person,
1994; Mason, 2012) (Appendix A). It is possible that participants were unintentionally given
reflective questions by the researcher, which prompted them to reflect on their current program
planning process and to note differences between their process and the process that was outlined
in the course. Participants often would answer the questions based on their prior experience, as
well as what their current process has been in designing the library program for the course,
which again supports Garrison, Anderson, and Archer’s (1999) inclusion of social presence in
their Community of Inquiry model. This could also explain the reason why participants who did
not have an interactive peer, had a somewhat high level of cognitive presence on their own,
because they were interacting with the content, and in a way, passively with the instructor by
answering and elaborating on the discussion board posts. They lacked the feedback, support, and
differing perspectives that were associated with peer interactions in this course. Therefore, these
students were utilizing reflective practices, even if they lacked the social interaction from their
partner. This supports the need for reflective practice during learning in order to better
understand one’s internal thinking processes (Schön, 1983; Schön, 1987, Shapiro & Reiff, 1993),
however in the case in which there was no social interaction from the peer coach, this resembled
more of a personal, reflective journal, than it did of a discussion.
Difference in Learner Outcomes
A One-Way ANOVA test was utilized to determine if there was a significant difference
in final product scores between the control and the treatment group. The test indicated that there
was no significant difference between the two groups. This result indicates while there is not a
significant difference in scores between the two groups, the treatment group had slightly higher

79

product scores. This is probably due to the fact that there were fewer participants that completed
the final product (n= 8) and those that did were probably more motivated to do well in the
course.
Additionally, this also begs the question of whether or not there is a correlation between
participants who exhibited a high level of cognitive presence and those who scored high on the
final product, as the current study only investigated the total level of cognitive presence within
the interaction of the peer dyad as opposed to individual levels of cognitive presence as
participants interacted with their peer. Since the learner outcome was an individual assessment,
individual levels of cognitive presence may have impacted understanding and implementation of
the content into a final product in the form of a program outline.
Challenges Learners Experience in Peer Coaching
Following the completion of the five-week course, all 123 initial registrants were asked to
complete an online survey highlighting the challenges they experienced while participating in the
course, as well as their overall experience participating in online peer coaching. Registrants who
did not fully participate in the course were asked to complete the survey in an attempt to garner
information related to why they did not fully participate. Of the 123 participants who registered
for the online professional development course, 35 participants completed the post course
survey. Of the 35 participants, 11 respondents were not active participants in the online
professional development course. Since the 11 respondents that were not active participants in
the course, and therefore would not be able to adequately answer all of the questions, they were
only asked to answer the reflection question addressing challenges they faced while attempting
to participate in the professional development course. The researcher and research assistant then
reviewed the survey responses from a phenomenological lens and determined overarching

80

themes. Two themes stood out related to challenges participants experienced: lack of time and
lack of peer engagement
Lack of Time. Participants indicated they were excited about taking the course as they
wanted to increase their program planning skills and to gain insights from other participants on
how to better create their programs, however life and other work priorities seemed to always get
in the way of participants’ professional development. For example, Participant 5 was given an
unexpected work project that took up all of her free time that she was planning on devoting to
this course. This was not an unsurprising theme, as working professionals often have to juggle
their work responsibilities and their need and desire to improve their quality of work, gain
information, learn a new skill, etc. Head (2016) conducted online surveys of 1,651 participants
who were recent graduates to determine their information seeking patterns now that they were
out of college. Head (2016) found that respondents preferred informal learning opportunities due
to the minimal time commitment. For example, 79% of respondents preferred to use YouTube
when they needed to learn something for their job, and 51% utilized Pinterest. However, only a
small percentage took advantage of formal learning opportunities such as online classes through
Coursera because they were unable to juggle life, job responsibilities, and a formal online class.
Lack of Peer Engagement. Participants indicated that one of the biggest challenges was
not having a partner to engage with, as many individuals who originally registered for the course
failed to participate in the weekly discussions, primarily due to the inability to prioritize
professional development above their other work responsibilities. Without having a peer to
engage with during the five-week course, many participants lost the motivation to participate in
the weekly discussions due to the fact that there was nobody to interact with, or to gain a new
prospective from, which is one of the main reasons why participants registered for the course.

81

Respondents were looking for engagement from their peers. Those who did have an
engaged peer indicated that they appreciated not having to respond to 50 other participants in a
general discussion board (Participant 69). This allowed them to have more meaningful
conversations. Those who did not have an engaged peer suggested having more than two people
in a group in order to increase the chances of having at least one peer to interact and learn from,
instead of relying solely on one additional person who may not be as motivated to complete the
course.
Learner Experiences Utilizing Peer Coaching
Following the five-week course, during the post-course survey, participants were also
asked questions related to their experience participating in the online, asynchronous, cognitive
apprenticeship utilizing peer coaching strategies in order to inform future design. The researcher
and research assistant then analyzed participant responses in order to determine themes via a
phenomenological lens. Two themes stood out related to how participants experienced peer
coaching in an asynchronous, online environment: fresh perspectives and access to resources.
The themes and results were outlined in Chapter III, and will be further discussed here.
Fresh Perspectives. Participants indicated that they registered for the class in order to
gain fresh perspectives from other librarians and paraprofessionals who are responsible for
planning programs at their respective branches. Those who had a responsive peer indicated that
this was one of the most useful aspects of the peer coaching experience: having access to have
somebody to bounce ideas off and see how things are done in other library systems. This was
particularly useful for Participant 105 who works in a relatively small library system where she
is the only one planning and implementing programs, and feels cut off from the rest of the
profession.

82

This finding was not at all surprising, especially considering the social nature of learning
that informs the design of cognitive apprenticeships (Collins, et al., 1991), and is one of the main
reasons for the inclusion of a community of practice, giving practitioners in a particular field the
opportunity to bounce ideas off other practitioners, seek feedback, and most of all to learn from
one another in either a formal or information learning space (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Access to Resources. A repeated comment from most participants who responded to the
post-course survey was that they appreciated the ability to continue to access resources following
the course. This ranged from the ability to download the weekly lectures, to having access to the
online resources that were related to program planning, and even to having access to other
participants in the study. This again shows the need for resources to be readily available for
individuals who are interested in improving the quality of their work. They may not have the
time to go out and search for resources on their own time, as this would compete with other work
priorities. However, if somebody pulls resources together that have already been vetted, they are
more likely to use them in order to enhance their professional development.
Much like the appreciation of fresh perspectives from their peers, access to resources has
more to do with the actual design of the course, specifically utilizing a cognitive apprenticeship
approach. Access to resources speaks to the exploration strategy of a cognitive apprenticeship
(Collins et al., 1987), as well as the use of a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991), as a
community of practice could in theory be one centralized location where resources are available
for practitioners, in additional to having access to peers who are available for social learning.
Implications
This study was impacted by a number of limitations. First all participants had varying
levels of programming experience. In an attempt to pair peer dyads within their zone of proximal
development (Vygotsky, 1986), participants were given a pre-test in order to gauge individual

83

levels of experience. The signed informed consent and the pre-test were meant to be completed
before the course started, many participants did not complete the pre-test prior to the five-week
course. The researcher made an attempt to pair dyads together to the best of her ability. All
participants were asked to complete a pre-course survey that included questions related to prior
programming experience, in order to gauge whether or not the participant could be considered a
novice or an expert, in an attempt to pair peer dyads together that included one expert and one
novice. However, unfortunately not all participants completed the pre-course survey in a timely
manner, or at all, and therefore these peers were paired together randomly. This may have had an
impact on the quality of interaction in the peer dyads, as well as for those individuals who
decided to respond to the discussion board prompts, even though their peer did not respond,
which in turn may have had an impact on the level of cognitive presence that was demonstrated.
Hooper and Hannafin (1991) utilized two separate grouping strategies for middle school students
working on computer-based instruction. Dyads were either homogenous, meaning students had
relatively the same ability level, or heterogeneous, in which low-achievement students were
paired with higher achieving students. The authors found that lower achieving students did better
in the heterogeneous groups, however higher achieving students did not. Therefore, for future
research, if participants are paired based on their ZPD, it would be worth determining if there is a
correlation between the participant’s level of experience and level of cognitive presence
demonstrated in individual interactions, as opposed to the overall cognitive presence of the peer
dyad.
The discussion board prompts that were given each week to participants to begin
conversations between peers were in fact reflective questions. This may have impacted the level
of cognitive presence during each week’s discussion, especially for individuals who did not have

84

an interactive peer. This may have contributed to the somewhat high levels of cognitive presence
in the control group, where peer dyads were not given the guided reflective questions. Past
research found that most interactions only rate either triggering (1) or exploration (2). In the case
of this study, the average cognitive presence score for all participants was 2.68, indicating that
cognitive presence levels typically landed between exploration (2) and integration (3), which is
higher than previous studies (Shea et al., 2010)
Furthermore, it did not appear that participants in the treatment group utilized the guided
reflective questions, even though they were brought to their attention each week. The guided
reflective questions were in a section of the LMS, on a left-hand menu under “Course Info”.
Participants were asked to view an introductory video that demonstrated where all materials in
the course would be kept, including the weekly Camtasia videos, resources for program
planning, etc. In addition to visually directing participants with screen capture and audio as to the
location of the guided reflective questions, participants were encouraged with each discussion
board prompt to view the list of guided reflective questions in order to keep the conversation
going, and as a reminder that the questions were available. Participants may not have utilized the
guided reflective questions because they had to click on a different section of the LMS, away
from the discussion board post in order to access the list of guided reflective questions. This lack
of convenience may have contributed to their lack of use.
The number of participants who actually completed the study is an overall limitation.
Only 42 out of 123 registrants actually participated in the study, which makes completion rate of
34.1%. Even though the completion rate is above the 13% of most Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) (Onah, Sinclair, & Boyatt, 2014), with such small participation numbers, especially
divided between two groups, it makes it difficult to be able to generalize results.

85

Finally, all of the work-life variables that each participant faced (families, kids, other
work priorities, illnesses) impacted the amount of participation and interaction between peer
dyads. As other variables presented themselves, the participant’s professional development was
neglected, which had a direct impact on the number of participants who completed the course
and interacted with their peer. However, it is important to note that these challenges are not
unique to those working in public libraries. These time constraints and life variables are
something all working professionals must juggle, and exist, regardless of the work that is being
done.
Peer Coaching
When designing a cognitive apprenticeship, special attention should be given to the
coaching strategy. Peer coaching can be utilized in order to decrease the amount of time the
instructor takes to individually coach each student. This is especially important when the class
size is large. Much like previous research, the current research indicated that the social aspect of
peer coaching, in which learners are exposed to the previous experiences of their peers, as well
as their processes for working through a problem are beneficial to each peer, as they are not only
given the new information provided in professional development, but are given the opportunity
to work through the new material together, to better understand, utilize, and transfer the
information into their work (Showers, 1992; Showers & Joyce, 1996; Baker, 1983; Cordingley et
al., 2005; Ross, 1992). The utilization of peer coaching in an online setting, also provides
opportunity for social presence to occur, in which the learners create knowledge and
understanding of the content through social interaction (Garrison et al., 1999).
Additionally, in the current study, participants indicated that they enjoyed being paired
with a teammate, as it allowed them to focus on one other person, as opposed to the entire class
(Participant 69). This allowed for a more personal experience between peers and lessened the

86

amount of time each learner spent reading discussion board posts written by the entire class. The
impact on time spent in the class is significant, especially considering the lack of time librarians
and paraprofessionals indicated that they are able to devote to professional development.
Participants also indicated that they enjoyed having the ability to interact one on one with
other participants in the course. It allowed for networking, and the ability to bounce ideas off
somebody else who isn’t necessarily in the same library system. The difference in experience
levels and content areas provided opportunity to learn from each other. While there is no
research to support this in the field of library science, there has been a movement in teacher
education to provide professional development within the learner’s zone of proximal
development. This strategy is known as the zone of proximal teacher development (ZPTD)
(Warford, 2011). Teemant (2014) utilized a coaching framework to demonstrate and teach the
use of a new teaching pedagogy structure based on ZPD. Volunteer teachers participated in a 30hour workshop. Teachers placed in the treatment group received 15 hours of coaching.
Following the study, it was found that the treatment groups utilized the new pedagogy on a more
regular basis and sustained use of the new tool. Therefore, further investigation into the use of
ZPD as a way to pair peer dyads should be researched to determine if there is a significant
difference in adoption of systematic program planning for library staff.
Instructional designers can therefore utilize the principles of peer coaching when
designing online instruction in order to increase social interaction and presence among learners,
as well as to decrease the amount of time learners spend reading and responding to discussion
board posts from the entire class. Instead of being exposed to a large number of posts, learners
are exposed to higher levels of social presence, and higher quality posts. These interactions allow
learners to develop a stronger relationship with their peer, as opposed to just getting to know all

87

members of the class in a more surface level way. This deeper social relationship between fewer
individuals allows for everyone to have an opportunity to provide information on past
experiences, ask questions, brainstorm, and problem solve in a more intimate setting.
Reflective Questioning
The goal of reflective inquiry or questioning, is to elicit critical thinking and change.
Both reflective inquiry and coaching utilize questioning strategies (Shapiro & Reiff, 1993;
Stober & Grant, 2010). Pervious research into the use of reflective inquiry has been on the kinds
of questions used in order to enhance critical thinking. Mason (2012) focused on who, what,
when, where, why, and how questions, and Graesser & Person (1994) found success in utilizing
how and why questions. In the current study, the researcher provided a listed of suggested
reflective questions for the treatment group, and participants were encouraged to review the
questions in order to keep the discussion going, however, the questions were not utilized by
participants verbatim. As has been discussed previously, while the treatment group did not
demonstrate a significantly higher level of cognitive presence, they did ask more reflective
questions (Table 13). In the case of the current study, the participants did not ask the questions
verbatim, however the treatment group did ask more reflective questions than the control group.
Therefore, it is possible that the participants utilized the guided reflective questions as a model
for the kinds of questions they can ask during discussions with their peer partner. In this case,
the expert modeled the kinds of questions novices should ask during discussions in order to
continue meaningful interactions between peers in their dyad. This speaks to the modeling
strategy of cognitive apprenticeships, and reinforces the fact that modeling should be conducted
by the expert for the benefit of the novice (Collins et al., 1987).
Additionally, the researcher provided discussion board prompts that focused on reflective
questions (Appendix A) as opposed to simply asking what participants thought about the content

88

that was presented during the week, or to summarize or describe their past experiences. In order
to measure critical thinking, the practical inquiry protocol (Rodriguez, 2014) was utilized in
order to measure cognitive presence. The current study found there was significant difference
between the treatment and control group, with the control group having higher levels of
cognitive presence, while both groups had higher than average levels of cognitive presence
overall. Shea et al. (2010) reported that the most common levels of cognitive presence were
triggering (cognitive presence score = 1) and exploration (cognitive presence score = 2). The
current study found the mean cognitive presence score of the control group to be 2.87, which
places the average interaction between exploration (cognitive presence score = 2) or integration
(cognitive presence score = 3) and the mean cognitive presence score of the treatment group to
be 2.43, again, higher than just the exploration level. This inadvertent use of reflective questions
in the discussion prompt may have impacted cognitive presence levels in the two groups,
especially in the case of individuals that did not have a responsive and interactive peer. The
inadvertent use of reflective questioning in this manner helped to scaffold the reflecti ve process
of participants, even in cases when their peer partner was not engaged in the conversation.
Therefore, when designing online instruction, instructional designers should utilize
reflective questions in order to increase critical thinking and cognitive presence. This can be
done in a number of ways, such as modeling the kinds of questions learners can ask their peers
by giving suggestions of said questions, or by incorporating reflective questions in the discussion
board prompts. By providing reflective questions in the discussion board prompts, this allows the
self-motivated student who has an unresponsive peer to still have the opportunity to reflect on
past experiences, their own processes, and on the material presented in the course.

89

Public Library Professional Development
Implications for professional librarians and paraprofessionals have more to do with the
need for more social interaction between members of the field, and the availability of time for
professional development. Public library systems come in a variety of sizes from the one branch
system, to systems have dozens of branches. The amount of interaction librarians and
paraprofessionals have with other staff in the system depends greatly on the organizational
structure of the library system, as well as the size of the library system. And, while there are state
and national professional organizations for libraries and paraprofessionals, it appears based on
this study librarians and professionals are seeking opportunities to develop relationships and
networking opportunities in order to gain fresh perspectives and to have a group of people to
bounce ideas off one another and problem solve through issues they are facing at work. For
example, Participant 105 indicated she enjoyed having the ability to communicate with others in
the field, since she comes from a small system and doesn’t have that opportunity interact with
other professionals very often. Additionally, other participants mentioned enjoying having the
ability to discuss issues with more experienced programmers. These findings imply that there is a
need for a more formal and active community of practice in which library staff can network with
other professionals and paraprofessionals outside of their library system to seek support,
feedback, and resources in order to improve the quality of their work.
In addition to seeking opportunities for social interaction and networking with other
library staff, participants indicated that lack of time makes it incredibly difficult to devote time to
professional development, especially ongoing, time consuming professional development. The
field of public libraries is quickly changing with the advent of technology and processes that
continue to automate tasks such as cataloging and circulation, and place a larger focus on library
programming and community building. With these changes, comes the need for professional

90

development in order to navigate the change and provide better services for the public. This
paired with the fact that professionals and paraprofessionals find that they do not have enough
time for professional development, aside from a one-hour webinar, demonstrates a larger
problem on the organizational level. Articles have been published speaking on the need for
professional development and make reference to the financial and time constraints library staff
face when seeking out professional development (La Chapelle & Wark, 2014; Stephens, 2014).
However, these statements have not been verified as no research has been conducted to
determine what specific challenges public library staff face that prevent them from participating
in quality professional development. These potential challenges and constraints have
implications in terms of organizational cultures of learning, and what each library system
prioritizes. If libraries want to see growth in the quality of the services they provide to patrons,
time for professional development must be made a priority.
Cognitive Apprenticeship Implications
It is important to note that the six strategies that are utilized to design cognitive
apprenticeships are not linear, nor iterative. In fact, the strategies tend to overlap with one
another. In the current study, the use of peer coaching in an online, asynchronous cognitive
apprenticeship supports five out of six of the strategies that make up a cognitive apprenticeship,
simultaneously (See Figure 2).

91

Coaching

Modeling

Exploration

Reflection

Scaffolding

Articulation

Figure 2. Overlap of cognitive apprenticeship strategies.
It is important for modeling to occur first in order to demonstrate the thought process of
the expert while teaching the novice a skill. Without the modeling process, the novice cannot
develop a model of how to work through the new skill, solve the problem, or work through the
process (Bandura, 1971, 1977). Once the skill has been modeled, the use of peer coaching, and
specifically the use of reflective questions supports the simultaneous application of the majority
of the strategies that make up a cognitive apprenticeship: coaching, articulation, scaffolding,
reflection, and exploration.
Coaching. Traditionally, in cognitive apprenticeships, coaching is a relationship between
the expert and novice in order to guide the novice through the content (Collins et al., 1987).
However, in traditional coaching relationships in cognitive apprenticeships, researchers have
found coaching to be one of the most taxing strategies of the framework (Dickey, 2008; Brown
& Stefaniak, 2016), especially when the instructor is the expert and is responsible for coaching
all of the novices in the class (learners). In an attempt to lessen the burden on the expert, peer

92

coaching was utilized in the current study to determine if a peer to peer coaching relationship, in
which the peers were equals (Showers, 1984, 1996) would be effective.
In the current study, an attempt was made in order to pair dyads based on their ZPD, in
order to provide a minor expert-novice relationship in order to further enhance the peer to peer
relationship. However, this pairing did not work across the board due to the fact that not
everyone completed the pre-course survey that included questions to determine the participant’s
prior programming experience and confidence related to program planning. Therefore, there was
no expert-novice relationship was formed during the weekly peer dyad interactions. The only
expert-novice relationship was when the researcher walked participants through each step fo how
to plan a program, and by providing guided reflective questions for the treatment group. While
this may be considered a limitation, the lack of an expert-novice coaching relationship was not
negative and it in fact has implications for the design of cognitive apprenticeships: when peers
are interactive in their groups, peer coaching provides the same opportunities for discussion,
guidance and reflection as an expert-novice peer coaching relationship. Members of peer dyads
still had discussions related to the content, asked questions for clarification and to guide their
peer. Guidance was given based on participants’ prior experience and by giving fresh
perspectives to the content, peers were able to learn from others, and the mean cognitive
presence levels were higher than previous research has found (Garrison et al., 2001). This
finding may help to redefine the role of the expert in a cognitive apprenticeship, especially
considering the use of peer coaching during weekly discussions mitigated five out of six of the
strategies associated with cognitive apprenticeships, as discussed in this section of the paper.
Future research may look at comparing expert-novice coaching relationships with peerpeer coaching relationships to determine if there is a difference in outcomes. Additionally, in

93

order to enhance the peer-peer relationship, it would be interesting to compare peer dyads that
were grouped based on ZPD and peer dyads that were not in order to determine if there is a
difference in learning outcomes. If there is no difference in learning outcomes, then the
additional work that goes into determining ZPD and pairing based on ZPD may not be necessary.
Since pairing peers based on ZPD proved difficult during the current study, strategies must be in
place in order to ensure all participants complete the pre-course survey so they can be paired
appropriately. In an attempt to ensure the peer relationship remains is to require the pre-course
survey as part of the participation in the professional development course, possibly even during
the registration phase, making it mandatory to complete before receiving access to the LMS.
Scaffolding. The use of discussion board prompts as a way for peers to interact with one
another asynchronously allowed participants to have conversations to think through their current
situation and more specifically the current program they were planning as the final project for the
professional development course. The discussion board prompts and reflective questions
provided questions and suggestions for what to focus on during their discussion, as well as how
to utilize the content that was presented and modeled in the weekly video. Instead of having
participants watch the content and then go directly to the related portion of the final project,
participants were guided and given the opportunity to converse with their peer in order to work
through the content with support.
The guided reflective questions were to be used as a tool to not only elicit reflection from
participants, but to scaffold the program planning process, so participants were not thrown into
the final project without any additional support. At the beginning of the professional
development course, both groups were given training on how to be a peer coach, what kinds of
questions to ask, and were encouraged to continue to interact with their peer, as this was an

94

integral part of the course. While training was provided on how to be a peer coach, there were
peer dyads in which there was little to no interaction. In these cases, even though the discussion
prompts were reflective in nature, these individuals did not receive any scaffolded support or
feedback that would help them to work through their final project. Therefore, in order to provide
scaffolding utilizing the asynchronous, online cognitive apprenticeship design, it is essential to
have the interaction within the peer dyads. The question is how can this be accomplished? Future
research may explore motivation of participants of online professional development courses,
especially in cases in which the course is free, to determine what motivates an individual to
complete the course.
Additionally, one of the challenges that participants indicated was the fact that they do
not have time to participant in a five-week course that required a large amount of interaction.
One potential solution is to chunk the larger process of program planning into smaller, more
digestible chunks so the course does not take so much time, and focus primarily on the
interaction between peers. Another option would be to develop a community of practice that has
chunked content and experts readily available to assist novice program planners through the
program planning process, and then comparing the experiences and outcomes of the two
different designs (one being the open online community of practice, and the other being a more
formal professional development course that requires registration and more formalized peer
pairing).
Reflection. The use of peer coaching and reflective questions was meant to be used as a
tool to increase the amount of reflective practices in online discussion between peer dyads as
indicated by the level of cognitive presence. The guided reflective questions were meant to
provide an avenue of interaction between peers in the dyad to get them thinking about their own

95

program planning process and determining how their process differs from the model presented in
the professional development course, as well as having participants think through their own
process as they worked through their final project (Schon, 1983, 1987).
As was mentioned before, one of the limitations of this study was the fact that the
discussion board prompts included questions that were reflective in nature, which allowed
participants who did not have an interactive peer to demonstrate high levels of cognitive
presence, regardless of the level of interaction. However, as was also noted earlier, peer dyads
that experienced high levels of cognitive presence demonstrated high levels of interaction
between the peer dyads. As the conversation continued, participants asked additional questions
for understanding, included information about their previous experience, and provided feedback
and suggestions for how their peer should proceed.
A second limitation was that the treatment group seemed not to know about or chose not
to access the reflective questions. Future research might explore various placements of the
reflective questions to determine the best place for accessibility. In this case, the reflective
questions were in a section outside of the discussion board posts. During an orientation
presentation, participants were shown where the reflective questions were located in the LMS,
and during each week’s discussion board prompts, participants were encouraged to access and
utilize the provided guided reflective questions. Future design research might look at directly
linking to the guided reflective questions in the discussion board prompts, or incorporating
verbatim the suggested reflective questions within the discussion board prompt as a visual
reminder that they are available. Either way, knowing which strategy works best to make a tool
available and visible so it will be used will be beneficial not only for providing scaffolded

96

support for online, asynchronous cognitive apprenticeships, but also for other courses presented
in an LMS.
Articulation. Articulation is the process by which the novice in a cognitive
apprenticeship is able to explain the how, what, and why of their solution. By providing
opportunities for peer dyads to discuss the content and providing guided reflective questions, or
reflective discussion prompts, participants were given the opportunity for participants to explain
the how, what, and why related to their program planning process both in the past, and while
completing the final project for the professional development course.
By answering the discussion board prompts and interacting with their peer, it was
essential for participants to articulate their experiences. Through this articulation, participants in
the current study indicated that one of the aspects that they enjoyed the most out of the course
was obtaining fresh perspectives from their peers, as their peers were located in different cities
across the United States and Canada. Without the use of discussion boards or some other form of
online communication, participants would not be able to articulate their responses to the
discussion board prompts, and thereby would have a difficult time scaffolding their learning and
reflecting on their experiences, and coaching each other through the final project.
Exploration. As participants were planning their program, they required access to
resources in order to explore activities and strategies to support the overall goal and objectives of
their library program. In the case of the current study, this came in the form of online resources
that were saved in the LMS for accessibility. Additionally, through conversations that peers had
in their dyads, as they worked through the final project and made sense of the content provided,
they not only coached and scaffolded each other, but provided various perspectives, and more

97

importantly, through conversation, peers were able to explore how other library systems and
programmers program plan, providing larger perspective on the process.
Further research and exploration into this theme may support the need for the access of
resources and peers, a comprehensive repository of resources across programming subject matter
to include the process of program planning (how to do it), resources that provide activities that
support programmatic goals and objectives, as well as an avenue for programmers to discuss
their challenges with more experienced programmers. This would form the basis for a
community of practice. Library programmers have a number of resources to discuss
programming challenges, such as dedicated Facebook groups, and websites in which they can
access programming ideas such as the ALA’s Programming Librarian (2017) that incorporates a
blog, news, programming ideas, opportunities for learning and program models. However, there
are multiple limitations to the use of this resources. The program models section does not
provide models for how to go about planning a program from start to finish. The learning section
provides upcoming events, but does not have a repository of learning models that programmers
are able to access at any time, and the topics that are available are limited. Aside from the ability
to comment on blog posts or comment on a program or program model, there is no opportunity
to interact with peers. And finally, there is not a comprehensive list of resources a programmer
can refer to during the program planning process. Based on the themes that presented themselves
in this study, in regard to participant experiences, a comprehensive site that includes all of these
elements, and takes the task of search for quality resources out of the picture, would help save
precious time, and provide ample opportunities for exploration and interaction with peers outside
of their typical network.

98

Modeling. In the case of the current study, the only time the expert-novice relationship
was utilized was during the modeling strategy in order to make the expert’s knowledge visible
during instruction, and then by providing a list of guided reflective questions to be used in the
treatment group. The intention of the guided reflective questions was to provide a list of
questions participants could ask each other during weekly discussions in order to keep the
conversation going, and in an attempt to increase the levels of cognitive presence between peers
in their dyads. However, based on the content analysis, participants in the treatment group did
not use the list of guided reflective questions verbatim, they did however ask more reflective
questions throughout their interactions. Therefore, it is inferred that participants reviewed the lis t
of guided reflective questions as a model, or an example, and then asked their own individual
questions based on that model. Therefore, the implications for cognitive apprenticeships are that
the one strategy that relies on the expert the most is the modeling strategy.
Future Research
Future research is needed in order to further explore strategies for increasing peer
interaction in an online learning environment. This may include increasing the number of peers
in each peer coaching group, increasing student motivation and making the accountable to one
another, and provide additional prompts and suggestions for how learners can socially interact
with one another in order to fully reap the benefits of social learning. Future research exploring
the optimum number of group members in a peer group setting is also important for determining
the best way to enhance social learning through peer coaching.
Participants indicated one of the aspects of the online peer coaching strategy was that
they had the ability to learn from more experienced programmers, especially those who work for
different size library systems. Therefore, future research to determine whether or not grouping
peer coaches together by their zone of proximal development will have an impact on learning

99

outcomes would lend information related to strategies for how to group peers together, whether
it’s by their experience level or by their specialized content area.
Not only is there little research on how to pair peers together based on ZPD, but there is
little research on the impact such pairing may have on cognitive presence in an online learning
environment. Learners who are slightly more advanced typically have a lot of experience to pull
from when coaching their peers. This previous experience provides an additional perspective for
more novice learners, and as has been demonstrated in the current study, is something
inexperienced library programmers are looking for. The issue becomes how to recruit a number
of experienced programmers to participate in online professional development, that they do not
have time for, especially if the majority of the benefit in such a relationship will be for the more
novice peer.
Additionally, since this study focused on professional development, and many of the
participants indicated it was difficult prioritizing professional development over work
responsibilities, it may be necessary to look at the culture of learning in public libraries to
determine what kind of value is being placed on professional development. The current study has
highlighted some issues that librarians identified in terms of constraints related to professional
development, where other papers have not verified or cited surveys or studies related to these
challenges (La Chapelle & Wark, 2014; Stephens, 2014). The results from the qualitative survey
help to shed light on constraints that learners experience when trying to improve their skills and
professional knowledgebase in the field of library science. This goes hand in hand with knowing
the optimum time frame for a professional development course, and how much time individuals
can devote to their continuing education. Knowing the optimum time frame for a professional

100

development course would also inform best practices for chunking material so that it fits within
those time frames, yet learners achieve learning outcomes and transfer knowledge to their jobs.
Conclusion
This study utilized a mixed methods approach to look specifically at peer coaching
strategies that can be used during an online, asynchronous cognitive apprenticeship, specifically
the use of guided reflective questions. In order to determine the effectiveness of the strategy,
cognitive presence was used in order to determine whether or not participants demonstrated a
high level of cognitive presence. While the findings did not demonstrate significantly higher
cognitive presence levels in participants who received the guided reflective questions,
information gleaned from the post-course survey highlighted potential reasons for these results
and produced more questions for future research than answers. Specifically, future exploration
includes:
•

Continued exploration of the benefits of using peer-peer coaching over expert-novice
coaching in cognitive apprenticeship models and the impact it has on learning outocmes

•

Continuing to look at strategies in a cognitive apprenticeship to determine how grouping
peers together to support interaction can assist the majority of the strategies present in a
cognitive apprenticeship model, and lesson the burden on the expert or instruction

•

Best practices for pairing dyads based on ZPD and whether or not there is a significant
difference between dyads grouped by SPD, and those that are not

•

Organizational structure and priorities of public libraries and its effect on professional
development

•

Better ways to present professional development, specifically just in time learning that
incorporates some form of social interaction so peers can learn from one another

101

To date, there have been no studies looking at alternative coaching strategies to be used
in a cognitive apprenticeship in an attempt to lessen the burden placed on the instructor. While
this study did not produce significant results in favor of the use of guided reflective questions
used by peer coaches, it did however highlight constraints, limitations, challenges, and positive
aspects of those who participated in the study that have informed future research questions in an
attempt to develop best practices for the design and development of online, asynchronous
cognitive apprenticeship based professional development for the library profession.