The Bully Pulpit on Display: How Presidential Libraries Present Presidential History

Becky Forsberg

Scholars have portrayed presidential libraries and museums as either whitewashed and
propagandist temples to presidents or highly valuable institutions of American democracy.
However, the literature lacks a discussion of the curatorial process for creating the
contested exhibits and the choices that were made in that process, leaving out a
conversation of curatorial voice and authority in presidential libraries. The purpose of this
study was to identify the curatorial choices made in presenting presidential history in
presidential library and museum exhibitions. Qualitative data collected from curators at
nine of the 13 presidential libraries operated by the National Archives and Records
Association (NARA) were collected in this phenomenological study. Findings suggested that
a major goal of presenting presidential history was to showcase the significance of the
president, especially focused on accomplishments, relevancy, and legacy. Additionally,
findings indicate that curatorial authority was kept to the individual libraries rather than
NARA or the president’s private foundation.

CHAPTER 1: Introduction
But even the President of the United States
Sometimes must have
To stand naked
Bob Dylan, “It’s Alright Ma, I’m Only Bleeding”

The Office of the Presidential Libraries (LP) is a federal agency that oversees a
system of archives and museums dedicated as repositories for presidential records that are
operated by the National Archives and Records Association (NARA). Each president since
Herbert Hoover has joined this system, often building his own library on the site of his
family home or in his home town. Existing scholarship on this system of libraries was vast
and often critical. Some scholars focused on the quality of the presidential history being
presented as well as the information missing from the exhibit narrative. For instance,
Benjamin Hufbauer asserted that presidential museums venerated a monolithic historical
narrative, one that was a “whitewashed and glamorized portrait of each president”
intended to uphold an image of an imperial presidency that supported an American civil
religion with the president as a god-figure.5 In contrast, other scholars focused their
attention on the presidential museums as important institutions where American
democracy was honored through the history and public discussions of the executive
branch.6 That viewpoint was substantiated by NARA in its official description of the
libraries: “Presidential Libraries promote understanding of the presidency and the

Benjamin Hufbauer, Presidential Temples: How Memorials and Libraries Shape
Public Memory, Culture America, Lawrence, Kan.: University Press of Kansas, 2005, 140
5

Sharon K. Fawcett, "Presidential Libraries: A View from the Center," The Public
Historian 28, no. 3 (2006), 30
6

2

American experience. We preserve and provide access to historical materials, support
research, and create interactive programs and exhibits that educate and inspire.”7
However, existing scholarship on the presidential library and museum system does
not include a discussion on the curatorial practices within the libraries. Curatorial
authority, or “how a curator might exert authority over an institution, collections, objects,
knowledge, and public understanding”, is often the driving force behind an exhibit’s
purpose, presentation, and impact.8 If presidential libraries and museums determine the
public’s understanding of the presidency and the American experience through their
exhibitions, then it is critical to understand the intent and perspective of those who were
empowered to create those exhibitions. The purpose of this study was to identify the
curatorial choices made in presenting presidential history in presidential library and
museum exhibitions and to add to the growing body of scholarship in this area.

7

National Archives, “Presidential Library History”

Sarah Longair, "Cultures of Curating: The Limits of Authority." Museum History
Journal 8, no. 1 (2015), 1
8

3

CHAPTER 2: Literature
While money doesn't talk, it swears
Obscenity, who really cares
Propaganda, all is phony
Bob Dylan, “It’s Alright Ma, I’m Only Bleeding”

This research was informed by four categories of literature: bias, propaganda, and
whitewashed history in the federal presidential library system; American civil religion and
how the presidential library system venerated the notion of an imperial president; the
value of the presidential libraries as institutions of American history working to promote
the executive branch; and curatorial voice or authority found within the broader
museological scholarship.
The presidential library system was instituted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in
1939 when he donated his papers and a portion of his Hyde Park, New York estate to
NARA. The libraries are one-part public museum and one-part research archives and are
typically located in the birthplace or hometown of the president. Roosevelt’s intention was
to create a system that preserved the work of the president for future generations.9 He
declared the importance of this preservation at the opening of his Presidential Library and
Museum in 1941:
To bring together the records of the past and to house them in buildings where they
will be preserved for the use of men and women in the future, a Nation must believe
in three things. It must believe in the past. It must believe in the future. It must,

National Archives of the United States, “Presidential Library History,” August 15,
2016, https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/about/history.html
9

4

above all, believe in the capacity of its own people so to learn from the past that they
can gain in judgement in creating their own future.10
The eleven presidents who succeeded Roosevelt, as well as one president who preceded
him, followed his lead in preservation of their presidency, resulting in the following
libraries: Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum; Harry S. Truman Presidential
Library and Museum; Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood
Home; John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum; Lyndon Baines Johnson Library
and Museum; Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum; Gerald R. Ford Museum;
Jimmy Carter Library and Museum; Ronald Reagan Presidential Library; George Bush
Presidential Library & Museum; William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park; and
George W Bush Presidential Center.11
Signed into law by Dwight Eisenhower, the Presidential Libraries Act of 1955 (PLA
1955) permitted presidents to build libraries from private funds and donate the building,
their objects and artifacts, and their papers to the government. This deed of gift ensured
that the administration and operations of each library would be managed by the federal
government and funded by the federal budget. This legislation encouraged presidents to
build facilities to house their historical legacy, but it did not require each president to
participate.12 It was not until 1978 that any president was required to give materials to the

10

National Archives of the United States, “Presidential Library History”

The National Archives, “Presidential Libraries and Museums of the National
Archives,” August 15, 2016, https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries
11

United States Congress, “Presidential Libraries Act of 1955,” August 15,
2016, https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/laws/1955-act.html
12

5

NARA. Stemming from concern for transparency and public interest after the Watergate
scandal, the Presidential Records Act of 1978 (PRA 1978) asserted that all documents and
records generated by an administration were owned by the people of the United States, and
by default, NARA.13 If a president chose not to create his own library and museum, his
papers would be permanently housed in the main National Archives repository and
accessible to the public. Soon after, the Federal Budgetary Committee realized that the
budget for these libraries was becoming burdensome on federal resources and in 1986, a
second Presidential Libraries Act (PLA 1986) was passed. PLA 1986 required each
president to provide a 20% operations endowment for every 70,000 square feet of facilities
deeded to NARA.14
According to Don Wilson, a former Archivist of the United States (AOTUS), the
libraries had two main purposes: to archive the papers of the president and his advisors
and make them publicly available, and to raise the “public consciousness of the burdens of
presidential decisions” through the implementation and use of a public museum.15 Richard
Cox rebutted this claim saying, “the libraries seem to have taken on a life of their own,

United States Congress. “Presidential Records Act (PRA) of 1978,” August 15,
2016. https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/laws/1978-act.html
13

United States Congress. “Presidential Libraries Act of 1986,” August 15,
2016. https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/laws/1986-act.html
14

Don W. Wilson, "Presidential Libraries: Developing to Maturity," Presidential
Studies Quarterly 21, no. 4 (1991), 771
15

6

becoming immune to suggestions that the system may have outlived its usefulness.”16 He
continued:
If we are honest, we need to understand that the President, incumbents and former
holders of this office often do not want the American people to know certain things,
especially as found in their records. The Presidential Library system does not seem
to be the ideal solution to such a reality, equivalent to having the fox guard the hen
house.17
To scholars like Benjamin Hufbauer, the museums had a reputation for being one-sided,
monolithic venerations of the individual presidents.18 Hufbauer argued that as the system
grew, the libraries began to “attempt to elevate individual presidents into the civil religion
of the United States.”19 According to Hufbauer, as more libraries opened, the political
interest of the presidents began to dominate how they interacted with their libraries. The
libraries became shrines of an imperial presidency and akin to sanctuary sites of the civil
religion of American patriotism, allowing for the repression of unflattering information and
casting shadows over controversial historical material.20

Richard J. Cox, "America’s Pyramids: Presidents and Their Libraries," Government
Information Quarterly 19, no. 1 (2002), 47
16

17

Cox, 56

Benjamin Hufbauer, "Spotlights and Shadows: Presidents and Their
Administrations in Presidential Museum Exhibits," The Public Historian 28, no. 3 (2006),
122
19 Hufbauer, "Spotlights and Shadows”, 118
18

20

Hufbauer, Presidential Temples

7

Hufbauer invoked the notion of a civil religion from social scholars in the United
States in the 1960s. Robert Bellah argued that civil religion was a tool for understanding
aspects of American history and life and a means of guarding against uncritical
patriotism.21 Hufbauer explained the key elements of civil religion as including:
“saints,” such as Washington and Lincoln; sacred places, such as Mount Vernon and
the Lincoln Memorial; sacred objects, such as the Declaration of Independence and
the Constitution; and, finally, ritual practices, such as the Pledge of Allegiance,
Fourth of July celebrations, and pilgrimages to sacred sites.22
In a civil religion, these elements become invaluable patriotic aspects of a society where
harsh criticism of their importance is an extreme social taboo. With a strong taboo in place,
it was understandable to see how civil religion perpetuates unfailing patriotism—or
veneration—of these sacred elements.23 Additionally, as Marcela Cristi argued, civil religion
could be used to spread patriotic propaganda to “force group identity and to legitimize an
existing political order by injecting a transcendental dimension or a religious gloss on the
justification.”24

21

22

Robert N. Bellah, "Civil Religion in America," Daedalus 134, no. 4 (2005), 42
Hufbauer, “Spotlights and Shadows”, 119

Rhys H. Williams, "Civil Religion and the Cultural Politics of National Identity in
Obama's America," Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 52, no. 2 (2013), 240-41
23

Marcela Cristi, From Civil to Political Religion : The Intersection of Culture, Religion
and Politics, Waterloo, Ont.: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2001, 3
24

8

Hufbauer argued that “presidential libraries often fit better with a reading of civil
religion that sees it as having ties to state propaganda. Presidential libraries, for the most
part, are temples that promote the best possible place for their subjects within civil religion
while promoting the imperial president.”25 The term imperial presidency was coined by
Arthur Schlesinger with his 2004 book The Imperial Presidency. This book explained that
with the evolution of the US Presidency and the growth of security, privacy, and
presidential power—how it served the Constitution and harmed it—US Presidents became
imperial figures, untouchable to the average citizen and the leader upon the throne.26 To
Hufbauer, the imperial president was the largest issue in presidential libraries. The
libraries evolved from being about the president’s sometime hobbies and collectibles
during Roosevelt’s time to being about the preeminence of the president himself; the
libraries perpetuated this protected status by representing certain politically specific
aspects of the president’s administration as imperial decisions that left little room for
questioning whether the president acted in the best interest of the public and the nation.
He stated, “What is at stake in this transformation of presidential commemoration is how
presidencies and presidential authority are remembered, and how these constructed
memories shape contemporary and future presidential authority.”27

25

Hufbauer, “Spotlights and Shadows”, 120

Arthur M. Schlesinger and Frank Virginia Williams Collection of Lincolniana, The
Imperial Presidency, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973.
26

27

Hufbauer, Spotlights and Shadows, 118

9

Hufbauer furthered this argument by asserting that the imperial presidency mirrors
that of Roman emperors who would “have an exaggerated list of ‘things achieved’ engraved
in stone, written with the help of their advisors. These ancient examples are prequels to the
self-promoting museums in presidential libraries, which are largely curated by the former
presidents themselves.”28 Furthermore, the libraries “promote an expansive view of
presidential power…It’s not a coincidence that the federal presidential library was invented
by Franklin Roosevelt, identified by Schlesinger as the first modern ‘imperial president.’”29
Hufbauer posited that the presidential library system had followed this pattern since its
inception.
Hufbauer also asserted that presidential libraries fell into three categories:
… a group that features celebratory and even propagandistic displays, consisting
mainly of the newer presidential libraries; a group that features some good attempts
at public history but which still have a way to go before they meet the National
Council on Public History guidelines for “historical truth”; and finally, one library
that meets high standards for good public history that might become a model for
some of the museums at other presidential libraries.30

Benjamin Hufbauer, “President Obama’s Library Will Be a Spin Temple Worthy of
a Pharaoh,” Politico, May 1, 2015,
https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/05/obama-presidential-library-116695
28

29

Hufbauer, “President Obama’s Library”

30

Hufbauer, “Spotlights and Shadows”, 125

10

The library Hufbauer declared as “the library that meets high standards for good public
history” was the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. He argued that it
managed to correct its earlier installations perfectly to present a balanced, fact-based
interpretation of the president.31 Hufbauer went on to recommend that the libraries
employ the expertise of historians to follow the Truman Library’s lead to ensure more
balanced displays. He explained that:
The problem with many of the museum exhibits at presidential libraries is that they
often present a white-washed view of history, one that shows that the president in
question was always acting in the best interests of the nation, and one in which
scandals and missteps are repressed. This is especially true at the more recent
presidential libraries. The newer presidential libraries rarely present a historical
consensus in their exhibits, but rather are close to being political propaganda.32

The argument of propaganda was echoed by Anthony Clark, a former Legislative
Director in the House of Representatives, who, through his congressional work, was styled
an expert on presidential libraries and NARA. He argued, as Hufbauer did, that presidential
libraries were tax-payer-funded political propaganda that painted presidents in uncritical,

31

Hufbauer, “Spotlights and Shadows”, 124

Benjamin Hufbauer, "Is There “Noncontroversial” History at Presidential
Libraries?", The Public Historian 28, no. 4 (2006), 85
32

11

noncontroversial, and untouchable images.33 Clark argued that NARA was allocating funds
to rewrite history, saying:
The government hosts biased, factually incorrect, legacy-polishing exhibits and
partisan political events, and the taxpayers support them. And records languish,
unprocessed and unavailable, as NARA allocates scarce resources to exhibits,
education and public programs rather than to the core function of the libraries:
records.34
According to Clark, the American public was unknowingly paying for propaganda about
modern political history. Additionally, H. Prentice Baptiste and Katie Townsend argued that
the museums were applying political lenses to the curated exhibit spaces and the history
they presented to the public. They defined political as “being any act based on or motivated
by a partisan or self-serving objective.”35 Their report found that presidential libraries
were “perpetuating the myth that the presidents of the United States were perfect
leaders.”36 The detailed years’ worth of collected data showing a multitude of ways that

Anthony Clark, The Last Campaign: How Presidents Rewrite History, Run for
Posterity & Enshrine Their Legacies, North Charleston, SC: CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2015.
33

Anthony Clark, “Presidential Libraries Are a Scam. Could Obama Change That?”
Politico, May 7, 2017,
https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/05/07/presidential-libraries-are-ascam-could-obama-change-that-215109.
34

H. Prentice Baptiste and Katie Townsend, "Examining the Presidential Libraries:
Students Find Biases and Recommend a Multicultural Perspective," Multicultural Education
16, no. 1 (2008), 48
35

36

Baptiste and Townsend, 48

12

presidential libraries and their umbrella agency were severely biased toward preserving
the president’s image rather than presenting fair information, saying that they were
“riddled with omissions, with over emphasis, and with misdirection, all resulting from
those who controlled the information.”37
In response to the critical portrayal of presidential libraries, some scholars came to
the defense of the NARA system and argued that the libraries were vestiges of American
democracy and vital pieces of American history. Sharon Fawcett is a prominent voice in
this discourse where she aimed to put to rest contentious arguments like Hufbauer’s,
claiming that his multiple publications were aimed solely at arguing that the libraries’
“primary function remains the transformation of presidential history into presidential
myth for the general public.”38 While Hufbauer argued that the federal control over the
libraries harbored a revisionist history, Fawcett countered that the libraries are far more
independent.
More significantly, even after their transfer to the government, these libraries, while
bound and frustrated by the requirements of bureaucracy for hiring and
procurement, were otherwise left largely on their own. With little guidance from
Washington, the libraries developed their exhibits and public programs, defined
procedures for administration of their collections, and managed their relationship
with their foundation.39

37

Baptiste and Townsend, 51

38

Fawcett, 14

39

Fawcett, 17

13

This independence meant that each library was removed from federal opinion makers,
refuting claims by Hufbauer, Clark, and Cox that each institution was a political arm.
Further support of Fawcett’s argument was found in the Presidential Libraries: A
GSA Handbook, which states: “exhibits in Presidential Libraries will be consistent with the
dignity of the presidency and will present historically accurate and balanced
interpretations of the former President and major events.”40 The handbook was instituted
nearly 50 years ago and well before the last two congressional acts appeared, but the
language is quite clear; if the libraries heed this operations manual, the history they
present would be factually based. Fawcett did clarify that the manual ceased to be “strictly
enforced when funding for new exhibits shifted from the government to the foundations or
other non-appropriated revenue sources.”41 Once PLA 1986 was authorized, the outdated
manual was largely abandoned allowing for each institution to approach their exhibits
more independently.42
In an article commissioned by NARA in 1991, Linda Fisher argued the value of the
libraries, saying “Americans build monuments to remind us of, and to communicate to
others, our political heritage. When the edifices are visibly situated, they become central
democratic institutions.”43 Fisher continued by saying that the library’s role was dependent

Presidential Libraries: A GSA Handbook, General Services Administration, NARR P
1856.1, Washington D.C., December 20, 1968.
40

41

Fawcett, 18

42

Fawcett, 18

Linda Fischer, "The Role and Function of Presidential Libraries," National Archives
and Records Association, 1991, 6
43

14

upon “its particular locale, the size of its holdings, and the desires of the former president
and his family, Library Director, and Presidential Foundation. As long as a library
thoroughly satisfies its core mission, the institution… [can] serve as broad a clientele as
possible, thereby obviating any criticism of elitism.”44 Fisher’s article continued, “Ralph
Bledsoe, Director of the Ronald Reagan Library, recognizes that a Presidential Library plays
an official role as a local representative of the Federal government. As such, the library can
become a political resource for the local community.”45 Robert Norton Smith, former
director of the Herbert Hoover Library, presented the same argument, saying “like the
office they commemorate, presidential libraries are living institutions…they are not
monuments to one person alone. Rather they are storehouses of information and
classrooms for democratic instruction.”46 From these arguments, it seemed that the
libraries fulfilled an important aspect of American historical context by bringing history of
the highest position in the nation to multiple locations around the country to reach and
educate citizens.
Fawcett argued that the design of exhibits followed a rough timeline in that “the
initial exhibit in each presidential library represents an important transition for the former
president.”47 She explained that the first exhibit was often created and installed before the

44

Fisher, 14

45

Fisher, 25

Robert Norton Smith, "A Presidential Revival - How the Hoover Library Overcame
a Mid-Life Crisis," Prologue-Quarterly Of The National Archives 21, no. 2 (1989), 116
46

47

Fawcett, 30

15

museum was deeded to the government. Therefore, the design process, oversight, and
funding of the first exhibit installation was done by the foundation. Thus,
That exhibit is in itself a historical artifact—representing how the former president
views his life and his presidency. At the time these first exhibits are installed, there
is little historical perspective to draw upon. The deep political division in this
country plays out in the initial exhibit. As a result, the exhibits are more engaging to
those who supported the president than to those who did not, those who felt
disenfranchised, or those who were blithely unaware of the events and policies of
the administration. These exhibits reveal strongly held views but not reasoned
historical perspectives on what a president has or has not achieved.48
The first exhibit was a natural portrayal of the president’s public image given how short of
a time frame the library had for developing it and how limited historical perspectives
existed at the time of development.49 NARA explained,
While the funding source of an exhibit plays a role in its interpretative theme, it is
also worth noting that the most recent Presidential Libraries have exhibits that
feature contemporary issues and topics. Exhibits in the Presidential Libraries evolve
as the themes transition from contemporary to historical. Examples of more critical
interpretations of Presidents include the Truman Library’s exhibit on his decision to
use the atomic bomb and the Nixon Library’s recently renovated exhibit on

48

Fawcett, 30

The National Archives, “Frequently Asked Questions,” August 15, 2016,
https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/about/faqs.html
49

16

Watergate. Where the Truman exhibit can rightfully be lauded today for its balanced
content, a more recent Library may well receive similar praise when that Library
reaches the age of the Truman Library and reflects the perspective that only time
and more historical research can provide.50
From these explanations, it appeared that the exhibits tracked an evolutionary path
dependent on the age and historical context available.
While Fawcett, NARA, and Fisher explained the importance of the exhibits to their
institutions, Jason Lantzer was the only scholar to directly address how exhibit spaces in
the museums were created. He argued that because museums were places “where
academic history openly clashes with popular history”51, presidential libraries faced a
complicated task to present as fair a narrative as possible to any visitor that came through
the door. Even without influence from NARA, these institutions faced an uphill battle to
present any narrative. Where Hufbauer and Clark argued that revisionist history
determined the rose-colored exhibitions in the libraries, Lantzer established the opposite.
Lantzer argued that NARA was not in the business of rewriting history; they were simply
working to preserve it with as much dignity as possible. They focused their attention on the
proper care of the artifacts and records rather than the content surrounding them.52

50

National Archives, “FAQ”

Jason S. Lantzer, "The Public History of Presidential Libraries: How the Presidency
Is Presented to the People," Journal of the Association for History and Computing 6, no. 1
(2003), n.p.
51

52

Lantzer, n.p.

17

According to Lantzer, “the federal government had no input when it comes to exhibits.
However, the National Archives does keep watch for ‘questionable’ exhibits and
events…they try to identify potential problems or bias. The National Archives wants these
very political museums to be as ‘apolitical’ as possible.”53 Lantzer’s arguments seemed to
point to the issue of curatorial authority—also known as curatorial voice—within the
presidential libraries. If NARA reviewed the exhibits for “questionable” content only, then
the curatorial authority laid somewhere else.
Alex Roland explained the phenomenon of a curatorial voice and authority in
museums: “museum visitors hear many voices. The artifacts themselves speak with the
greatest clarity and authority, carrying the burden of the exhibit. A curatorial voice
emerges from labels, story lines, and even the selection of artifacts. The museum itself gives
voice to its history and purpose.”54 This curatorial voice is often associated with a sense of
authority over the information; the curator imparts expert or authorized knowledge to the
visitor through label text and narrative. Across the museum field, curatorship covers a vast
array of duties. Perhaps most significant among them is preservation of collections and
presentation of those collections to the public.55 Sarah Longair explained that “an intimate
knowledge and understanding of the institution’s collection is a fundamental component of
curatorial authority. Object identification and documentation provided the building blocks

53

Lantzer, n.p

54

Alex Roland, "Voices in the Museum," Technology and Culture 39, no. 3 (1998),

55

Longair, 3

483

18

on which to construct a curator’s claims to expertise.”56 Furthermore, many curators hold
their posts “for many decades—such length of service around a particular collection
enabled them to amass a wealth of knowledge,”57 further establishing their expertise.
Roland extended this idea of expertise to the institution as well. Using the Smithsonian’s
National Air and Space Museum as an example, Roland explained that the prestige of the
institution held as much power to inform the significance or authority as the objects or
curated voices. “Putting the object on display in the most visited museum, within sight of
the halls of Congress, burdens the exhibit still further. The NASM would be an ideal place if
only it could insulate its exhibits from the symbolism of the place.”58
Whether individually or through institutional policy, a curator does not necessarily
intend to lecture, manipulate, or even propagate through their exhibit design. Much of the
impact of a curator’s work depends on the person experiencing it. As Susan A. Crane noted,
“museums are not supposed to lie to us; this act seems like a breach of faith. Assuming that
our own memories are fallible, we rely on museums as well as on historians to get the past
‘right’ for us.”59 However, issues of misinterpreted authority do happen. Peter Bednar and
Christine Welch explained that the content of a message was not given form until the
person receiving the message gave it one.

56

Longair, 3

57

Longair, 3

58

Roland, 483

Susan A. Crane, "Memory, Distortion, and History in the Museum," History and
Theory 36, no. 4 (1997), 51
59

19

In other words, there is no content before the message is given form, and efforts to
find differences between form and content would become highly questionable, to
the point of being futile. Form and content are always one ‘package’ – one cannot
subsist independently of the other. Each combination of content and form is unique,
in the sense that any change of form will also change the content. Recognition of a
change of form by a human reader of the message must by definition conjure
different associations from that person’s past history – thus changing her
interpretation of the message.60
According to Bednar and Welch, the message meant nothing until the person reading it
attributed meaning to it. Disagreements between curatorial voice and visitor interpretation
do occur, but, considering Bednar and Welch’s explanation of misinformation, it may boil
down to a matter of lived experience and not necessarily intent.
Hufbauer suggested that entrusting historians to construct the narrative in the
libraries would ensure a more balanced message, yet Roland argued that even historians
were culprits of naiveté and hubris which led to a message without a strong enough spine
to stand up for itself.61 Roland asserted that visitors were just as culpable in overwhelming
the exhibit with their own voice, saying “their voices entered the museum from the streets
and ultimately overwhelmed the curators, the museum, and finally the artifact itself.”62 The

Peter M. Bednar and Christine Welch, "Bias, Misinformation and the Paradox of
Neutrality," Informing Science 11 (2008), 88
60

61

Roland, 486

62

Roland, 486

20

myriad of voices at play expressed their own expectations and interpretations into the
exhibit. Both intent and impact of a message are important, as Longair argued: “a critical
element in the study of curatorial authority is the need to test their public pronouncements
— which themselves were designed to legitimize and establish their authoritative voice.”63
Authors like Hufbauer, Clark, and Prentice and Townsend made strong cases for the
issue of whitewashed, unbalanced, and propagandist history in presidential library
exhibits. According to Hufbauer, all of the libraries fit into three categories, which seemed
to indicate that all but one library was failing to present adequate history. This assertion
also fit with what authors like Fawcett, Lantzer, Fisher, and the National Archives argued
about the exhibits, namely that the exhibits evolved with the age of the president and his
administration and became more balanced and fair the further removed from
contemporary history they were. While these two bodies of literature—one led by
Hufbauer, the other by Fawcett—seemed to agree on the type of exhibits found in the
libraries, they diverged in most of their arguments. Fawcett maintained that the libraries
were important pieces to the story of American democracy and the first generation public
image exhibit was part of the president’s history itself. Hufbauer stated that the libraries
became temples to imperial presidents and represented praise and homage to
democratically elected officials—something that he believed was incongruent with
American democracy.64

63

Longair, 5

64

Hufbauer, Presidential Temples

21

What seemed to be missing from either of these bodies of literature was a
discussion on the curatorial practices within the presidential libraries. Literature on
curatorial voice and authority asserted that the expertise of the curatorial staff was
instrumental in presenting the institution’s story. Curators were steeped in the knowledge
of the artifacts around them, which made them the authority on the story behind those
artifacts.65 It seemed that the message the curator chose to present in the exhibits they
designed was at the crux of what Fawcett and Hufbauer argued, yet was missing from their
scholarship.

65

Roland, 483

22

CHAPTER 3: Study Design
Research Purpose
The purpose of this research was to identify the curatorial choices made in
presenting presidential history in presidential library exhibitions. The study was designed
to explore the following four guiding questions:
1. What are the goals and objectives for presenting presidential history?
2. What are the narrative concepts and themes for the curated exhibitions?
3. Who influences the content and narrative of the curation?
4. Does influence from NARA impact what history is presented in the exhibitions?
Exhibit goals and objectives are important to ascertain from participants in order to
address many of the claims made by Hufbauer and Clark that asserted the libraries were
intentionally presenting propaganda or whitewashed history. The first question was
intended to identify if the library had a particular target audience when designing the core
exhibit as well as what goals were driving the design of the exhibit. The second research
question pointed to the same assertion of whitewashed history in the literature, but it was
extended to identify how the curated story was presenting the president—chronologically,
biographically, or in some other fashion—while focusing on the narrative themes of the
exhibit.
Research questions three and four addressed curatorial authority and voice within
the individual libraries. Both questions were designed to elicit information about which
parties were involved in deciding what stories were told in the exhibits—family members,
former administration staff, the president himself, or government officials—while also

23

seeking to find whether the president’s political party influenced any content displayed, as
Fawcett suggested it might. Additionally, the fourth question sought to find the level to
which NARA determined content because the literature showed two disparate arguments
about NARA’s involvement in content creation.
Ultimately, these four questions were designed to identify what curatorial authority
looks like while presenting presidential history within a federally operated space.

Research Design
To answer these questions, a phenomenological study was designed. A
phenomenological design allowed for the exploration of the lived experience of curators
designing and presenting presidential history within their individual museums. Subjects
were asked to participate in one in-depth, semi-structured interview. The interview
consisted of nine standard questions, each with one to four additional or follow-up
questions [see Appendix B for interview guide]. These nine questions addressed the
important aspects of curating the core narrative for the presidential museum and
identifying the key influencers on the choices that were made in the curation process.

Sample Selection
Subjects for this study were chosen purposively. There are 25 presidential libraries
in the continental United States, but not all of them are NARA institutions. For this study,
NARA-operated sites were identified as participants due to the extent to which existing
literature focused on the relationship between the federal government and the president’s

24

private foundations in influencing the exhibit content. Therefore, libraries outside of the
federal jurisdiction of NARA were not included. Additionally, only libraries that had current
curated spaces were eligible. Therefore, this study focused on the 13 libraries under the
umbrella of LP that had physical core exhibits installed [see Appendix A for full list].
The eligible sites were contacted through publicly available email to introduce the
study and extend an offer for their participation. Interested parties were given additional
information about the research protocol and consent forms assuring anonymity [see
Appendix C], and were scheduled for interviews. Interview questions were not provided in
full to subjects before the interview to reduce the possibility of participants providing
prepared responses to questions. The goal was to have free-flowing conversations about
the participants’ work and the exhibit spaces free from prepared statements.

Data Collection & Analysis
Staff members who asked to participate in interviews were the current supervisory
curators at each museum. In the instance that the library did not have a current
supervisory curator on staff, the next closest staff position was substituted. Semistructured interviews were conducted by phone (ranging 30-60 minutes in length) in
January and February of 2018. These interviews focused on the curators’ personal
experiences designing exhibits in their current library to avoid receiving answers that
generalized about other libraries or the field as a whole. The conversation topics explored
included tenure with NARA and experience as a curator, core exhibit narratives, exhibit
funders, exhibit goals, and the people involved in making content choices.

25

Interviews were recorded and transcribed using traditional Microsoft applications
such as Word, Excel, and Voice Recorder. To assess the findings, data were analyzed using
emergent coding—or identifying patterns, themes, and differences throughout all
responses to interview questions—for each major question as an inductive analysis of the
qualitative data [see Appendix D for rubric]. Patterns and trends identified by repeated
words, phrases, or sentiments became the majority of the codes used.

26

CHAPTER 4: Results and Discussion
Inside the museums, Infinity goes up on trial
Voices echo this is what salvation must be like after a while
Bob Dylan, “Visions of Johanna”

Description of Sample
Nine of the 13 federally operated presidential libraries participated in this study
(see Appendix A for list). Eight of the participants were supervisory curators while one
participant formerly held the supervisory curator role before a promotion. Five of the
libraries were dedicated to Republican presidents and four were dedicated to Democrat
presidents. The oldest participating institution was 56 years old and the youngest was 14
years old. Out of respect for participant privacy, quotations and associations will be
anonymized throughout these findings.

Findings and Analysis
To understand the phenomenon of curating within presidential libraries, interview
questions were designed to elicit responses from participants about their individual
experiences within their current library. When discussing exhibits, only permanent core
exhibitions/galleries were considered; temporary exhibitions were not included in this
study. Three of the curators were not involved in the initial content creation of the current
core exhibitions in their libraries. However, they agreed to speak of their experience and
knowledge of the exhibit to the best of their ability.

27

Background Questions: How long have you been working in curation and within the NARA
system?
To set the context of the curators’ experience in the field, participants were asked
how long they had worked in curation, how long they had been associated with NARA, and
how long they had worked in their respective library. Of the nine participants, five
answered that they had worked for more than 25 years in curation positions; the average
amongst all nine participants was 22 years of curatorial practice. Four participants
answered that they had been working within NARA for over 22 years; the average tenure
within the NARA system amongst all participants was 19 years. Finally, when asked how
many NARA institutions for which they had worked, four participants said they had always
worked in the same library; two participants had worked in two or more NARA
institutions; two participants had spent half of their careers in a NARA institution; and one
participant had worked outside of the NARA system until joining their library three years
prior to this study. These results appeared to indicate a strong foundation for curatorial
expertise in the libraries.

Research Question 1: What are the goals and objectives for presenting presidential history?
This research question was intended to address the intention behind presidential
library exhibits. Participants were asked about the specific goals for the core exhibit and
whether it was designed for a specific target audience. When asked about the exhibit goals,
three participants indicated that their permanent exhibits had a goal to represent only the
president’s time in office, three participants specified that the goal was to speak about the

28

full life of the president—“from cradle to grave”—throughout the exhibit, and two
participants said that the goal was about representing the legacy of the president in the
gallery. One participant was distinctly different and said they used two core exhibits to tell
the story, one devoted to the presidency and the other focused on biography. For the
presidency gallery, the library had two goals:
“We had two primary goals. The first one was to focus on the importance of decision
making in the presidency. So we focused on the difficult decision that [the president]
had to make and by extension that every president has to make. The second focus of
that exhibit was that we wanted to make sure the theme was that there is no one
storyline in history. There are people who disagree no matter what we put in the
exhibit, people who disagree with that interpretation. So we consciously went
through the exhibit and included components we call ‘dissenting views’.”
This was the only participant to mention using dissenting views as an intentional piece for
the exhibit. This seemed to indicate that incorporating confrontational history was rare in
the exhibitions. However, the other eight participants addressed their intention not to
editorialize history and allow visitors to arrive at their own conclusions about the history:
“I think the goal in each case is to tell as complete a story as you can with the
resources that you have. You don’t want to push people to an answer; that’s not our
objective. You want people to reach conclusions on their own.”
“Since we opened, we have taken an even-handed look at the presidency. That is
what we were dictated to do when we opened. […] didn’t want a shrine to himself,
he wanted everything open so that the American people, historians, scholars can see
everything from his presidency and make their own decisions whether or not his
presidency was a success or failure.”
This intention to keep away from historical conclusions appeared to indicate that the
curatorial process wanted to stay clear of a dominant argument. It appeared that the
curatorial process approached exhibits with a goal to avoid rewriting history in favor of
presenting the history that was available.

29

The second part of the research question asked participants about their target
audience for the exhibit. One participant said the exhibit was designed to attract supporters
of the president. The remaining eight participants clarified that a very broad, general
audience was the main target. They specified that this broad audience included school
groups, young adults, college students, retirees, people who remembered the president in
their lifetime, and “generally uninformed” tourists. Within these responses, seven
participants specified that a large portion of their audience showed signs of not knowing or
remembering the history of their president.
“I know that as the years go by there are fewer members of the audience who have a
President […] as part of their living memory. So I think, you know, back in the early
90s it was assumed that a lot of the audience actually might have remembered
President […], whereas nowadays there’s fewer parts of the population that do.”
These participants said that this reality required the library to revamp its content to attract
a younger audience who were removed in years from the president. It seemed the longer a
president had been out of office the more necessary it became to have a broadly accessible
exhibit. The consensus toward a broad audience fit with the strong inclination for not
editorializing history. This seemed to indicate that the libraries aimed to make their
exhibits accessible to as many visitor groups as possible.

Research Questions 2: What are the narrative concepts and themes for the curated
exhibitions?
The second research question addressed three main inquiries. Participants were
asked about their core/primary exhibit and how recently it had been installed. They were
asked to explain the narrative and concept of the core exhibit. And finally, they were asked

30

if there were elements of the president’s history that they intentionally left out of the
exhibit.
When asked about the age of their exhibit, three participants said their library had
core exhibits dating back to the early 1990s, four participants’ libraries had core exhibits
dating to the early 2000s, and two participants’ libraries had core exhibits dating to the
mid-2010s. Of the nine participants, two specified that they were redesigning their core
exhibit at that time. One participant said their library still featured the full original
installation while two participants said that their library’s core exhibit featured some
sections from the original installation, but much of it had been refreshed. The other six
participants said their library was on the second or third full installation.
Since only three libraries featured sections of their original installation, it seemed
that enough time had elapsed for the majority of the libraries since their president left
office to evolve their exhibit content, as Sharon Fawcett argued.66 Interestingly, the three
participants who said their library still featured original installation content were also
among those that spoke about the need to make exhibits more accessible to younger
visitors who did not necessarily know the histories of their presidents. This seemed to
indicate that the evolution of the exhibits correlated to the evolution of the audiences,
where the presidential history required more explanation the older it became.
Participants were asked to explain the overall narrative and concept of their core
exhibits. Seven participants specified that they designed their exhibits to be a chronological
biography of the president. An eighth participant said that the exhibit was a biographical

66

Fawcett, 42

31

exhibit but not chronological, instead allowing visitors to jump around in the galleries at
whim. The ninth core exhibit employed a different approach by focusing on the
administration years of the president and was not designed to be biographical or
chronological.
“Like other [libraries] I have been to, they’re taking the entire life of the president
from childhood through the presidency and then the presidency is just one section
in the exhibit. But for us, almost the entire exhibit is the […] years of the […]
presidency.”
Three libraries said they utilized the president’s own voice—through recordings and
primary source material—to have him tell his own story.
“Another strategy was to present people with an opportunity to hear, in President
[…] own voice, him explain his own policies and actions.”
Six participants said they wanted to bring visitors back to the historical era of the
president. Four of those participants said that their exhibit incorporated a fully recreated
Oval Office to reflect that historical era. One participant said they built only half of the Oval
Office into the exhibit, due to space limitations. Another participant said they intentionally
avoided the Oval Office and instead rebuilt a post-presidency office space into the exhibit.
“We do not have an Oval Office installed and it’s going to stay that way. What we do
have, which is kind of interesting, is the office he used in retirement that he
maintained at […] College. We have that recreated and we have all the original
furnishings—books and everything—that he had there. I think that is a little more
personal and tells a little bit more about the person rather than the president.”
Additionally, five libraries included gallery space and/or narrative space for the First Lady
as a key actor in the story of the president and the White House. These results seemed to
indicate that the whole story of the president, as a person as well as a politician, was an

32

important element in designing the exhibits. It appeared that there was a desire to immerse
the visitor into experiencing the White House and the president’s era to help set the
environment for understanding the president’s decisions.
Participants were asked if the exhibits had purposefully excluded any elements of
the president’s history. Five participants said no, three participants said yes, and one
participant was somewhere in the middle. The explanations given for excluding history
were: 1) curators chose to stay away from personal or private foibles of the president to
focus on presidential history; and 2) the design team assumed that some history was
general knowledge and unnecessary to include in the exhibit.
“Some controversial things [are] not on exhibit because the designers just figured
that everybody knew that.”
This finding appeared to indicate that presidential controversies lie on a spectrum and the
library needed to cull lesser events to speak to larger issues. The libraries that avoided
personal foibles, however, did so intentionally which suggested that arguments from
Hufbauer and Clark on presenting the president in a favorable image had some supporting
evidence. One participant had a unique answer to this question. Rather than omitting
information to paint a more positive picture, their exhibit design missed the opportunity to
explore the president’s accomplishments in office more.
“It’s just his whole story up through his presidency, which they don’t tell very well.
They still dodge some of the things that, you know… I think we’re all humans and I
think showing the flaws and showing the humanity of those people is really
important. And in some places it’s better than others, there are things the can do
better here. He really was trying all kinds of stuff and [his successor] was able to
give them more traction. It’s a weird thing where people were complaining that […]
was doing too much or not enough—you know, what do you do then?”

33

This answer seemed to show that the library would like to frame the president more
positively than history remembered him, placing it on one end of the spectrum. On the
other end of the spectrum, one participant emerged as an exemplar:
“We didn’t shy away from the topic. We dealt with the subject but we didn’t deal
with it with our own opinion. We had voices of people who were living at the time
talking about what they felt about the decision to use the […] and you hear all of this
and see all of this in the exhibit, and then we simply provide the timeline of what
happened and then we have a comment book there and let visitors voice their own
opinions about whether his decision was the right one or not.”
This library chose to highlight controversial and uncomfortable history, and encouraged
public conversation. Placing comment books and incorporating dissenting views into the
gallery space allowed for the voice and message of the space to be affected by the viewer as
well as the institution. This correlated to what Bednar and Welch argued about the
interpretation of messages and how the receiver was the one who made the meaning out of
the message.67 This also supported Hufbauer’s argument that a handful of libraries had
figured out how to present their history in balance.
Overall, there were three major themes and one minor theme found throughout the
nine interviews: accomplishments, relevancy to today, situated within historical context,
and legacy. Five participants used the word “accomplishments” frequently to describe their
approach to content. Seven participants used the phrase “situating within historical
context” or similar notions to describe their narrative. Six participants spoke about
emphasizing the president’s “relevancy to today” for their overall concept. Two of the
libraries declared that their exhibit was designed to speak to the legacy of the president.

67

Bednar and Welch, 88

34

“How these accomplishments were monumental for his time and how those
accomplishments passed by an old white guy in the 19--s are still relevant today and
touch the lives of every American.”
“The general concept and narrative is to put people back into the 19--s era. So we
have a series of immersive environments.”
“There’s so much major events of the presidency period in particular that I think
we’re trying to underscore […] relevance to today. So much of what he established,
or his admin established, we’re still living with. There’s just all of the relevant things
that we’re trying to make connections to today’s world.”
“It just goes chronologically all through his public service and all the different areas
that he was a public servant. That’s the main driving force: a value of public service
and being ethical and moral and doing the right thing.”
These themes seemed to coalesce and point to a broader idea of presenting the president to
the public: significance. Accomplishments, relevancy, and legacy are words that reflect a
value judgement related to the significance of a particular thing or person. This significance
is then juxtaposed to the historical context of the president’s time and actions to further
strengthen the importance of the significance. Each of the nine participants used at least
one of these themes in their description of the core exhibit. Therefore, it seemed
reasonable to assert that these exhibits are designed to present presidential significance.

Research Question 3: Who influences the content and narrative of the curation?
The third research question was addressed in three ways. Participants were asked
about the content creation process for their exhibits, what parties were involved in the
content process, and whether the president’s political affiliation influenced any of the
process.
All of the libraries created an exhibit content committee to design their exhibits. All
participants specified that they used an exhibit design firm for the design expertise but not

35

content. Content committee members included library directors, supervisory and assistant
curators, and library archivists. Occasionally, other library staff members were involved
such as a facilities manager. Eight participants said that their president’s family was
involved with the library in some form. However, only three participants said that family
members worked on the content creation process. Six participants said that members of
their foundation also sat on the committee. Three participants said that members of the
president’s cabinet or administration were involved in the content process, but did not
necessarily drive the content.
“The chairman of the Foundation who was an aid to [the president], was consulted
on every step of the process and even sat in on meetings and made his concerns
known.”
“They [cabinet members] were certainly queried about it. They don’t drive any of
the content. There are a number of them that we reach out to for input, but aside
from providing quotations and some videos, it’s not a major part.”
Six participants clarified that they did not have cabinet or administration members
involved in the process.
Three libraries said that the core exhibit involved the president in the design
process. The other libraries specified that their president was not involved because he had
passed away before the exhibit was created.
“When you have living presidents and living first ladies that changes the dynamic of
the libraries and the way those stories are told completely because they are
interested in how they’re portrayed.”
“I think that the government is to be thanked for that in most cases in the libraries,
especially for redesigns. If the government weren’t there to step in and say, ‘Ok, you
got your first round to say what you wanted to say and now we’re bringing in the
historians and we’re going to kind of tweak it a little bit and we have a better
perspective now…’ I think the redesigns have more of an opportunity to balance
things out.”

36

This seemed to follow Fawcett’s claim that presidential library exhibits have different
evolutionary stages to them.68 The first evolutionary stage occurred when the president
was still around and was trying to maintain a public image for himself. Once the president
had passed, and historians had advanced the body of research, the exhibit evolved to a
more balanced display.
Additionally, five libraries specified that their refreshed exhibits were reviewed by
historians. Though, one of these five libraries was an outlier, saying:
“We sometimes use historians. We try to move away from editorializing history
because we have plenty of content already. If we want a quote from one of the
documents in the collection downstairs, or a newspaper article, we use attribution.
We don’t need to go to historians for their two-cents on the topic.”
It seemed that the established NARA archivists could substitute as historian or expert for
smaller elements in the exhibit.
A major theme found in the exhibit goals question also appeared in the content
design question: the desire not to editorialize history in the exhibit. It was most prevalent
when participants were asked whether the president’s political affiliation influenced the
exhibit narrative. A resounding “no” from all nine participants was the answer.
“The process through the Archives staff, whether at the library or in Washington, is
making every effort to not interpret but present the facts.”
“One of the things that is very important to us as we develop anything for the
museum is to make sure that it is balanced and accurate. So any content that’s
developed, we run it by professional historians to make sure that what we say is
first of all correct and then to make sure that it is a balanced and accurate view of
things.”
“We’re supposed to tell the history, not promote one party over another. That’s a
misconception a lot of people have, they consider, you know, a Republican president
68

Fawcett, 30

37

so all you’re going to be doing is telling the Republican politics. That’s not true, not
at all.”
“You know, our goal is history, it’s not legacy. That’s the foundation’s job to support
presidential legacy and they get to pick and choose. We on the NARA side, our goal is
accuracy of history.”
They all explained that their libraries were federal agencies and as such were required to
be nonpartisan. Each library clarified that political party was only present in the exhibit
spaces to present facts about elections and events throughout the president’s time in office.

Research Question 4: Does influence from NARA impact what history is presented in the
exhibitions?
The fourth and final research question was addressed with six questions.
Participants were asked: what NARA funds; what the president’s private foundation funds;
how much involvement NARA has in overall operations of the museum; what portions of
the facilities NARA does not control; who has the final authority to approve exhibit designs;
and who were the largest funders for the museum.
Unanimously, the participants said that NARA only funded facilities, conservation,
and general operational costs, including maintenance, custodial, archival, and curatorial
staff.
“The primary influence they have is over the logistics of the physical aspects of the
building—whether the cases meet certain requirements, the humidity, lighting,
etc.—they don’t have any impact in the way of content except for perhaps having to
research for the content we want. As far as the content of the history that is
displayed, they don’t have any influence on that.”

38

The foundations funded all other elements of public engagement including exhibits and
public programming.
“Most of our education programs, almost all of our exhibits and a lot of our special
events are funded by our foundation. In other words, if we didn’t have the support
of our foundation we would basically be a custodial type place where people can
come and do research and look at the collections. But we would be doing almost no
outreach or public programs or exhibits without the help of our foundation.”
Three participants said that some parts of the property were owned solely by the
foundation. These areas included event space, ticketing, and retail. One of these three
participants explained that the PLA 1986 legislation enabled them to expand the
foundation-owned facilities. This library took the opportunities afforded by the legislation
further than the other libraries. The revenue from their foundation-owned spaces was
earmarked to safeguard against a furlough of federal library staff in case of government
shutdown, ensuring that the library could remain open year-round regardless of changes to
the federal budget.
To further clarify where exhibit decisions were made, participants were asked about
the final approval for their exhibits and who held that authority. All nine participants said
that NARA had authority over conservation and security of objects to ensure that artifacts
were protected, but they did not approve content. They clarified that this meant that NARA
only reviewed exhibits for conservation and environment. According to all participants, the
levels of approval through NARA included conservators, administrators in LP, and
ultimately the AOTUS. Four participants said that the private foundation was asked for
approval of the content because it was the sole funder of the exhibit, but its approval was

39

secondary to the library’s director and curatorial staff. According to all nine participants,
the director of the library approved the final design with the curatorial staff.
“There were some efforts in the past to move that decision making to Washington
and then the libraries would just carry out what was approved and concepts that
were developed back east. But it was determined that that was an unwieldy process
and, I think, an inappropriate one, because if you’re going to hire professionals to do
these jobs and make these decisions, you should let the professionals do them.”
This suggested that each library was a separate entity under NARA and their curation
process reflected that independence.

Summary of Findings
The three major themes found throughout the data involved curators: trying not to
editorialize history; presenting the accomplishments, relevance, historical context, and
legacy of the president; and keeping curatorial voice within the individual library. The
findings seemed to support arguments from both sides of the literature. Hufbauer’s
argument that the libraries specifically focused on positive and praise-worthy history
found some support in this study.69 The findings indicate that the exhibits strongly focused
on presenting the accomplishments of the president above all else. Furthermore, the
language used to discuss the content and narrative of these exhibits—accomplishments,
legacy, relevancy, and historical context—suggested that the significance of the individual
president was the guiding goal. This was supported by the number of libraries that focused
on the president’s time in office rather than expanding on his personal history.

69

Hufbauer, Presidential Temples

40

Additionally, Fawcett’s claim that the libraries were important to the history of
American democracy because they present and represent the executive branch of the
federal government also found support in these data.70 The findings suggested that the
exhibits did have an evolutionary track and that it was strongly dependent on the age of the
library, the presence of a living president, and the amount of historical research that was
available. Participants shared that the early installations of exhibits were created by the
president himself or his foundation on his behest and appeared to be more focused on a
positive image of the president. It was not until a certain amount of time had passed and
more historical research had appeared that the exhibits were redesigned with a broader
historical context, and became more balanced and fair.
Anthony Clark’s assertion that funding models from the private foundations dictated
the content71 was not significantly supported in these findings. The findings strongly
suggested that the involvement of the foundations in any content decisions was
subordinate to that of the museum’s curatorial staff and archivists. The division of funding
models seemed to separate content creation from financial support. While all exhibits were
dependent on the foundation for funding, there was not significant evidence to suggest that
the foundation determined what was displayed. The curators’ partnerships with historians
and expert archivists seemed to be the dominate method for keeping content consistent,
fair, and balanced. It appeared as if the foundation funding is simply funding.

70

Fawcett, 31

71

Clark, “Presidential Libraries Are A Scam”

41

However, many participants spoke about the connections between the foundations
and exhibits and how it had occasionally hindered the production of their exhibits. One
participating library was working toward redesigning the core exhibit for the better part of
25 years because the foundation was not able to provide adequate funding for the project.
This seemed to suggest that, while the foundation did not determine content, it still played
a major role in whether content was displayed at all. Likewise, while Hufbauer, Clark, and
Prentice and Thompson argued that the libraries presented whitewashed history, the
findings suggest otherwise. Only two libraries said that they intentionally left some history
out of their exhibit, saying that they made conscious decisions to avoid the president’s
private life in favor of presidential accomplishments. These themes seemed to coalesce and
suggest that presidential libraries were not inherently propaganda institutions, and while
some eras of the museum’s evolution might fall into that category, in the long run they
were intended to be removed from historical journalism.
Finally, the data seemed to suggest that curatorial voice in presidential libraries was
kept to the individual library rather than the broader NARA system. The director and
curatorial staff of each library held the final authority to approve exhibit content. The
review process included several people in NARA and occasionally the foundation, but the
library remained the authority on exhibit installation. Additionally, some libraries used
primary sources and recordings of the president in the exhibit narrative, which suggested
that the voice of the exhibit was primarily of the president himself. Additionally, by passing
the content through the eyes of historians, archivists, curators, and the president himself
(where available) worked to keep the authority or voice in-house; the libraries did not
appear to include voices outside of this small group of experts and professionals in content

42

decisions. One outlier to this pattern showed a direct intention to include dissenting views
and comments from visitors within the exhibit. However, the initial content was still
designed and curated by the small team of experts, suggesting that the curators still had
authority over the content displayed.

43

CHAPTER 5: Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to identify the curatorial choices made in presenting
presidential history in presidential library and museum exhibitions. Research on
presidential libraries lacked a conversation about the curatorial process and choices made
when presenting presidential history. Existing literature focused on either the issues of
incomplete or whitewashed history in the exhibits or the importance of the presidential
history in these institutions to the broader historical landscape of America.
Findings from interviews suggested that presidential exhibits were not intentionally
one-sided. Rather, the curatorial committees—comprising members of presidential
foundations, NARA staff, library and archive staff, and outside design firms—passed their
content through many levels of review to ensure a non-editorialized narrative. Libraries
reported a strong theme of focusing on accomplishments, relevancy, historical context, and
legacy within their exhibit spaces, indicating that significance of the president is the
dominant content goal. Additionally, the findings indicated that the curatorial voice in
presidential libraries was centralized within the individual libraries. Neither the private
foundations nor NARA had strong influences on the content choices.
Furthermore, once the exhibits had evolved from their first installation, the libraries
worked to incorporate as many voices as possible in the design process, including allowing
the presidents to tell their own stories through their own recordings and primary sources.
This seemed to indicate that curatorial voice was dependent on the extent of the
president’s involvement and the age of the relevant history. By encouraging historian input
and finding ways to incorporate visitor commentary into the narrative, like incorporating

44

dissenting views or spaces for visitors to leave their own conclusions in the exhibits,
presidential libraries could embrace a communal voice in their exhibits.
The sample size of this study limits its ability to be generalized out to the broader
library or archival system in the United States, including other National Archives
institutions. However, though the presidential libraries and museums that fall outside of
the NARA system may have different funding relationships than the NARA sites, the
findings from the research questions focused on content, narrative, and curatorial process
are consistent enough to suggest similar themes in all 25 presidential libraries.
While this study addressed the gap in the literature around curatorial choices in
presidential library and museums, additional research would strengthen it. For instance,
including the four remaining NARA presidential libraries and museums in a study could
provide a more conclusive understanding of the issue. Furthermore, some of the major
interview questions could have been structured differently to elicit more depth of
responses, especially in regards to the involvement of those who influenced exhibit
content. Additionally, further research regarding the design and interpretive content in the
exhibits as well as a document analysis of the exhibit content as installed would
complement this study.