TOWARD A MODEL OF INTERCULTURAL WARRANT: A CASE OF
THE KOREAN DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION'S CROSS-CULTURAL
ADAPTATION OF THE DEWEY DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION

by
Inkyung Choi

ABSTRACT
A MODEL OF INTERCULTURAL WARRANT: A CASE OF KOREAN DECIMAL
CLASSIFICATION'S CROSS-CULTURAL ADAPTATION OF THE DEWY DECIMAL
CLASSIFICATION
by
Inkyung Choi
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2018
Under the Supervision of Professor Hur-Li Lee
I examined the Korean Decimal Classification (KDC)'s adaptation of the Dewey Decimal
Classification (DDC) by comparing the two systems. This case manifests the sociocultural influences on
KOSs in a cross-cultural context. I focused my analysis on the changes resulting from the meeting of the
two cultures, answering the main research question: “How does KDC adapt DDC in terms of underlying
sociocultural perspectives in a classificatory form?” I took a comparative approach and address the main
research question in two phases. In Phase 1, quantities of class numbers were analyzed by edition and
discipline. The main class with the most consistently high number of class numbers in DDC was the
social sciences, while the main class with the most consistently high number of class numbers in KDC
was technology. The two main classes are expected to differ in semantic contents or specificities. In Phase
2, patterns of adaptations were analyzed by examining the class numbers, captions, and hierarchical
relations within the developed adaptation taxonomy. Implementing the taxonomy as a coding scheme
brings two comparative features of classifications: 1) semantic contents determined by captions and
quantity of subordinate numbers; and 2) structural arrangement determined by ranks, the broader
category, presence and the order of subordinate numbers. Surveying proper forms of adaptation resulted
in the development of an adaptation taxonomy that will serve as a framework to account for the conflicts
between and harmonization of multiple social and cultural influences in knowledge structures. This study
has ramifications in theoretical and empirical foundations for the development of “intercultural warrant”
in KOSs.

Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1. Introduction and background
Knowledge organization (KO) research is based on the belief that diverse sociocultural
contexts contribute to multiple viewpoints embedded in a knowledge organization system (KOS)
to the extent that one sees KOS as a sociocultural product, that is not only formed by human
interest and capabilities but is also influenced by the surrounding environment. For instance,
“cultural warrant” is a concept commonly understood as a foundation of classification, and it
emphasizes cultural conditions in a certain time and place.1 The KOSs in multiple viewpoints
that reflect social, cultural, historical, political, and technological variations of knowledge have
recently started to receive scholarly attention.
In addition, as advances in information communication and technology (ICT) break
national, social, and cultural boundaries, use of classification systems also crosses social and
cultural borders. Libraries in countries outside North America, for instance, have adopted the
Dewey Decimal Classification () for organizing their library collections. In a trend of
globalization, however, the question of proper localization of information systems beyond
translation or assimilation is still in dispute. In reaction to globalization, indigenization of
interoperable information systems is actively discussed. As such, cross-cultural environments
make it imperative for classification research to address knowledge as a sociocultural product.
Because classification is socially constructed, it carries its own assumptions about the
world and may have significant consequences not only for the knowledge user but also for
society. Recognizing these sociocultural influences, KO research has examined how multiple

“The concept of cultural warrant implies that a knowledge organization system is more likely to be useful and
appropriate for those who are members of a culture and that it is less likely to be useful and appropriate for those
who belong to a different culture, at whatever level of society that culture or domain may reside.” (Beghtol 2002, p.
45).
1

1

sociocultural viewpoints are realized in KOSs by taking a variety of methodological
approaches—e.g., domain analysis. Knowledge is based on both the nature of known things
(ontological) and how humans process knowledge (epistemological). Although many KO
scholars investigate both the ontology and epistemology of individual domains to construct valid
KOSs, research regarding sociocultural aspects takes mostly an epistemological approach,
because epistemology itself is culturally assumed.
There are also criticisms pointing out a prevalent relativism of contexts and
epistemologies in KO suggesting that this tendency restricts development of generally accessible
KOSs regardless of context and epistemology. To avoid the pitfall of extreme relativism, social
and cultural contexts and epistemologies need to be thoroughly examined. For sociocultural
contexts to be framed in pluralistic perspectives rather than relative perspectives, the
comparative approach to KOSs in different contexts is useful. Comparative thinking leads to the
acknowledgement of different conceptual schemes from different cultures, which may, in turn,
effectively make each culture acutely aware of its own historical and contingent nature.
In recent KO research, along with the notion of cultural warrant, sociocultural influences
have received attention through discoveries of categories and/or their relationships in KOSs that
result from social and cultural factors. Applying empirical and interpretative methods such as
tracing changes to the composition of a KOS, those KO studies mostly aim to reveal the
dynamics and evolution of knowledge structures according to the sociocultural changes in one
society or one culture (Salah et al. 2012; Tennis 2012). Such studies also explore multiple
perspectives in organizing knowledge derived from diverse sociocultural contexts.
Some problematic issues, however, are raised during the construction and utilization of
various KOSs because each reflects a different sociocultural perspective. On the one hand, for

2

such systems to reflect a certain domain or cultural view, it is possible that the systems will have
limited accessibility—fewer users will be able to use a particular culturally targeted system. On
the other hand, any systems aiming to accommodate diverse cultures and different perspectives
are likely to satisfy no one due to the difficulties of managing myriad and often incompatible
differences.
Therefore, one challenge in developing a KOS is to make it accessible to as many users
as possible while satisfying the needs of intended users. Also, given the increasing cross-cultural
use of classification, it is no longer true that current classification systems exist for only one
society or one culture. However, few KO studies have illustrated how two cultures are reconciled
through conflict and harmonization within a KO structure beyond pointing out the need to
recognize and identify sociocultural perspectives.
Along with this interest in sociocultural issues in classification systems, KO scholars
have studied such research themes for the general library classification schemes such as DDC,
Library of Congress Classification, and Universal Decimal Classification (UDC). From the long
history of KO in the context of library and information science (LIS), these library classification
systems have been exemplars encompassing many KOS characteristics. While I also address the
focus of KO or classification research on library classification systems in this study, it should be
noted that library classification schemes do not represent all kinds of KOSs. To clearly
differentiate these schemes from all other KOSs, what follows is a brief description of library
classification scheme development.
The general library classification scheme is based in rationality and pragmatism: its aim
is a logical taxonomy using symbolic language in order to provide access to knowledge to library
users. More importantly, library classification schemes were intended to situate, for end users,

3

distinctions among different disciplines. Books were the primary mode of instantiation.
Emphasizing the practical purpose of library classification schemes, Rafferty (2001) pointed out
that classification theorists who contributed to their development have achieved “discipline
epistemology” in identifying main class structures to simplify access to knowledge in books or
documents for library users (p. 182).
As global use of library classification systems increase, more than one cultural
perspective may exist in a system. In cross-cultural environments, the knowledge structures of
classification systems should reflect multiple sociocultural viewpoints, because the KOS is
intended to meet the needs of multiple cultures. Sociocultural influences on KOSs may also
come from historical changes to the society a KOS serves, because sociohistorical changes result
in different concepts and different relationships among those concepts over time. Changes in
KOSs induced by sociocultural influences may include both classificatory principles and cultural
features. Examining the Korean Decimal Classification (KDC)’s adaptation of the DDC by
comparing the two systems reveals many instances of this phenomenon. The KDC’s adaptation
of the DDC illustrates the sociocultural influences on KOSs in a cross-cultural context, as
revealed in an in-depth investigation of sociocultural influences. This was achieved by situating a
KOS (the KDC in this case) in a cross-cultural environment and examining the dynamics
between two classification systems designed to organize information resources in two distinct
sociocultural contexts. The following paragraphs will briefly discuss related concepts and issues
relevant to sociocultural influences in KOSs, followed by a detailed description of the study and
its significance.

4

1.2. Description of the study
DDC is a well-known and widely used library classification scheme. The Dewey Decimal
System, an American KOS, interacts with other cultures in two ways: (a) it accommodates
cultural diversity within its system for diverse users and (b) it has been adopted as the foundation
for organizing library collections in other countries and is often adapted to meet local needs. The
latter occurs frequently. DDC’s disciplinary structure is considered preferable because (a)
demands for organizing library collections by academic disciplines is high and (b) it is easier to
build a classification system based on an existing structure. While modern academic disciplines
have their roots in Western culture, many countries around the world have also adopted Western
academic disciplines and education systems. Information professionals in these countries find the
DDC’s principles and disciplinary structure useful for managing national knowledge to serve
national interests and facilitate international exchange of information.
A national classification scheme for South Korea since its first publication in 1964, the
KDC is an example of an adaptation of DDC that is deployed in a different sociocultural context.
Because of American influence on the development of South Korean librarianship in the postKorean War period, the KDC follows most of the fundamental principles and features of DDC
such as the decimal principle, ten main class structures, and divisions (i.e., subclasses) found
mainly in language and literature. The sequence of main classes in KDC remains almost the same
as that of DDC. The one exception is the language class, which moved from fifth place in the
DDC to eighth in the KDC (Table 1-1).
DDC 23 Class
number
000
100
200

DDC 23 Subjects
General Works, computer
science and information
Philosophy and psychology
Religion
5

KDC 6 Class
members
000

KDC 6 Subjects

100
200

Philosophy
Religion

General works

300
400
500
600
700
800
900

Social Science
Language
Pure science
Technology
Arts & recreation
Literature
History & geography

300
400
500
600
700
800
900

Social sciences
Natural sciences
Technology & engineering
Arts
Language
Literature
History

Table 1-1 Classes of the DDC and the KDC

Despite its DDC-like characteristics, KDC has some classes, tables, and numbers that are
easily distinguishable from their DDC counterparts. This is partly because KDC borrows other
classifications’ categories and structures, including those of LCC for some divisions in the social
sciences and UDC for certain subcategories in medicine. Other subclasses are from the Nippon
Decimal Classification (NDC; the Japanese national classification). Still, KDC revisions have
continuously attempted to ensure the system’s suitability for local needs. This involves making
changes that reflect aspects of Korean culture and South Korea’s history of social and academic
development. For example, KDC had a major revision in its main class structure and added a
new table for religions in order to meet local needs involving various religions (Oh & Yeo 2001).
It also underwent a major change in the subject of architecture. In previous editions of KDC,
architecture as engineering (540) and architecture as art (610) were separate, similar to DDC
categories of architecture as construction of buildings (690) and architecture as art (720).
However, the new sixth edition of KDC has merged architecture as art (610) into
architecture/construction (540). This merger of two divisions reflects the fact that architecture is
closer to engineering in the Korean conception of the discipline.
Because KDC was independently developed as the Korean national classification scheme
using the basis of the DDC principles, Korean culture appears in KDC as a proper reflection of
cultural warrant. At the same time, KDC also inherits some cultural features of DDC. In KDC’s
adaptation of DDC, it either aligns with DDC or reflects specific aspects of Korean culture. In
6

this study, I examine the adaptation of a popular classification scheme to accommodate local
culture when conflicting and harmonizing cultural warrants merge into an intercultural warrant.
The study, therefore, is designed to answer the following question: “How does KDC adapt DDC
in terms of underlying sociocultural perspectives in a classificatory form?”
In comparing the two systems, it was assumed that the efforts to meet local needs were
realized through KDC’s adoption as well as adaptation of DDC. Based on this assumption,
analysis was conducted in two phases. The first phase was intended to identify variations
between the two schemes; in the second phase the primary aim was to understand and interpret
variations resulting from the sociocultural differences identified in the previous phase. This was
achieved by comparing the knowledge structures of the two classification schemes and
identifying the quantity of class numbers representing concepts in each of the individual main
classes.
The second phase was an in-depth examination of the differences between the two
schemes, and examining changes made during KDC’s adaptation of DDC to reflect certain
cultural or sociocultural dynamics. Findings from the first phase were used to identify two main
classes for analysis showing significant and multifarious differences caused by sociocultural
influences. Differentiating between DDC-like and Korean-specific characteristics occurred
during the second phase. As there were influences by both American and Korean sociocultural
needs in the KDC’s semantic contents and structure, concepts represented by class numbers the
relationships among them were manually examined.

1.3. Significance of the study
Cultural studies of Information Communication Technologies have four progressive
categories in their research streams: (1) identifying cultural differences, (2) explaining why they
7

are different, (3) managing the application of the discovered differences in information systems,
and (4) studying the influences of information systems on culture (Leidner 2010). The present
study is conducted to fulfill the first two categories. Its goal in comparing classifications is not
only to identify differences between the KDC and the DDC but also to explain how they are
different through consideration of different sociocultural contexts and the cross-cultural
adaptation of a KOS. Major results and findings are expected to contribute to the last two
categories. The examination of KDC’s attempts to address sociocultural differences in a KOS
can provide useful information for potential solutions to issues in managing cultural diversity in
a KOS. Furthermore, identified sociocultural/cross-cultural factors in this study may lead to
future research on relations of a KOS to users or society in cross-cultural environments.
This in-depth examination of sociocultural differences and contextualization of KOSs
will contribute to the development of an analytical framework of sociocultural contexts.
Comparative studies of KOSs, especially those involving research on sociocultural influences,
will uncover various cases on the role of context in KOSs, which appear as differences in
knowledge structures. Therefore, sociocultural differences and their context will provide
significant research data that can be used to create a framework for future studies of sociocultural
context in KO.
In addition, this study is intended to provide a theoretical foundation for the development
of KOSs in cross-cultural environments. Further studies of various cases of cross-cultural
contexts may be expanded to consider not only adaptation but also translation and adoption of
one KOS into another. It will certainly evolve into a robust research stream in cross-cultural
KOSs.

8

1.4. Next chapters
The remainder of the study consists of five chapters. Chapter 2 reviews the relevant
literature in four groups: (1) social and cultural aspects of KOSs, (2) the four categories of KO
research relating to culture, (3) comparative studies in library and information science (LIS), and
(4) KO and related studies on cross-cultural use of DDC and its influence on the development of
KDC.
Chapter 3 discusses methodological approaches to the current study, starting with the
discussion of the research question. Because the nature of this study is comparative, comparative
methods and their limitations in research design are discussed. Following discussion of the
research design, the subsequent section addresses the study’s analytical tools, quantitative and
qualitative content analyses and their strategic application.
Chapter 4 reports the quantitatively descriptive findings from the first phase analysis.
Due to a huge data set, the description relies mainly on visualizations, such as graphs. Chapter 5
describes the findings from the second phase analysis, explaining the coding schemes and the
results that arose from qualitative coding. Starting with the coding process, the coding schemes
and results are described and illustrated with major examples.
Chapter 6 discusses interpretations of noticeable findings. In answering the research
question, this chapter discusses interpretations of the findings in both phases, discussing the
major patterns of sociocultural influences uncovered through comparison of the two systems.
The second part of the chapter examines the notion of intercultural warrant as a major
contribution of the study. The last chapter summarizes the study, its limitations and implications
for future studies.

9

Chapter 2 Literature Review
2.1. Introduction to Literature Review
As South Korea modelled its education and library on American systems in recovering
from the Korean War, the country adopted DDC as the foundation for its own KDC, but sought
changes to meet the national and sociocultural needs of Korean society. This study is intended to
examine the sociocultural influences of that adaptation as reflected in the localized KDC.
Sociocultural means “involving aspects of social and cultural factors” according to Webster’s
New World College Dictionary (Agnes 2013). Because the KO literature has rarely defined
sociocultural influences analytically, I take an approach to sociocultural influences in KO
literature in accordance with the dictionary’s definition. Thus, this section attempts to review KO
studies addressing aspects of social and cultural factors respectively instead of trying to base an
analysis on sociocultural influences using a specific term that rarely occurs in KO literature.
Although social and cultural factors are deeply interrelated, these concepts will be explored
individually due to lack of use of the combined concept term.
Through culture, we learn how people understand themselves and interpret the world.
Societies generate the rules and regulations governing human social behavior. This differing
emphasis is seen in the distinctions of ‘cultural anthropology’ and ‘social anthropology’.
Broadly, cultural anthropology focuses more on an understanding of the rules of behaviors,
language, material creations and ideas about the word, while social anthropology emphasizes
social institutions and their interrelationships. Social anthropology studies the organizing
principles of social life both in ways that govern and are challenged by individual behavior
(Monaghan and Just 2000). With a view toward structuralism, the concept of culture discernible
from society is well illustrated in Lévi-Strauss’s definition of culture:

10

Culture is neither natural nor artificial. It stems from neither genetics nor rational
thought, for it is made up of rules of conduct, which were not invented and whose
function is generally not understood by the people who obey them. Some of these rules
are residues of traditions… Other rules have been consciously accepted or modified for
the sake of specific goals. Yet there is no doubt that, between the instincts inherited from
our genotype and the rules inspired by reason, the mass of unconscious rules remains
more important and more effective; because reason itself… is a product rather than a
cause of cultural evolution. (Lévi-Strauss 1985, 34)
In Strauss’s definition, culture is a product of or results from the accumulated traditions
of either social forces or individual motivations. “Culture” has a different emphasis than
“society”; society embodies social structures as major influences on human behavior, while
culture is the unconscious result of human behavior. Bourdieu (1977), however, interrelates
culture and society by looking at society and culture as complementary forces. In doing so, he
explains that social structure influences one’s habitus, and the manifestation of habitus makes the
shared experiences among individuals or groups of individuals explicit, which results in their
becoming indicators of culture. Given this closely associated relationship between social and
cultural factors, this study is designed to examine a comparison of two KOSs while taking their
sociocultural backgrounds into consideration.
This chapter will review previous writings that shed light on the importance of social
contexts for KOSs, especially those that highlight the epistemological stance of the study, as well
as related contemporary KO studies impacted by such theoretical discussions. I will also examine
several major perspectives regarding cultural contexts in the KO literature: culture as domain,
culture and ethics, and indigenous KOSs. Further, as another epistemic factor that will shape the
methodological approach of the study, intercultural comparative studies will be introduced
focusing on how sociocultural contexts are conceptualized in these studies. The chapter will
conclude with an examination of the cross-cultural use of DDC, the background on KDC, and

11

related studies of KDC’s adaptation of DDC.

2.2. Social Influences in KO
Technological advances in information systems and an explosive amount of information
have become available in recent decades, and improving the efficiency and efficacy of KOSs is
critical to information scientists. Meanwhile, discussions of social, political, and cultural
influences on KOSs continue to be a foundational aspect of KO.
Hjørland (2012) and Smiraglia (2014) examine the challenges facing KO in the Internet
era and the value of efforts to catalog and classify “recorded knowledge.” It might seem that
there is no need for KO or even Library and Information Science (LIS), given the large number
of search engines that make it possible to search for and access information with a few keywords
or mouse clicks. Searching for information is no longer the exclusive domain of traditional
information services such as libraries. Lester and Wallace (2007) define knowledge as something
that constitutes decision making — acquiring information is not enough to make a person
knowledgeable. Fulfillment of the need for knowledge could begin in a search for information,
but knowledge can only be obtained through a synthesis of information. To synthesize
information, we need contexts from which information can be found. Mere information retrieval
is not what satisfies users' needs, nor does it replace what libraries and other information services
contribute to society.
It is a common perception — I will go so far as to call it a misperception — that
what we do in the information field is to provide information, as though we
simply hunt for the right datum to answer a question. “Five,” we might say —
well, “five what?” a user might ask of us. However, without context, no datum is
truly useful, meaning that what we do is far more complex than the mere
provision of facts. Information scientists are more complex as a social structure
than any search engine could be (with all due respect to Google™ and Yahoo™,
or even Freebase™). In fact, what we do is attempt to comprehend potential
human information requirements, and then we collect artifacts from which the
correct informational instructions can be extracted, synthesized, and
12

communicated. We provide context, and we filter it through our own expertise
(Smiraglia 2014, 10).
The relationship of knowledge to social contexts has emerged as a research stream in
recent years. Hjørland’s “Lifeboat for Knowledge Organization”
(http://www.iva.dk/bh/lifeboat_ko/home.htm) lists five ways to use the term “social
classification”: division of a population into social classes, social bias in classification reflecting
how social/cultural contexts are reflected in (any) classification, social organization of
knowledge (institutional) as contrasted to intellectual organization of knowledge (scientific),
classification in the social sciences, and collaborative (or distributed) classification like
folksonomy. Among those five, the second and third meanings of social classification are
associated with the social influences on KO systems (KOSs) and will be further considered
below. Any bias in a society is inevitably reflected in KOSs constructed within the society, as the
KOSs reflect their social context. Also, knowledge is organized by social organizations and/or
institutions in order to fulfill their needs. In contrast, the intellectual organization of knowledge
consists of descriptions or representations of parts of the world, as in scientific discovery. This
does not necessarily imply that scientific discovery is immune to social influence, but it is
understood as a contradictory concept to social needs in organizing knowledge in Hjørland’s
distinction of intellectual organization of knowledge and social organization knowledge. The
distinction of intellectual and social organization of knowledge is not implying that one is closer
to world truth over the other. This matters in KO, because they are projected from different
epistemic stances: intellectual organization of knowledge is from a realist perspective and social
organization of knowledge is from a constructivist perspective.
Thus, research on social influences in KO theorizes that KOSs, regardless of their
intended purpose to meet the needs of individual institutions or society in large, are socially
13

constructed to serve as tools for social/institutional purposes, reflecting bias in social contexts.
The notions of socially organized knowledge and social contexts reflected in KO have a long
history. The following is a review of the works by KO theorists that influence the epistemic
stance of this study.
2.2.1. KO as Social
2.2.1.1. Theory of scientific and educational consensus: Henry Evelyn Bliss (1929)

Henry Evelyn Bliss is one of the most influential figures in KO. Dahlberg (2006), the
founder of the International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO), shares a behind-thescenes look at naming the Society with the term used by Bliss in his works The Organization of
Knowledge and the System of the Sciences (1929) and The Organization of Knowledge in
Libraries and the Subject-Approach to Books (1933). Bliss’s writings, books, and classification
systems influence many aspects of KO, such as the traditions of classification based on science
(Beghtol 2010; Hjørland 2008), faceted structures of classifications (La Barre 2000), and social
and economic values of KO (Andersen and Skouviq 2006; Gnoli 2008). While his philosophy of
classification impacts all those aspects of KO, this section will focus on his beliefs and
epistemological stance, and his influence on other contemporary KO scholars’ works, especially
those considering social influences.
Among classical KO theorists, Bliss (1929) was the first to directly articulate the
relationship between classification as a KOS and social organization. Despite his beliefs in
scientific knowledge as the most stable form of knowledge that was believed to be universal
truths, he also recognized the role of organizing knowledge in social communities, so that social
organizations would be driven by reason derived from knowledge. Broughton (2008) pointed out
that Bliss viewed the pursuit of an appreciation of knowledge as avoiding unnecessary conflict
between the rational, the empirical, and the bibliographic perspectives of knowledge. Bliss did
14

not restrict himself to only one epistemological approach; rather, his epistemological stance is
dynamic. His position regarding a natural order of things can be extrapolated to examine the
ways in which society determines “how the order is manifested” in human knowledge. Thus, his
approach to classification is based primarily on the view that the order of knowledge is
determined by a scientific and educational consensus of society. This principle is also called the
“theory of scientific and educational consensuses” by Beghtol (2010). Many contemporary
scholars laud Bliss’s writings as some of the most profoundly theoretical approaches to
classification (Broughton 2008; Garfield 1975; Hjørland 2008). In The Organization of
Knowledge and the System of the Sciences (1929), Bliss addressed numerous relevant concepts
and principles in organizing knowledge derived from a range of communal minds such as public,
commercial, educational, scientific, moral, and institutional thought.
Bliss’s The Organization of Knowledge and the System of the Sciences has been critical
in spreading his key ideas regarding KO, whether implicitly or explicitly. His views and
discussion of classification within social contexts have been revisited by many contemporary KO
scholars. Broughton (2008, 47) describes Bliss’s ideas of the KOS’s relationship to social
contexts: “While there is a theoretical basis to his ideas of ordering, the part played by society in
determining the nature and form of subjects and/or disciplines is given considerable weight”.
Andersen and Skouviq (2006, 303) also give credit to Bliss’s formation of a theoretical
foundation for KO relative to social organizations, saying, “Bliss tries to show how forms of
social organization constitute knowledge organization and, consequently, how we cannot think
of knowledge organization as an isolated activity”.
Broughton’s overview of Bliss’s work (2008) recognized a communal mind that is not
limited to the scientific, but applies to all kinds of communities. Beghtol (2010, 1050) also

15

highlights Bliss’s recognition of this consensual and communal mind in every domain: “He
believed that, over time, human beings would grow toward increasing agreement about the
answers to fundamental questions that were asked not only in science but also in every other area
of human enquiry (e.g., religion, aesthetics, and sociology)”. Gnoli also referred to Bliss’s notion
of social consensus, describing KO’s expanded influence in everyday life and society as an
interdisciplinary domain (2008, 140).
Any discussion of the notion of social contexts and communal minds leads to a
consideration of the role of organizing knowledge in society. Social organizations embody a
consensus of the opinions and interests of their members, which lead correspondingly to large
bodies of knowledge, thought, and objectives. Knowledge and information, the assets of a
community and vital to its continuing growth and development, should then be organized
accordingly in order to support that community’s objectives and activities. In other words, (1)
organization of knowledge reflects a collective’s practices or activities; and, (2) knowledge
needs to be structured to correspond to the collective’s interests and objectives (Figure 2-1).
Given the ways in which social organization influences and, to a large degree, determines
organization of knowledge, KOSs cannot be isolated from social organization.

Figure 2-1 Knowledge and Social Organizations

2.2.1.2. Social epistemology as theoretical foundation for LIS: Egan and Shera (1952)

During the development of library education in the United States, the Graduate Library
School (GLS) at the University of Chicago, a premier academic institution, took a lead role in

16

formalizing librarianship as an academic discipline. In a landmark article, Margaret Egan and
Jesse Shera of GLS set out their case for a theoretical foundation for the study of librarianship.
That article “The Foundation of a Theory of Bibliography” (Egan & Shera 1952) is recognized
as a critical work that first suggested a new discipline, social epistemology. As a theoretical
foundation of LIS, social epistemology concerns an understanding of how society achieves a
perceptual (knowing) relationship to its environment, through “analysis of the production,
distribution, and utilization of intellectual products”. They also suggested a methodological
framework to reflect collective views of society in bibliographic practices. Among contemporary
LIS and KO scholars, their work is credited for three major contributions: identifying the
ultimate goal of library and bibliographic services; providing a theoretical framework for the
study of library and information science with subsequent frameworks of information-seeking
behavior, knowledge organization, and bibliometrics; and the initial use of the term “social
epistemology” (Furner 2004).
It is necessary to discuss these scholars’ fundamental understanding of the social
dimensions of knowledge relative to KO. Egan and Shera (1952) began with a statement about
the fundamental problems of bibliographical organization research by pointing out that the
limited range of bibliography constrains observation of the total flow of communication in
society. The central concepts in such a view are “society” and “communication.” “Society”
indicates a construct that involves complicated relationships and interactions between groups or
individuals and is certainly a notion beyond individuals. In the works of Egan and Shera (1952)
and other KO scholars (e.g. Furner 2002) dealing with social epistemology, the basic foundation
for all theories, arguments, and discussions in KO is a macrocosmic or collective perspective.

17

According to Egan and Shera (1952), microcosmic perspectives of bibliography focusing
on individuals are economically wasteful and intellectually frustrating, because a microcosmic
approach to bibliography, as a separate tool, satisfies only a few people with urgent needs. This
limited range hinders the provision of bibliographic services to a society, as there is no
overarching scheme that encourages not only production and consumption, but also the
interaction of intellectual properties through all parts of society. This view can be found in their
presumptions regarding human beings, compared to other disciplines, seen in Table 2-1.
Discipline

Presumption

Economics

Acquisitiveness is an ineradicable aspect of human nature, and it creates forms
and processes (money, products, exchange, etc.).

Sociology

Man is inherently gregarious and seeks to examine the forms and processes of
gregariousness (culture, religion, education, etc.).

Social
Epistemology

Man is naturally and continuously curious about his environment and seeks to
extend his knowledge in his efforts to control his environment (form and
processes).
Table 2-1 Presumptions on Human Nature (Egan and Shera 1952)

Table 2-1 shows certain presumptions of human nature in each discipline. These key
beliefs distinguish social epistemology as a new and separate discipline. Social epistemology’s
view on human nature implies the unavoidable relationship of a person to his or her environment
and the relationship of his or her knowledge to that environment. Egan and Shera’s (1952)
discussion ends with a proposal for social epistemology as a theoretical foundation for an
information scholarship. With a macrocosmic approach to bibliography, social epistemology is a
study of cognitive behaviors at the social level, one no academic field had attempted to address
at that time (Furner 2004). After Egan’s passing in 1959, Shera attempted to disseminate their
ideas by providing a framework for social epistemology (1960, 1968, and 1970). In 1970, he
stated, “I want today, however, to direct your attention away from the individual and to society,
18

because it is the social context of the library with which we as librarians must ultimately be
concerned, even though we must work through the individual to achieve the social end” (Shera
1970, 82).
Whereas “social” implies a collective, macrocosmic approach to and study of
environments, “communication” concerns the perspective of actions, activities, or activism of
knowledge. Bibliography is “one of the instrumentalities of communication and communication
itself as an instrumentality of social organization and action” (Egan & Shera 1952, 125). Further,
“bibliography must be looked upon as being, in effect, the roadbed over which the units of
graphic communication move among the various parts of society as they make their contribution
to the shaping of societal structure, policy, and action (Egan & Shera 1952, 125)”. These
statements indicate a belief that a socio-communicative conception of bibliographical activities
and organizing knowledge is critical as a theoretical foundation for bibliographic research
(Andersen 2006). According to this point of view, bibliographic organization needs to be studied
relative to the total environment: physical, psychological, and intellectual. In recognizing
bibliographical activities as part of social communication in a broader sense, Egan and Shera
emphasized the importance of the relationship between communicative action and KO.
Egan & Shera’s 1952 work has been revisited continually in further exploration of the
term “social epistemology” (e.g. Zandonade, 2004; Furner, 2004). In addition to their influence
on modern-day scholars with the concept of social epistemology and methodological approaches
appearing as current LIS sub-areas, their notion of bibliography as a communicative instrument
for society implied the role of KOSs not only as a means of enabling search and retrieval, but
also as a social system enabling communicative action within a given society.
2.2.1.3. Socio-cognitive (domain analytic) approach: Hjørland (1997 and 2002)

In a similar vein to the idea of social epistemology as suggested by Egan and Shera,
19

Hjørland also contemplated cognitive behaviors beyond the individual. In his book Information
Seeking and Subject Representation: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Information Science
(1997), he provides theoretical foundations for information-seeking behaviors and KO based on
activity theory. His view on activity theory defines knowledge as a product of human activity
associated with the division of labor in society. The understanding of knowledge and organizing
knowledge is based on the notion that human cognition is not achieved solely through individual
development. Rather, a person’s development of cognition is a result of biological, cultural, and
individual development. Therefore, meanings of terms are determined by their use in social
groups (Hjørland 1997) and, in this definition, terms also have socially negotiated meanings
(Hjørland 2009, 1,593). Meaning, concept, and knowledge conveyed through communicative
interactions are thus ecological and social, so we cannot assign meaning bibliographically within
KOSs simply by studying individuals’ cognition. Hjørland stresses the need for the study of
collective thought in individual knowledge domains or discourse communities to design better
KOSs. This idea is similar to Bliss’s (1929) belief in the role of KO relating to social
organizations. Also, building on Egan and Shera’s (1952) view of bibliography as a
communicative instrument, Hjørland attempts to demonstrate the relationship between the social
organization of knowledge and human communicative activities.
Since his 1997 work, Hjørland has further developed and disseminated his theory and
framework. As an alternative to internal movements that focused on the individualistic or
universal human mind, he introduced cognitive aspects at the social level in information science
and suggested a socio-cognitive view of KO (1997 and 2002). The socio-cognitive view
questions the individualism of the cognitive view, which disregards the contexts and interactions
present in a community.

20

Hjørland’s socio-cognitive view is closely associated with his acknowledgment of
epistemology as a theoretical foundation for KO and Information Retrieval (IR). The individual
view of cognitive behavior presumes a universal human mind – studies of individuals are
believed to be representative of all human beings by excluding contextual factors, whereas social
and ecological views of cognitive behavior allow for different perspectives from diverse social
groups. His socio-cognitive view, thus, is considered similar to the philosophical discussion of
Egan and Shera’s social epistemology (Zandonade 2004). Hjørland’s socio-cognitive viewpoint
and Egan and Shera’s social epistemology are both based on collective views and
communicative actions in organizing knowledge. In addition, Hjørland suggests a theoretical
framework and methodology for information science — a domain-analytic approach, which
investigates how domain-specific communities understand concepts and communicate by using
their own terminology (Hjørland 2002).
2.2.2. The Impact on contemporary KO field
Much of the KO literature concerning the social aspects of knowledge and KO is
influenced by major works of these KO theorists - the theory of scientific and educational
consensus by Bliss (1929), the social epistemology of Egan and Shera (1952), and the sociocognitive view of Hjørland (2002). Their emphases on the social aspects of knowledge and KO
bring attention to communicative activities of collectives; such views have contributed to
building theoretical foundations for KO scholars concerning the significance of context.
2.2.2.1. Metatheoretical assumptions

According to Hjørland (1998, 607), in information science a lack of theory exists; even
some specific approaches such as algorithmic retrieval or citation-based retrieval are not claimed
as theories, but termed ‘metatheoretical assumptions’. Metatheoretical assumptions are more like
philosophical views, thus more general than theories. They are assumptions made to generate
21

specific theories and are often recognized in the elaboration of concepts by use of certain terms
in texts. In this study, I examine metatheoretical assumptions from the texts of KO studies and
related concepts regarding the impact of social influences on KOSs.
Philosophical shifts from ontological to epistemological

Andersen (2004) affirms that information seeking is a collective activity, given that a
social organization engages in document production according to the demands of the
organization. As a result, knowledge-organizing activity should be shaped by its connection with
the social form. Budd (2002) also recognizes collaborative activity in needing information and
maintains that knowledge is influenced socially, referring to Susan Suleiman’s (1980) claim that
reading is essentially a collective phenomenon. Those collaborative activities such as the
production, mediation, and dissemination of knowledge reflect the ideas and worldviews of a
certain group, community, and society, implying that different views are at play in organizing
knowledge.
Such perspectives are opposed to universal, modernistic, and positivistic views, and at the
same time bring more attention to epistemology as a basis of KO. There have been evident shifts
“from classification-as-ontology, in which everything is defined as it is, to a more contemporary
notion of classification-as-epistemology, in which everything is interpreted as it could be” (Mai
2010, 711). Given that classification is one type of KO, Mai’s assertation could be interpreted to
say that there are shifts from KO-as-ontology to KO-as-epistemology. In the “Introduction” to
Cultural Frames of Knowledge, edited by Smiraglia and Lee, Olson (2012, ix) points out a
dramatically increasing interest in epistemology in KO literature: “I gave my first presentation
about epistemology at the 1996 biennial international conferences of ISKO at the Library of
Congress in Washington . . . At the 2010 ISKO conference in Rome, the conference was
22

organized into two tracks, one of which was almost exclusively about epistemology, nearly half
of the conference, and was the more heavily attended track. What happened in those 14 years?”
This attention to epistemology, which allows multiple viewpoints on organizing
knowledge, resulted in a split between stable, universal kinds of KOSs and dynamic, pluralistic,
and their domain-specific counterparts (Mai 2010). The distinction between the ontological and
the epistemological approaches in KO could shed light on KO’s foundation regarding social and
cultural conditions beyond technological advances. KO is not merely about structuring
knowledge for retrieval; understanding of knowledge is the understanding of the world, with
knowledge not as truth but as it exists in relation to environments, natural as well as social.
According to Hjørland and Hartel (2003), knowledge is based on both the nature of known things
(ontological view) and how humans process knowledge (epistemological view). Gnoli (2008,
140-141) maintains that “Human knowledge is thus a product of both the world itself and of
human interests and capacities”; he also posed a long-term research question on how to respect
multiple viewpoints: “One outstanding claim of the epistemological approach is that KO can be
different to different communities”. Many KO scholars investigate epistemology of a certain
domain, with special attention to the social and cultural aspects of organizing knowledge in order
to construct valid KOSs. Hjørland (2008, 16), for example, advocates for the domain-analytic
approach to KO and states that “domain analysis is a sociological-epistemological standpoint”.
In this sense, KOSs should reflect the needs of a community or purposes of a given group. In
other words, this approach represents current epistemological thought and simultaneously gives
room for the interplay of multiple viewpoints in KO, maintaining that no universal KOS meets
all needs.

23

Contextualization

Along with the increasing interest in epistemology, the importance of context in
organizing knowledge and information retrieval has also been discussed. Mai (2010) dismisses
the claim that one best system can serve everyone, and emphasizes the importance of
contextuality in KOSs. He stated that there is a plurality of bibliographic systems with different
contexts, meaning that there are also plural epistemological stances. Olson (2009) explores the
historical aspects of theoretical foundations for classification at various times and notes that no
neutral classification exists through the historical transitions of classifications. According to her,
Sayers (1926) and Bliss (1929) imply that even natural classification adhering to the natural
order (ontology) must overlap with purposive classification (epistemology) in some ways. Thus,
no classification scheme comes without social and cultural conditions.
I posit that the epistemological approach allows for multiple viewpoints in KOSs.
Cultural diversity can also be understood as involving multiple viewpoints; the cultural aspect of
KOSs will be discussed in the second part of this literature review.
2.2.2.2. Empirical and practical works

As discussed above, there have been attempts to acknowledge and theorize about social
influences on KOSs. In the form of conceptual study, they are shedding light on the importance
of epistemology and contextuality in KOSs. However, not many studies have examined the
metatheoretical assumptions empirically in the context of KOS research and development. Since
KO, as a discipline, has been developed upon the strong foundation of not only theory but also
practice, it is also necessary to discover what the acknowledgment of social influences in KO
brings to bear on practice.

24

The following section focuses on two approaches of the empirical studies derived from
the metatheoretical assumptions discussed earlier: 1) the analysis of KOSs in social contexts and
2) the domain analytic approach in social contexts.
The analysis of KOSs in social contexts

KO researchers examine socially structured knowledge by considering how KOSs have
manifested that knowledge. In these studies, the metatheoretical assumptions are that KOSs will
inevitably reflect social contexts. These studies not only relate KOSs to social contexts but also
illuminate novel perspectives, often unnoticed or taken for granted, with critical views regarding
those systems.
Bowker and Star’s Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences (1999) is an
influential work concerning the social dimension of organizing knowledge. The researchers take
an anthropological approach to classification, investigating classification schemes as
foundational structures of human societies. The natural inclination of humans’ classifying leads
to the fact that a systemic classification designed by and for many kinds of people — who each
classify things in their own way — is ultimately the result of conflict and negotiation among
groups. The authors attempted to reveal the assumptions underlying classification systems and
the consequences of these assumptions by investigating examples of practical classifications
such as Nursing Intervention Classification (NIC) and International Classification of Diseases
(ICD). An example of NIC showed how a classification system organizes and is organized by an
interest group, in this case nurse practitioners. NIC aims to make the range of nursing activities
visible through classification, legitimizing the work of nurses. These classifying activities have
been critical to the nursing profession because they allow the real work of nurses to be recorded,
verified, and rewarded by measuring the cost of each activity. Like other classification schemes
25

that render work visible, NIC carries some challenges, such as over-specifying what a nurse
should do. It also has positive consequences, such as making nurse-practitioners an organized
occupation, creating a basis for a scientific domain, and developing a tool for organizing work
practices.
The consequences of classification may also involve political and ethical problems, as
shown in the case of ICD. For example, different cultures have different ways of defining the
moment of birth. That difference causes conflict in creating a definition in ICD. Political
concerns and definitions, and particularly the role of the US government in controlling the
discussion around the definition of birth and personhood, have put this topic into the realm of
affairs of the state (Bowker & Star 1999). In other words, ICD reflects the charged political and
ethical atmosphere surrounding controversial topics, forcing some definitions to be abandoned or
silenced and others to appear exotic or overly convoluted. Bowker and Star tested how social
knowledge is organized and what impact it has on society through these classification systems.
While the importance of organizing social knowledge is recognized in every discipline,
many studies of socially organized knowledge manifested in existing bibliographic
classifications and re-confirming the inevitable relations between KO and social context exist.
These studies not only stress social context in organizing knowledge but also discuss the
responsibilities of KO scholars and practitioners to improve the systems by continuously
questioning existing bibliographic classification systems within their social contexts.
Critiques on the mainstream classifications- universal is problematic

The early acknowledgement of social context by KO theorists such as Bliss (1929) and
Egan and Shera (1959) has inspired critical approaches to classification revealing embedded

26

social and cultural bias. Many scholarly works are critiques of mainstream classification systems
over three decades (e.g., Olson 1998). Those critiques were mostly of DDC, LCC, and UDC.
Gender

One of the major critiques of mainstream classification schemes is derived from feminist
epistemology. Olson applies feminist theory to deconstruct the existing standards and subject
representations of marginalized voices (1996; 2002; 1998). She examines the presumptions of
Cutter’s (the creator of the Expansive Classification, which provides a basis for the top
categories in the LCC) and Dewey’s (the founder of the DDC) principles for organizing
knowledge, stating their belief that “[a] universal language is necessary to overcome diversity for
effective subject retrieval (2013, 140)”. The example of revealing the problems of universal
classification systems shows a number of works containing feminist themes combined are found
to be only partially represented in both LCC and DDC. Kublik and Olson (2009) attempt to make
adaptation of DDC for a feminist/women’s perspective as a particular social context. To identify
the gaps and instances of bias in DDC relating to women’s studies, they link each of about 5,000
descriptors in a Women’s Thesaurus developed by librarians and subject specialists to one or
more DDC numbers and make the assessment of each link for goodness of fit, based on
coextensiveness, reflection of gender, and rhetorical space. Although this expansion can’t be
realized because of legal issues, the project is meaningful as a prototype for future
improvements. Fox (2015) applied discourse analysis to explore gender oppression in DDC, and
examined its possible consequences or interplay in social contexts through the survey of legal
and medical documents.

27

Non-western epistemologies

The major critiques on universal classification systems also look at diversity. As the
fourth peak period of immigration in the United States, large-scale immigration began in the
1970s (Hipsman & Meissner 2013). Correspondingly, criticism arose of major classification
systems around underrepresented cultures, bringing attention to non-western and indigenous
epistemologies. Questioning the treatment of non-western materials in LCC and the DDC African literature, history, languages, and African studies; Melanesian geography, ethnography,
and languages; Asia and the Pacific; Arab-speaking countries -; the critiques challenge the
mainstream classification schemes’ treatment of non-western materials as being
underrepresented (Olson 2001).
“The power of social influences is most easily seen in classification outside of one’s own
society (Olson 2009, 4809).” Following the critiques on mainstream classifications, the holistic
analysis of social contexts manifested in the classification systems in a certain time and space
was carried out within broader social and cultural backgrounds. The second part of the literature
review will address studies relating KOSs to cultural contexts in much more depth.

Socio-technical changes

With recent socio-technological changes, socially organized knowledge, as in social
network sites or the Web 2.0 environment, has become one of the most popular topics. Research
on social tagging (or folksonomy) is actively produced, reflecting social contexts more directly
in organizing knowledge by engaging not with expert catalogers but users as amateur catalogers.
Unlike standardized classification systems, user-contributed tags are not constrained by authority
control. However, Kipp & Campbell (2006) and Olson & Wolfram (2008) identify the patterns
of Zipf-distribution for social tagging terms, showing that some major terms are dominantly
28

showing and a long tail of other terms appear infrequently. This pattern of social tagging is likely
to prohibit preserving diverse social and cultural perspectives in user-produced KOSs. The
emerging social technical change, like social tagging, will not guarantee a better reflection of
social contexts through its use alone. Therefore, KO research consistently calls for the studies of
social contexts manifested in KOSs, regardless of the type of system – e.g. traditional or
emerging - and of the impacts social contexts have on KOSs.
The analysis of social groups in a domain-analytic approach

Those studies revealing social and cultural contexts in classification systems and
suggesting desired directions lead to studies of social and cultural groups. Analysis of social and
cultural groups aims to provide practical solutions for constructing classification systems that
meet the needs of particular groups. Analysis of a certain group is similar to domain analysis,
given its shared purpose of organizing knowledge with a certain epistemological angle. Theories
and concepts are products of particular domains, so those domains should be analyzed to better
understand their users (Hjørland 2013a). Smiraglia (2012, 111) also argues that a domain “must
be a group with a coherent ontology, which implies a shared epistemology”. Domain analytic
studies in KO not only examine the needs and perspectives of a certain group but also implement
the analyzed results in the development of KOSs. User-oriented approaches and Cognitive Work
Analysis are exemplary domain analytic studies examining a certain social group.
User-oriented approach

User studies, claimed to examine users’ perspectives to be reflected in information
systems, have generated a couple of successful examples for user-oriented systems in KO.
However, Hjørland (2013b) maintains that such examples are not user-friendly systems as in a
user-centered revolution (Nahl 1996; 2003), but reflections of domain knowledge as in a socio29

cognitive approach that represents the perspectives and language from the activities of a certain
social group. For instance, the Book House system developed for information retrieval of fiction
in Danish is one successful example based on users’ preferences and cognitive views in the KOS.
The system abandoned many traditional approaches, which are document oriented, and adapted
users’ requests as a focus (Pejtersen 1989). This could be an improvement over traditional
document oriented approaches possibly because of its specific purpose and because the user
group for a specific domain, in this case fiction readers, was targeted. Smith (2011) targets the
user group for a domain that is appropriate for a specific purpose: medical information thesauri
and patient/consumer language. There is still no consensus in defining what user studies are in
KOSs, especially in relation to the socio-cognitive/domain analytic approach. It would be,
however, desirable that a KOS aiming to fulfill the needs of a specific social group considers not
the individual-cognitive aspects of the users being expected to be universally applicable, but the
socio-cognitive aspects including the perspectives and language of the group.
Cognitive Work Analysis

Mai (2008) proposes that the notion of actor and the notion of domain are also needed for
a contextual, human-centered approach to the design of KOSs, in acknowledgement of the recent
trends of classification research's understanding of contexts in which KOSs functions. Thus, he
suggests the application of Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA) (Vicente 1999; Rasmussen,
Pejtersen & Goodstein 1994) as a methodological framework for analysis of actors’ activities,
domains, and preferences in accordance with the socio-contextual and domain analytic
approaches. The CWA framework sees information interactions of actors in the context of
purposive activities. Among many studies applying CWA in information science, Holland (2006)
investigates the use of corporate publications by researchers in forest science, oceanography, and
30

fishery science to provide recommendations for the design of information systems related to the
structure and representation of data about corporate publications. Soglasnova & Hanson (2015)
apply CWA to evaluate social responsiveness and relevance of terminology used in a specialized
thesaurus constructed for a community legal clinic library.

2.3. Cultural Aspects of KOS
2.3.1. Culture and Knowledge
Knowledge plays a critical role in making a decision leading to possible actions, whether it
is an individual or group decision/action. So, the need for and pursuit of knowledge are
inevitable, regardless of the form of delivery, exchange, and flow. However, the channels, forms,
and ways in which knowledge is generated, stored, and transferred can be culturally influenced.
Also, because culture shares thoughts, attitudes, beliefs, and values (Hofstede 1994), the ultimate
goals or values in pursuing knowledge can be culturally different. Those shared values, beliefs,
and thoughts are transmitted socially and become a lens through which people understand and
interpret the world. They consist of such things as practices, competencies, ideas, schemas,
symbols, norms, institutions, goals, constitutive rules, artifacts, and modifications of the physical
environment (Fiske 2002, 85). The cultural lens can be unique in treating knowledge and the
goals and values of knowledge such as in Sahlins’ (2004, 11) claim that “culture does not
determine history but organizes it.” Culture leads people who share social epistemology to
understand the world. This shared epistemology also allows shared perceptions, which organize
the shared knowledge.
2.3.1.1. KOSs as cultural artifacts

KO scholars and practitioners have attempted to capture many aspects, lenses, and
screens of reality and reflect them in KOSs. All KOSs are language based, although some use
31

symbols for systematic representation of knowledge. Language is innately a product of culture.
The relationship between languages and cultures implies how we understand the relationship
between KOSs and cultures. According to Whorf’s (1956) hypothesis, language applies a screen
or filter to reality. Boas (1966) claims that various languages classify experience differently and
linguistic categories might impose themselves on the thoughts of their speakers. If the linguistic
categories include knowledge structures in any sense, knowledge structure, organization, and
classification would reflect the views of the language speakers. For instance, just as language
consists of content (words) and relationships (grammar), most KOSs also have the same two
parts. Olson (2009) suggests that there is an essential construct of classification affected by
social and cultural conditions: semantic contents and structures. The semantic contents of
classification, such as terminology, synonyms, and antonyms, can apparently represent the
interests of a certain group, depending on its political, cultural, and moral context. Likewise, the
structure of the classification system, such as hierarchy, results from cultural and intellectual
infrastructure. Tennis (2011) also attempts to separate semantics and structure in the context of a
classification scheme. According to him, semantics is a definition of classes, while structure is a
representation of relationships. I shall examine these two concepts separately to reveal
underlying assumptions of KOSs in the methodology chapter.
2.3.1.2. Cultural diversity in pursuing knowledge

Cultural diversity arising from different social structures implies various values for
knowledge across cultures. If we look at the highly prioritized value in knowledge generated
from social discourses, ‘seek truth and avoid error’ is generally understood as a primary goal. A
large number of anthropological reports show that diverse cultures share a common feature in
that they recognize the value of truth as their epistemic goal (Maffie 1995). However, Mulder
(1996) maintains that it is at least possible for there to be a society in which members value
32

epistemic goals other than truth. One example is ancient China, where dominant thought (i.e., the
classicism) promoted learning centered on morality-seeking in context with no mention of
pursuing truth (Lee 2016, 127-128). In Hongladarom’s (2002) claim of the need for “crosscultural epistemic practices”, he illustrated the difference in epistemic goals across cultures using
an example of how the Thai pursue knowledge. In Thai, knowledge is valuable in relation to
social hierarchy and succession of traditions. It is echoed by Mulder (1996, 140-141) stating “To
have relatively more knowledge entitles one to equivalently more respect and position, and,
correspondingly, people in higher positions are thought to have knowledge—or at least they are
expected to behave as if they know. Knowledge is a personal attribute that is beyond research or
discussion.” Hongladarom emphasizes that epistemic goals can vary, given that values for
knowledge can vary across cultures. This implies that cultural consideration should contribute to
the task of social epistemology that Egan and Shera (1952) envisioned as a discipline that
examines the role of knowledge in society.
2.3.2. Culture in KOSs
Despite the inevitable relationship between culture and organizing knowledge, there is a
lack of consensual elaboration of KOSs addressing culture. Beghtol (2002, 903) raises the issue
of culture as a foundational warrant for KOSs. She emphasizes the importance of equipping
information systems with the cultural conditions of groups, stating, “A system that has not been
established on an appropriate cultural warrant will not be adopted for information search and
retrieval because information seekers will find that it does not match their accepted view of how
the world works”. The KO literature, however, lacks comprehensive accounts for the epistemic
stances of knowledge organization regarding cultural contexts, which leads to practical
implications.
33

2.3.2.1. Culture as domain

Many major KO scholars now support multiple viewpoints, post-modern views, and
multicultural contexts in organizing knowledge. In an effort to provide an overview of cultural
pluralism in KO, the Information Organization Research Group at the University of WisconsinMilwaukee published a collection of essays titled Cultural Frames of Knowledge (Smiraglia and
Lee 2012), addressing diverse viewpoints in cultures, methods, and epistemologies - referred to
as ‘domain analytic.’ In this collection, Smiraglia (2012) concluded that culture provides us with
epistemological lenses: perceptions are shaped by definable social domains and perceptions
shape epistemology – how we know what we know. In accordance with both the social
epistemology of Egan and Shera and the socio-cognitive approach by Hjørland, culture is
regarded as domain wherein human activities take place and customs, habits, languages, and
perceptions are shared.
2.3.2.2. Culture and ethics

The two challenges of classification discussed in an earlier section – ethnographic and
formal (Star & Bowker 1999) - bring ethical concerns as a third challenge of classification.
Depending on the purposes of classification systems or political and social strategies of dominant
user groups, a particular culture becomes dominant and other cultures become exotic or “the
stepchild.” In addition, the dynamics of economic, social, political, and technological changes
leading to conflicts and movements of social/cultural classes call for rigorous ethical assessments
of classification systems sensitive to the changes. Even the determination of sameness and
difference, upon which classification is built, is reliant on the perception of mainstream user
groups (or mainstream culture). This post-modern viewpoint is elaborated by Foucault (1966) as
in his claim, “thought can yield resemblance only within the visible parameters of an immediate
domain (Smiraglia 2012, 12)”.
34

Those ethical concerns for organizing multiple viewpoints are also followed by the
discussion of the concept of cultural warrant proposed by Beghtol (2002). Cultural warrant, as
discussed in Chapter 1, reflects man-made products and human activities such as languages,
traditions, logic, and habits in certain times and places. As different cultures possibly have
conflicts from misunderstanding each other’s perceptions, the KOS based only on a certain
cultural warrant can also cause negative effects, depending on the cultural background of domain
user groups. Those conflicts arise when different cultures co-exist in a shared social structure,
and ethical concerns for organizing diverse cultures become an important matter going forward
to mitigate them. Oh and Yeo (2001) discussed the conflicts caused by cultural differences in
DDC, and suggested an option for the DDC class Religion (200) for nations, such as South
Korea, in which religious diversity predominates. They propose contracting the divisions on
Christianity, 220-280, into one division, 220, and allowing more room for religions originating in
Asia while maintaining the overall order of religions in the DDC.
2.3.2.3. Indigenous KOSs

The movements of repatriation of social and cultural assets for indigenous people in the
late 20th century have called for indigenous librarianship to enable indigenous people to have
better access to their knowledge (Ghaddar & Caidi, 2014). According to Turner (2015), in the
19th and 20th centuries museums collected indigenous cultural assets not as contributions for use
by indigenous people, but as material culture for research on communities whose worldviews
differ from the Eurocentric perspective. Recent efforts by libraries and museums support access
to indigenous knowledge in their own worldviews for use by indigenous peoples. Therefore,
indigenous epistemologies become an issue when organizing indigenous knowledge. A goal of
indigenous KO, as a field of practice and scholarship, is to build KOSs that reflect unique

35

indigenous cultures and avoiding a certain cultural slant2 of major classification systems such as
DDC and LCC.
Brian Deer Classification, the Canadian indigenous classification system created in the
1970s, has been applied, evaluated, and re-constructed to serve the Maori in recent scholarship of
indigenous KOSs (Doyle 2006; Cherry & Mukunda 2015), and has been followed by a
suggestion of building subject headings for Maori as well (Lilley 2015). Also, in a study of
constructing a thesaurus that reflects American Indian worldviews consisting of spiritual,
physical, social, and the mental constructs, the authors (Littletree & Metoyer 2015) stress
indigenous ways of understanding and perceiving the world as different from an Eurocentric one.
They also argue that there are rich opportunities in indigenous KOSs, as an investigation of
relationships among information, knowledge, and wisdom.
The indigenous KOSs for the Maori in New Zealand and for the American Indians are
systems outside of major KOSs in a certain national boundary. The studies of indigenous
knowledge have broader implications in maintaining cultural and intellectual assets of a
particular local environment, regardless of their colonization by the West. For example, Lwoga,
Ngulube, & Stilwell (2015) use two terms, indigenous knowledge and local knowledge,
interchangeably in their study of indigenous KOSs for agriculture in Saharan Africa, because
they aim to build a KOS reflective of local environments without reference to whether the
community members are inhabitants or not. Overall, while maintaining cultural and intellectual

2

In this section, I used the term ‘slant’ as a particular point of view, avoiding ‘bias’ that projects unfair treatment.
This use of term ‘slant’ in KO is from José Augusto Chaves Guimarães’s presentation at the conference ‘Global and
local knowledge organization’ in Copenhagen, August, 2015.

36

diversity, indigenous KOSs aim to better reflect “prioritized issues of importance to the peoples
in use and their structuring of social relations (Cherry & Mukunda 2015, 552)”.
In recent indigenous KO research, there also have been attempts made to develop
suggestions in organizing knowledge, with an emphasis on the importance of indigenous KOSs.
Gilman (2006) emphasized cultural and intellectual diversity through securing access to
indigenous knowledge. Classification and Cataloging Quarterly published a special issue in
2015 addressing indigenous KOSs. In the special issue, Parent (2015, 704-705) argues that “the
possibilities for connecting information through digital means now come close to resembling the
knowledge structure built over the entries by Indigenous culture”, so “we need to be mindful of
access points, cultural differences, and appropriate vocabulary” so not to lose the value of
indigenous knowledge.
Doyle (2006) highlighted the need for building culturally appropriate KOSs that lead to
the preservation of local communities, foundations for cross-cultural understanding, and even
invigoration of local cultures against knowledge structures that assimilate one another. She
conducted a case study evaluating an indigenous KOS for the Maori and suggests
methodological approaches in five steps:
(1) collect existing Indigenous library classifications and subject headings (2) conduct
interviews with the creators and users of those classifications and subject headings to
determine design principles and usability (3) undertake a collaborative project with an
Aboriginal community that intends to describe Aboriginal collections from an Aboriginal
perspective (4) reflect on the principles that informed the collaborative research (5)
present a case study of the use of the classifications and subject headings that is a proof
of concept (p. 6)
Howarth & Knight (2015) encourage participation of community members in describing
local-based handcraft collections and suggest an “Indigenous approach to creating surrogates

37

that focuses on the inherent value of an object to a storyteller, an individual, a community”
(p.593) as complementary with KO specialists’ functional ways of describing.
2.3.2.4. KOSs of distant cultures

Indigenous KOSs emphasize the importance of organizing knowledge to the social
relations of the people in use. In a similar vein, but with further implications, there are studies of
KOSs of eastern cultures – Indian and Chinese. These studies investigate the epistemologies of
nonwestern or ancient knowledge structures, with implications for the current KOS.
Neelameghan and Raghavan (2012) examined Indic cultural frames and found the
commonality of thoughts and unity of ideas across domains as its characteristics. Simply put,
many concepts and the relations among concepts in the Indic culture are trans-disciplinary; e.g.
the concept of taaLa is used as rhythm in music, cadence in dance, height in sculpture, and area
in architecture. This trans-disciplinary character is aligned with 1) Ranganathan’s proposition of
seminal mnemonics - sequencing of concepts acceptable across domains in Colon Classificationand 2) PMEST (Personality, Materials, Energy, Space, and Time), as a basic frame for
knowledge representation, implemented in faceted classification. From Ranganathan’s approach
to classification, which is deeply rooted in the Indic culture, the authors see the feasibility of
developing a universal framework in overcoming the confusions caused by sociocultural
differences in expressing subjects.
On the other hand, Lee (2012a) analyzed the epistemic foundation in the very first
Chinese bibliographic classification – constructed immediately before the beginning of the
Common Era. She identified several major design principles in the scheme reflective of the
epistemological frame of the time, e.g., classicist morality and government functions. Studying

38

the orthodox point of view that influenced the knowledge structures of early China, she implies
the dynamic relations between knowledge creation and knowledge structures. Beyond the
discovery of the epistemic foundation differing from the modern/westernized classification, Lee
(2012b) suggests considering the Chinese approach, especially its principles of holistic and
correlative thinking – which are not part of the current systems – as an alternative way of
organizing information in current and future systems. Her research on classification (2010,
2012a, 2012b, 2016) viewed it as not just an objective scheme for retrieval but as social process
via the accumulated experiences in Chinese imperial society.
Studies of KOSs in other cultures are a rarity in recent KO literature. However, there are
a small number of studies examining KOSs in other cultures, not examinations of general
features or principles in understanding epistemic standpoints, but comparisons of the knowledge
structures of different cultures over a certain domain – e.g. religion, musical instruments, or
gender studies. These will be discussed in the next section.

2.4. Cross-cultural comparison of KOSs
Clifford Geertz (1973, 89) describes culture as “an historically transmitted pattern of
meanings embodied in symbols, a system of inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms
by means of which men communicate, perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and
attitudes toward life”. It is not an individually-construed concept, rather it is a context for
behavior, which reinforces and codifies social structures involving economics, politics, and
relations through socially-agreed upon patterns. His notion of culture echoes the concept of
social epistemology (Egan & Shera, 1952), and theories of social and educational consensus
(Bliss, 1929). While culture embraces a broader scope of symbols and emphasizes historical
transmission, Geertz’s description of culture also implies that an iterative relationship exists
between culture, as a system of inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms, and social
39

structure, involving economics, politics, and relations through socially-agreed upon patterns. As
such, the close associations of social structure and culture are embedded in studies of culture.
Comparative studies of multiple nations especially need to take a holistic approach to culture, as
complex systems interacting with social systems, resulting in the sociocultural view in the
comparison of national cultures.
In light of the international use of DDC, some have called for modifications to reflect
other cultures in DDC, cultures that have been ignored or misrepresented (McConnell 1985; Oh
and Yeo 2001). However, the continual development of DDC is intended to meet the needs of its
main user groups in the United States, whose culture functions as the cultural warrant of the
scheme. It is entirely different when a different nation adopts DDC and seeks to adapt the
scheme to accommodate its own culture. In other words, it is impossible that the cultural warrant
of the new scheme simply be an adjustment of the original one; it must focus on the culture of
the adopter. The need to accommodate the adopter’s culture in the inherited cultural features of
DDC requires an understanding of both cultures. The adopter’s culture can be distinctly
supported in comparison with the inherited culture supported by the original scheme. In this
study, comparison of two classification systems takes a cross-cultural comparative approach to
the KDC’s adaptation of DDC. This section will address the principles of comparative studies,
previous comparative studies in LIS and KO, and conclude with brief background descriptions of
DDC and KDC.
2.4.1. Comparative studies
Conflicts in action, thought, and values between different cultures may exist because of a
lack of understanding. However, differences between cultures do not have to be problematic.
Rather, they may present opportunities to enhance self-understanding and improve mutual
understanding. Because of their value for understanding the self and others, comparative studies
have been favored for a long time. Comparative studies have been performed across disciplines

40

not only as they apply to observable cultural differences but also as a mechanism toward a
clearer understanding regarding the underlying values of people, society, and culture.
Why and how does a comparison of different cultures enlighten understanding of
ourselves and each other? For one thing, presuppositions are derived from an acceptance of
multiple cultures. That multiplicity allows us to think comparatively regarding ourselves and
others. A different system of thought helps to expose our own limitations, and comparative
thinking makes the previously unthinkable or unthought in some ways thinkable by uncovering
those limits (Xie 2001). The crucial point here is that different cultures have different conceptual
schemes and systems of classification, each of which may effectively make the other culture
acutely aware of its own historical and contingent nature.
Comparative research in the social sciences and humanities refers to the study of multiple
societies, countries, cultures, systems, institutions, and social structures and is carried out
through systemic comparison of phenomena over time and space (Hantrais 2009). The
comparative approach became a systematic method in the nineteenth century with use by leading
figures such as Alexis de Tocqueville, Emile Durkheim, Karl Marx, Max Weber, and John Stuart
Mill. Since the late 1980s, many countries have started to call again for comprehensive studies of
adjacent countries to understand not only those countries but also dynamism among those
countries, particularly within international organizations such as the European Union, United
Nations, UNESCO, WHO, and OECD (Hantrais 2009).
In terms of the unit of analysis, comparative studies are usually classified into crossnational, cross-societal, and cross-cultural comparisons. Nation or country as a unit of analysis is
convenient in defining territorial boundaries and administrative/legal structure clearly, but can be
confusing when national borders shift. Moreover, the within-nation differences such as diversity
41

of population, regional characteristics, and competing institutions in one country could be
ignored (Xie 2012). Society as the unit of analysis is not as clearly defined as a nation. This
usually calls for a certain degree of commonality in socioeconomic, political, and cultural
criteria. Society as a unit of analysis depends on sets of criteria. For example, Durkheim
compared subsets of society as characterized by age, sex, or family type. Social systems such as
schools, business firms, or local communities are also frequently used for analysis as subsystems of a society (Hantrais 2009). Ultimately, cultures are far too broad and complex. In
cross-cultural psychology, culture is all-encompassing, both representing shared practices and
meanings within particular groups, and constituting an independent variable “producing
differences among groups” (Lyons and Chryssochoou 2000, 136-7). As a unit of analysis, culture
is often closely associated with a linguistic entity studied by linguists and ethnologists. In
general, culture serves as a framework for organizing, analyzing, and interpreting actions,
motives, attitudes, and values (Hantrais 2009).
2.4.1.1. In LIS

In Library and Information Science (LIS), Lor (2012) advocates for International
Comparative Librarianship (ICL). He addresses theoretical, methodological, and practical issues
concerning comparative research in LIS and redefines related concepts applicable to ICL.
Although texts for comparative research in social sciences show commonality with ICL in
almost every concept, ICL delimits the object of inquiry to cross-national libraries and libraryrelated information systems.
While lacking common terminologies, methodologies, and theories, there are
comparative studies of different countries regarding libraries or information-related systems.
This section discusses approaches to conceptualization of culture in LIS literature.
42

Some studies on international comparisons aim to discover trends across
cultures/countries. These studies are more likely to broaden understanding of certain systems
within an intercultural environment. Thus, they find critical perspectives not identified within
domestic-only observation, thereby expanding the boundaries of information-related systems.
For example, Wilkinson & Thelwall (2012) observed topical trends in nine months of Tweets in
English from the UK, US, India, South Africa, New Zealand, and Australia and uncovered
international imbalances, especially in tweets of news media: the tweets and re-tweets on news
media mostly show US trending topics regardless of a Twitter user’s national background.
Vaughan & Chen (2015) also discovered US-centric search results in Google Trends through a
comparison with the major Chinese Web search service, Baidu Index.
Assuming the existence of cultural differences, there have been attempts to identify
differences across cultures. These studies, considering nationalities or nations as cultural
boundaries, examined information behaviors, information-related services/systems (Liu & Huang
2005; Shachaf, Meho & Hara 2007; Yoon 2008). Beyond exploration of observed cultural
differences, Hara, Shachaf, & Hew (2010) reveal West-centered studies of Wikipedia and
suggest sensitivity to other cultures.
In intercultural communication, many comparative studies of Eastern and Western
countries have applied binary frameworks differentiating the two cultures. One such framework
is high context (HC)/low context (LC) communication, which serves as one of the critical factors
used to determine cultural characteristics. HC communication filters more information on reality
and relies on shared experiences. Meanwhile, LC communication raises awareness on structures
of reality, relying on explicitly expressed contexts. Hall (1976) demonstrated these two different

43

contexts of communication by characterizing North Americans as more likely to use LC
communication and East Asians as more likely to use HC communication.
Qing (2008) takes such distinction of language codes under consideration as one of the
cultural influences on different patterns of knowledge integration in the East and West.
According to Qing, explicit knowledge can be codified and transmitted in formal and systemic
language, whereas tacit knowledge is more personally expressed in nature, related to action,
commitment, and highly involved in a specific context. Given that tacit knowledge is hard to
verbally code and demands shared experiences or contexts for communicators, HC
communication-dominated cultures like those in China are likely to integrate tacit knowledge
more efficiently than LC communication-dominated cultures, such as those of the United States.
Hofstede’s five dimensions (1994) of culture - Power Distance Index (PDI),
individualism (IND)-collectivism, masculinity (MAS)-femininity, Uncertainty Avoidance Index
(UAI), and long-term orientation (LTO) have long been widely used for finding patterns of
cultural differences. Among those five, Individualism/Collectivism presents distinguishable
differences between East and West; many comparative studies in LIS also apply Hofsted’s
cultural dimension theory emphasizing the dichotomous distinction of individualism and
collectivism (Yang 2007; Stvilia Al-Faraj, & Yi 2009; Kim, 2013). On the other hand, Park et al.
(2015) examine the influences of cultural characteristics of the US and South Korea, each
representing individualism and collectivism, on intentions of uploading Wikipedia articles. They
suggest, as a result, that the effects of cultural characteristics may be weakened with the more
self-oriented nature of Web 2.0 applications like Wikipedia.

44

As such, individualism/collectivism and HC communication/LC communication have
often been understood as mutually exclusive and opposing extremes. However, they are not
separated as extreme poles; rather they coexist in any culture. Lim & Ahn (2015) suggest
avoiding the dichotomous approach, which presupposes a static view in the study of cultures in
the field of intercultural communication. Rather, culture is a complex of traditional behavior
successively learned by each generation (Mead 1937) and an open system, which interacts with
various systems (e.g., educational, economical, and political) within the society as well as with
other cultures.
Instead of a dichotomous distinction of East and West, some LIS cross-cultural
comparative studies seek to understand the subsystems of national cultures. For example, Kaba
& Osei-Bryson (2013) investigated the influence of national culture on individuals’ perception of
ICT (Information and Communication Technology) in Quebec and Guinea. The distinguishing
factors of these two cultures are economy and social status – whether industrialized, developing,
or less economically developed, as adoption and dissemination of ICT in a nation is deeply
associated with socio-economic issues. On the other hand, in studying the cultural, educational,
and geopolitical forces that produce and shape university library consortia, Perushek & Douglas
(2014) take an interpretative approach with historical contexts such as imperial traditions of
China, relations of Hong Kong with China and the UK, and US development of democracy.
Furthermore, in understanding culture as a complex interaction with various social
systems, such as education, economics, and political systems, cross-cultural comparative studies
in LIS develop their own frameworks to understand sociocultural factors, in order to reveal
causal relations between national cultures and information systems. In examining the influence
of culture on digital libraries of the first wave in European national libraries – France, Portugal,
45

Scotland, and Britain, Dalbello (2008) combines the theories of culture and organizational
rationality, social choice systems, and strategies of organization behavior to generate the
framework of her analysis on histories from interviews with policy makers and developers of the
digital libraries. Relly (2010) synthesizes literature into three areas – political, cultural, and
economic - in order to identify the impact of nations’ statutes in adoption of ATI (Access To
Information) legislation. Specifically, the variables examined for culture are perceptions of
corruption, structural pluralism (ethnic and religious fractionalization), and social rights,
specifically women's rights.
2.4.1.2. In KO

Few KO scholars have conducted cross-cultural comparative studies. There are some
studies that situate KOSs in cross-cultural environments, which appear largely in two directions:
1) investigating knowledge structures of a culture, those not covered normally in Eurocentric
KOSs, and 2) comparing linguistic or semantic issues of KOSs of different cultures that would
promote trans-cultural/trans-linguistic use of KOSs. Because KO studies tend to examine either
knowledge structures or systems, studies aimed at promoting access to knowledge crossculturally either go deeper to assess knowledge structures of one particular culture, nonmainstream culture among those involved, e.g., access to Maori heritage materials (Liew 2005),
or seek development of universal KOSs that can be used across cultures, e.g., the conceptual
model of the Functional Requirements for Subject Authority Data (FRSAD) (Mitchell, Zeng &
Žumer 2014).
Not many studies compare KOSs in different cultures, partiularly in terms of national
cultures. One such study by López-Huertas (2008) compares knowledge representation and
organization of gender studies in Spain and Uruguay. There are also some comparative studies of
46

culture as context. Lee (2015) organizes several definitions of cultures, which influence
knowledge structures, into 1) nationality or geographic region, 2) context, 3) collective
phenomenon, and 4) human-made part of human environment. Culture as context is, for
example, culture based on a shared religion such as Islam or Hinduism. Neelameghan and Iyer
(2002) examine patterns of multicultural and multilingual databases for diverse spiritual and
religious materials to mitigate the difficulties of communication through KOSs across culture,
faith, and linguistic boundaries. López-Huertas (1997; 2013) also compares classifications of
musical instruments in three cultural regions: the West (what she calls the Occidental region), the
Indian subcontinent (Hindu), and Eastern Asia. She identifies ways in which cultural context
affects terminology, concept identification and naming, categorization, focus of themes, and
citation order.
However, even when comparing the different KOSs of different cultures, authors tend not
to identify their studies as comparative. Cultural dimensions, as in Hofstede (1984), are not
discussed, nor are cultural factors/contexts investigated, leading to the conclusion that no
comparative studies of causal relations or correlations between sociocultural factors and KOSs
have been conducted.
2.4.2. DDC and KDC
This subsection discusses the cross-cultural use of DDC, background on KDC, and
related studies of KDC’s adaptation of DDC.
2.4.2.1. Cross-cultural use of DDC

DDC as a general KOS: The DDC was devised on Baconian epistemology; main classes
are listed in the reverse order of Bacon’s basic forms of human intellectual production - reason,
imagination, and memory (Wiegand 1998). The Introduction to DDC 22nd edition introduces its
47

principles – “Arabic numerals, categories, hierarchies, and network of relationships among
topics” - and its purpose – “make it ideal as a general knowledge organization tool.” The DDC’s
goal of being used worldwide is also revealed in OCLC’s (DDC’s owner) description of its basic
structures – “ten main classes covering the entire world of knowledge.”
Aiming for worldwide application, DDC is currently the most widely used bibliographic
classification system: libraries in more than 135 countries use DDC itself or adapted versions of
DDC to organize and provide access to their collections. Not only are DDC numbers featured in
the national bibliographies of more than 60 countries, but various types of libraries also use the
numbers to share bibliographic records through WorldCat, or OCLC’s Online Union Catalog
(OCLC 2011).
Despite worldwide use of DDC, this system is maintained in a US bibliographic agency,
the Library of Congress (LC). The Dewey editorial office in LC analyzes American national
literature to detect trends that should be reflected in it. At the same time, revisions aim for
cooperation with international institutions regarding subjects and concepts across nations to be
covered in DDC.
Adaptation of DDC worldwide: DDC, first published in the United States in 1876, was
quickly adopted by many western countries, then used by many libraries in non-western regions.
At first, the developed countries took a lead on devising classifications (DDC included) to
organize library collections. Then, some non-western countries also adopted library
classifications such as DDC. Because of cultural differences, however, non-western countries
that adopted DDC have found it necessary to make modifications. These include not only
translation, but also changes to make the classification scheme more culturally appropriate. Thus,

48

the culture of a developing nation strongly affects the adaptations made to DDC for use within
the country, despite a shared foundation of basic classificatory principles and structure.
Martin (1996) summarizes uses of DDC in Asia Pacific, where half of the world’s
population resides in a region of broad economic, political, and cultural diversity. Despite this
reality, many national bibliographies in Asia-Pacific are built on identical DDC main classes.
Because Western European and American influences have been placed in the development of
modern librarianship in East Asia (Yu 2008), many East Asian countries developed local
classification schemes based on the DDC or localized the DDC to meet local needs. Some
libraries in East Asia use mixed classification systems: local classifications for the materials in
their languages and DDC for Western language materials (Martin 1996).
With the lead of western European and North American countries in academic
disciplines, the current modern bibliographic classifications in developing or newly developed
countries all have structures parallel to those in the western academic disciplines. Therefore, it is
hard to identify pure influences of culture unless one goes back to old times - at least prenineteenth-century. In current libraries’ use of DDC, there are two main trends regarding the
treatment of national cultures: 1) the authors of contemporary DDC editions incorporate diverse
national and local knowledge in their system, in order to be reflective of knowledge structures
across cultures, and 2) Non-western countries’ national classifications adapt or borrow DDC’s
main concepts but localize it to meet their needs.
The first type of interaction requires domain-analytic approaches: a thorough examination
of other cultures by studying languages, recorded knowledge, etc. On the other hand, the second

49

type of interaction demands the domain-analytic approaches with comparison of cultures of the
adopting/adopted countries.
2.4.2.2. KDC: development of modern classification.

Most of the South Korean literature on KDC focuses on functional structures. Even a few
studies of KDC with social or historical backgrounds describe only the directly associated facts
such as editors, revision histories, and use of the systems (Chung 2007; Oh 1992, 1995, 2012).
There is little discussion of KDC contextualized within the historical library developments in
South Korea in general, which obscures a foundational understanding of DDC’s influence on
KDC’s establishment. This section briefly introduces related historical facts regarding KDC and
some previous studies of KDC in both English and Korean.
Before KDC: South Korea owed much of its traditional cataloging practices to the
Chinese cataloging system for classics, history, philosophy, and literary works. During the period
of Japanese rule (1910-1945), Japanese library practices were introduced in Korean libraries, and
Japanese cataloging rules, as well as classification systems, were adopted. DDC was introduced
into Japan with modifications in 1889, resulting in the Nippon (Japan) Decimal Classification
(NDC) in 1928 to meet Japanese needs for both Japanese and foreign books (Ishiyama 1986).
South Korea’s independence from Japan in 1945 became an important turning point for Korean
librarians. They were motivated to develop their own tools for bibliographic control. That
included a classification system and cataloging rules.
Recognizing that the Japanese library system was inappropriate for Korean materials, the
National Library of South Korea, under the leadership of Park Pongseok, published the Chosun
Decimal Classification (CDC), which became the most widely used classification system in early

50

1950s South Korea. CDC seems to be based upon the format of DDC or NDC system. However,
the main classes of CDC are somewhat different from those of DDC or NDC (Table 2-2).

CDC
000 Generalities

DDC
Generalities

Generalities

100

Philosophy
Religion

Philosophy

Philosophy

200

History
Geography

History

Religion

300

Language
Literature

Social Sciences

Social Sciences

400 The Arts

Natural Science Language

500

Social Sciences
Education

Engineering
Technology

Natural Science

600

Politics, Law
Economics

Industry

Technology
Applied Science

700 Natural Science The arts

Fine Arts
Recreation

800

Engineering
Technology

Language

Literature

900

Industry
Transportation

Literature

History

Table 2-2 The comparison of CDC, NDC, and DDC (Cho, 1995)

In the post-Korean War period, international institutions like UNESCO, and the George
Peabody College in Tennessee, were actively involved in rebuilding the education system in
South Korea. Part of this process involved the assistance of librarians and library educators in the
Peabody team to establish a library school and mutual cooperation with the American Library
Association (ALA) and other library associations in the United States. The influence of
American libraries also can be seen in the general preference for DDC during this time, as
opposed to traditional Chinese library practices (Cho 1995).

51

Establishment of KDC: After librarianship in South Korea acquired a legislative base
through the passage of the Library Law in 1963, the publication of the first edition of KDC
followed in 1964. While KDC has been updated with several major revisions, at this time the
Korean Library Association also made efforts to be part of international librarianship;
international cooperation supported by institutions like IFLA raised awareness of some critical
international issues in organizing national materials. At the ‘IFLA World Wide Seminar' in Seoul
in 1976, addressing the problems of western KOSs applied to eastern publications, it was
suggested to approach the problems in applying western systems to eastern materials as an
exchange of ideas rather than looking for only western solutions. Anderson stated "UBC
(Universal Bibliographic Control) will be realized not by inter-Western but international library
cooperation (1976, 165)".
Comparison of KDC and DDC: as KDC is now used as a national classification system in
South Korea, there are general texts introducing various aspects of the system (Oh, Bae, and Yeo
2002; 2009). Recent Korean works analyzing KDC address more functional and systemic issues,
such as evaluating or updating classificatory structures and coverage for subject areas (Kim
2009; Yeo, Lee, and Oh 2008; Yeo, Park, Hwang, and Oh 2008; Oh, Bae, and Yeo 2008; Kim
2009; Kwak 2009). In evaluating and making suggestions for the desired direction of KDC
changes, the authors also compare KDC with DDC or NDC. Their comparisons, however, mostly
consider structural problems within KDC, without sociocultural concerns.
In one analysis (Oh 2012), some parts of KDC, such as schedules of main classes or
notations, were compared with DDC to see 1) the influences of DDC on KDC, and 2) the unique
characteristic of KDC. Although the comparison was not designed for comprehensive analysis of
sociocultural differences between KDC and the DDC, it shows the possibility of comparison as
52

an analytical tool for studying sociocultural issues in adaptation of classification. Kwasnik &
Chun (2004) conducted another comparative study of KDC and DDC by investigating both
semantic contents and structures of the two classifications. In this study the framework of
comparing two different knowledge structures is offered. However, their findings are limited to
only some observed phenomena from intentionally selected parts of KDC, not leading to
contemplation of sociocultural factors of South Korea and North America.

2.5. Conclusion
There is a long history of considerations of sociocultural contexts in KO: more
specifically recognition of multiplicity in epistemologies, call for the needs of studies on that
matters, and the efforts to address the diversity. Despite the necessity of addressing diversity in
KO, research shows few explorations of differences in knowledge and applications of established
KO frames to different sociocultural contexts. Comparative approaches bring about discovery of
insights in the problems caused by sociocultural differences in KOS and the attempts to address
them. Findings are presented through examinations of classification systems that have been
developed and used in practices and contemplate theoretical and practical implications to
develop the framework of addressing cross-cultural uses and adaptations of KOSs.

53

Chapter 3 Methodology
3.1. Introduction
The goal of this study is to examine sociocultural influences in the adaptation of an
American library classification, namely Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC), into Korean
Decimal Classification (KDC) for libraries in South Korea. It takes the stance that a KO system
(KOS) is not merely a means of enabling search and retrieval, but is also a social system that
embodies the epistemic stances and in turn facilitates as well as restricts communicative actions
within a given society. More specifically, the goal, format, categories, and structure of
knowledge in a KOS reflect a society’s worldview as well as its values. With this assumption in
mind, I employed an analytical taxonomy based on the acculturation model constructed by Berry
(1997) to examine changes made to the original classification system due to the sociocultural
needs of the adapter society. The acculturation model, a structured method for examining
immigrants’ adoption of a new culture, provides a useful scheme for analyzing the sociocultural
influences in the adaptation of a KOS developed for use by one culture into another KOS
intended for use in a different culture.
DDC was selected for this study because it is the most widely used library classification
and the most popular base on which many other classification systems around the world are built.
I choose KDC with confidence that KDC has been localized in the adaptation of DDC. KDC
exhibits numerous differences from DDC across multiple editions, despite American influences
in early development of education and librarianship in South Korea after Korean War. Over
about 60 years of fast growth, South Korean libraries have made significant efforts to adopt and
localize DDC to meet the needs of South Koreans. It is thus reasonable to think that the changes
made from DDC to KDC largely reflect the sociocultural differences between the American and
54

Korean societies. Under such an assumption, differences between the two schemes were
identified and then analyzed as a case presenting sociocultural influences in cross-cultural
adaptation of KOSs.
The remainder of this chapter describes the research question, research design, research
technique, and components of the present study. Research questions consist of one main research
question and two sequential agendas leading to two phases of the study respectively. Research
design addresses critical components of the comparative method applied to the present study of
two classification schemes. Content analysis as a research technique is followed in consideration
of characteristics of classification research. Lastly, components of the study are laid out in
answering a research question regarding comparative research design and content analysis of
classifications.

3.2. The research question
This study is designed to examine the influences of society and culture on KDC’s
adaptation of DDC. Thus, the analysis focuses on the changes resulting from the meeting of the
two cultures, answering the main research question: “How does KDC adapt DDC in terms of the
underlying sociocultural perspectives in a classificatory form?” A comparative approach was
applied to address the main research question in two phases: first, starting with a quantitative
comparison of KDC and DDC to measure the degrees of variation between them by main class;
second, performing an in-depth, qualitative examination of the variations to understand which
differences are the results of sociocultural influences. For the second phase, I examined the two
main classes that exhibiting the highest degrees of variation according to the analysis done in the
initial phase.

55

3.2.1. Phase 1: Identifying differences between KDC and DDC
The first phase set out to measure the degrees of variation between the two schemes by
applying quantitative content analysis. The objective of the analysis was to compare the
knowledge structures of the two classification schemes in terms of the quantity of class numbers
that represent concepts and their relationships in each of the individual main class.
In a decimal classification system, each class represents a broad subject. Although KDC
and DDC arrange their classes slightly differently, the ten classes representing broad subjects do
match. Thus, I specifically look for variation within each of the ten matching main classes
between the two classification schemes. Doing so, it assumes: KDC’s adaptation to meet its
sociocultural needs is observable in its changes of class numbers from DDC within main classes.
Smiraglia, Scharnhorst, Salah, and Gao (2013) suggested that the application of a
quantitative approach and visualization to classification research permits observation of changes
in classification such as size, composition, growth, and distribution. Thus, comparing the
compositions of the main classes and distributions of concepts in KDC and DDC reveal the
differences in their knowledge structures empirically. Furthermore, in the study’s second phase I
examined degrees and patterns of variation to select two main classes presenting the most
different compositions and distributions between the two schemes for an in-depth understanding.
3.2.2. Phase 2: Examining in-depth the differences to understand sociocultural
influences
In the second phase, a qualitative analysis on represented concepts and their relationships
follows, examining the changes made during KDC’s adaptation of DDC in reflection of a certain
culture or sociocultural dynamic. In Phase 2, KDC’s adaptation of DDC was analyzed by
examining concepts and their relationships represented by terms and classificatory structures.
56

With two selected main classes from Phase 1 showing the most significant and interesting
differences between the two schemes, DDC-like concepts were differentiated from those unique
to Korean culture, the former an inheritance from DDC and the latter a result of efforts to meet
Korean sociocultural needs. The analysis was facilitated by a taxonomy of adaptation. The
taxonomy is based on Berry’s acculturation model (1997), developed to analyze immigrants’
adoption of the new culture in their host countries. I modified the model into an adaptation
taxonomy to understand KDC’s attempt to localize DDC while taking advantage of the latter’s
widely known features. This differentiation includes semantic and structural differences; I
developed and applied the second coding scheme observing in which way the classificatory
variables in semantic and structural differences exhibit the differentiations. Two frameworks as
coding schemes will be detailed in a later section.

3.3. Research design
3.3.1. Comparative research
Through comparison of cultures, categories of knowledge become more distinct, enabling
scholars to identify cultural suppositions. To implement comparative mixed methods in this
study, there are some critical considerations, from the value of the comparison regarding the goal
of the research to the decision on the comparators. In his book International and Comparative
Librarianship, Lor (2012) discusses a set of critical questions to be asked in evaluating
comparative research design. Those evaluative questions are suggestive for taking all required
components of comparative studies under consideration. The following table (3-1) consists of
modified questions with the added answers for my research.
Decision
Rationale

Questions
Question (Q): Do the authors explain why a comparison was thought
necessary or useful?
57

Answer (A): The reason for conducting a comparison is to reveal
differences between two classification schemes that bear sociocultural
influences.
Quantitative vs.
qualitative approach

Q: Do the authors adopt a predominantly quantitative or qualitative
approach? Or a mixed methods approach? In that case, does one
approach predominate?
A: This research adopted a mixed methods approach that first explores
patterns in massive data quantitatively and then examines selected
parts of data in-depth qualitatively.

Number of cases and
variables

Q: Is this a study of a single country? If so, does it qualify as a
comparative study? How many countries are compared? How many
variables are studied?
A: Only two countries are compared. In this study, variables are not
mandatory components in the planning stage.

Selection of cases

Q: Do they choose a most similar systems (MSSD) or most different
systems design (MDSD)? [MSSD is to compare systems sharing more
similarities so that a few differences stand out and the impact of
differences can be examined. MDSD is to compare different systems
to examine common characteristics shared among systems and the
causal relations of common characteristics across different systems.]
Given the aims of their study, is this an appropriate strategy?
A: While Korean Decimal Classification is an adaptation of Dewey
Decimal Classification and the two share a common broad structure,
KDC has its own unique features designed for its social and cultural
needs. The study will be a Most Similar Systems Design (MSSD),
which allows researchers to see the unique differences.

Unit of analysis

Q: Is the unit of analysis about which data is collected appropriate to
the level of analysis? Do they use the same unit of analysis in all the
cases studied? Are the conclusions to which they arrive based on data
at the appropriate level of analysis?
A: the unit of analysis in the current study is concept in phase 1,
which investigates the variation of concepts in terms of category and
structural relationships. In phase 2, the unit of analysis is an

58

occurrence of socio-cultural differences between the classification
schemes.
Level of analysis

Q: Do the authors clearly identify the level of analysis? Is analysis at
the macro level (e.g. groups, systems, structures) or at the micro level
(e.g. individual employees or patrons; searches; citations, journal
titles)?
A: This research will be conducted at the macro level, because the
cases focus on the systems.

Table 3-1 Questions in evaluating comparative research design (Lor, 2012)

Because comparison lets researchers see what is thinkable or unthinkable in one culture,
it also accounts for what could be issues in the interaction of the cultures involved. Because the
classification schemes are in different languages, language could be an obstacle in the
comparison. Data collected for KDC had English translations for the three-digit class numbers at
section level. However, the comparisons of conceptual understandings through class numbers
sometimes requires examining subordinate numbers to those numbers which are not in English.
This comparative study thus required the researcher not mere fluency in both languages but also
the ability to ascertain contextual or heuristic use of the languages because many concepts have
no counterpart in other cultures. To contextualize terms in one language but not another,
contextual information was available including the researcher’s language skills and other textual
resources such as classification notes and dictionaries.

3.4. Research technique
3.4.1. Content analysis
Content analysis is a research technique commonly applied in social sciences. Content
analysts in social sciences generally investigate texts in pursuit of meanings behind human
actions and/or communication. According to Krippendorff (2012), the framework of content
analysis has six components, incorporated in one complete content analysis: a body of text, a
59

research question, context, analytical context, inferences, and validating evidence. A body of
text is a representation of symbolic interactions and the most common data for content analysis.
Through examining a body of text, researchers should be able find an answer to their research
questions. Thus, a body of text is unitized, sampled, and analyzed in view of the research
question. Contexts are conditions accounting for emerging patterns from data analyzed, referring
to the worldview of the analyst or environmental factors where the texts are situated.
The other three components emphasize more explicitness and transparency of content
analysis. The analytical context is an operational construct for data analysis, which could be
derived from data itself or the existing theory. Whatever the analyst applies, the analytical
context needs to be justified for the purpose of the research and may need revising over the
whole process of analysis. The point is that it should provide a certain structure or scheme for
data coding. Researchers naturally make their inferences based on their own background and
knowledge, through either the construction of the analytical context or interpretation of
descriptive statistics. Lastly, because content analysis follows scientific reasoning to answer the
research question, the analyst needs to validate the evidence derived from the analysis.
Although many scholars in social sciences have utilized content analysis, its procedures
vary depending on its purpose and the characteristics of data. Basically, the assumption on
language and the social reality for content analysis is that language is reflexive of reality, which
is observable independent of the interpreter (Hardy et al. 2004). Whether the nature of content
analysis is more likely quantitative or qualitative is still debatable. However, it is usually said
that content analysis needs both quantitative and qualitative perspectives (Krippendorff 2012;
Berg 2004).

60

Reduction to manageable or countable units of data is a common quantitative tactic.
Thus, quantitative content analysis usually applies basic descriptive statistics such as counting
frequencies and calculating portions. On the other hand, qualitative researchers count on their
worldview and domain knowledge in reducing data to manageable units and in interpreting data.
Even in reporting descriptive statistics, they cannot simply conclude without contextualization of
data. For example, qualitative researchers believe that the importance of a certain concept cannot
be measured solely by a frequency count, and thus advocate for conducting data analysis with
more contextual information such as types of sources, tone of words described, other words
appearing together, and so forth.
In short, content analysis can blend both quantitative and qualitative approaches. Of
course, an individual analysis can be more qualitative or more quantitative, depending on the
researcher’s worldview, the research questions, and data. A study’s leaning towards more
quantitative or qualitative approach is the strategic choice of the researcher.
3.4.2. Classification Research and Content Analysis
As discussed earlier, classification research has considered and examined sociocultural
contexts of classification. Andersen & Skouvig (2006), for example, maintains that a
classification system needs to be responsive to social and cultural changes. Others have
suggested changes in classification to disclose silenced voices in a social group (Olson 1998,
2002; Olson & Schlegl 2013).
Classification research also has applied various approaches of content analysis to
examining meanings through empirical analysis of text-based data derived from classification
schemes. This section will focus on content analysis in classification research, because
classification has distinct features from other text- based data. While other types of texts
61

normally used for content analysis, such as transcripts or documents, are mostly narrative or have
concepts implicitly expressed in synthetic uses of words like sentences or document structures,
classification consists of concepts and their relationships as basic elements in a formalized
structure. KO scholars have examined classification schemes in unique ways regarding its
features attributing to concept theory. Largely, there have been two major methodological
approaches to classification research: how well the classification represents its warranted
concepts and how well the concepts are populated by classes, divisions, and subdivisions
(Smiraglia 2016).
In classification research, warrant means the rationale that determines the criteria for the
scope and organization of knowledge and justifies the classificatory structure of a classification
scheme. One of the most prevalent types of warrant is literary warrant, originating from library
practices of constructing a classification scheme based on the contents of literature in library
collections. Other types of warrant have also been identified in KOS research, such as user,
institutional, ethical, and cultural warrants. They constitute the theoretical and practical
foundations for classification schemes, either as a single warrant or in combination.
KO scholars such as Tennis (2006, 2007), Olson (2001), and Fox (2013) have examined
changes to warranted concepts through textual and structural analysis of the concepts. These
studies tested how a certain concept has been changed and shifted as KOSs evolve. Tennis
(2006) used the term ontogeny do describe the notion of changing concepts in continuous
modifications of a KOS. Ontogeny is a biological term that refers to the evolutionary process of
an organism during its lifespan. The ontogeny of a certain concept can be construed through
diachronic and synchronic analysis (Tennis, 2007). Diachronic analysis is vertical and historical
because it traces changes over time. Synchronic analysis examines the intension and extension of

62

the concept by revealing its relationship to other concepts at one point. Tennis (2007) concluded
that structural changes present hierarchical and syndetic relationships between concepts, and
textual changes show choices of different words and forms.
Some recent studies take a different approach to examine KOSs. Salah et al. (2012)
applied a quantitative approach in examining the appearance of entire classification systems that
change over time. They investigated and illustrated changes in the degree of complexity and
composition of UDC by counting UDC numbers. The researchers, which used massive amounts
of data, presupposed that UDC numbers reflect the rules of classificatory structures properly.
Also, Smiraglia, Scharnhorst, Salah, and Gao (2013) suggested that the application of a
quantitative approach and visualization permits observation of changes in classification in terms
of size, composition, growth, and distribution. They illustrated a quantitative comparison of
UDC strings in UDC Master Reference File, OCLC WorldCat, and the university library in
Leuvento. This analysis empirically presented the populations of class by different uses and
implied positive possibilities for scientific methodology by using data from classification
schemes.
Despite differences in the former and the latter methodological approaches to
classification schemes, both look for meaning underneath a body of texts in examining
classificatory representations of concepts. More qualitative analysis of warranted concepts over
time through textual and structural analysis and more quantitative analysis of populated concepts
through changes in distribution, size, or growth, have been discussed. The former approach, with
in-depth understanding of certain concepts, and the latter approach to classification in
macrocosmic view both look for transitions of knowledge structure qualitatively and
quantitatively.

63

3.4.3. Strategic application of content analysis
As each perspective has its own advantage, researchers in social sciences have started to
apply both jointly in the so-called mixed methods research design. The quantitative approach can
accommodate large amounts of data and validate theories or model generalizable trends, but this
approach may fall short when accounting for complex variables explaining causalities of specific
cases (Collier, Brady, and Seawright 2010). On the other hand, the qualitative approach, which
addresses a small number of cases in-depth, usually attempts to provide detailed explanations of
a certain phenomenon with context-sensitive factors a researcher develops from a theoretical
lens; it does not generate or validate generalizable patterns, as they are case-focused (Brady,
Collier, and Seawright 2006). It is suggested that strategic application of these two approaches
reinforces their advantages and cancels out some of their disadvantages (Jick 1979), hence social
science researchers now classify the mixed methods approach as a separate design with its own
definition and taxonomy (Glik, Parker, Muligande, & Hategikamana 1986; Stechkler, McLeroy,
Goodman, Bird, & McCormick 1992; Morse 1991; Miles & Huberman 1994; Crewsell 1994,
1999; Caracelli & Greene 1993; Creswell & Miller 1997). Literature in mixed methods research
design (Schrodt 2006; Munck 1998) maintains that the joint use of quantitative and qualitative
methods is not only complementary but also more powerful. Benefits from the use of multiple
methods can sometimes be recognized intuitively. For example, when reading common sources
in our daily life such as news, sports coverage, and documentaries, it seems more persuasive if
individual stories support statistical trends (Creswell and Clark 2007).
The use of mixed methods research varies depending on the goals and purposes of
studies, and four elements- implementation, priority, integration, and theoretical perspectivesare considered depending on the types of mixed methods design (Creswell et al. 2003).
Implementation of mixed methods research design largely divides into sequential or concurrent
64

types, determining whether quantitative and qualitative analyses are carried out in a sequence or
simultaneously. Priority in mixed methods research design refers to the distribution of the weight
on either quantitative or qualitative methods. Integration of quantitative and qualitative
approaches involves deciding which component of research particularly incorporates both
approaches, from research question, design, data collection, and data analysis, to interpretation of
results. Theoretical perspectives in mixed methods research design basically call for further
actions either in the follow-up research contributing to theory building or in practical application
of real cases – which is transformative (Greene and Caracelli 1997). The theoretical lens can be
either implicit or explicit, and occur in any stage of the research, such as formulating the purpose
and questions, selecting data, applying the theoretical framework, and interpretation.
This study is also designed to take advantage of the idea of seeing the world in multiple
ways, providing empirical evidence as well as deep relational insight. In this study, quantitative
analysis preceded qualitative, which allowed the researcher to first examine a large data set and
then identify interesting patterns (Figure 3-1). Priority is given to the qualitative phase, which
was intended to generate more detailed explanations. This is called sequential explanatory
design; the initial quantitative phase of this design is used to identify compelling cases (i.e., two
main classes in KDC) related to the research question, so the results of the quantitative analysis
guide the purposeful sampling for a primarily qualitative study. This sequential explanatory
design of mixed methods research is straightforward and easy to implement because the data
collection and analysis fall into separate stages. However, the length of time involved in the
entire research process can be longer than concurrent types of mixed methods research design.
In this study, the integration of the two methods occurred in the main research question
asked. In the first phase of the quantitative analysis, data was analyzed descriptively in order to

65

generate the empirical evidence leading to interpretation. In the qualitative phase, the inquiry
was more exploratory and in-depth, with a strong emphasis on description and interpretation and
a thematic focus on understanding a central phenomenon. This study is designed to answer the
research question through both quantitative and qualitative analyses, in sequence. The adaptation
taxonomy based on Berry’s acculturation model was explicitly used as an analytic tool for
qualitative data coding, contributing to categorization of changes made as a result of
sociocultural influence in an in-depth, exploratory study.

Answering a research question:

How does KDC adapt the DDC in
terms of underlying sociocultural
perspectives in a classificatory form?

Figure 3-1 Sequential explanatory design of the study

3.5. Components of content analysis
As mentioned, a mixed methods research design was strategically applied, using both
quantitative and qualitative methods in two phases. Table 3-2 below describes the
methodological procedures for each phase. Applying Krippendorff’s six components of content
analysis to the study, Phase 1 and Phase 2 contain different sets of six components (Table 3-2).
Krippendorff’s Six
components of
content analysis

Phase 1

Phase 2

66

A body of text

Range and texts: Class
numbers from the six selected
editions of KDC and DDC

Range: Selected classes presenting
distinctive differences from the first
phase in only recent editions of KDC
and DDC
Texts: Class numbers, hierarchies, terms
and notes illustrating the concepts for
targeted terms and relational structures
between terms
Research
To compare the knowledge
To examine changes made during
Objectives
structures of the two
KDC’s adaptation of DDC in reflection
classification schemes, in terms of certain cultural or sociocultural
of the quantity of class
dynamics
numbers that represent
concepts and their
relationships in each of the
individual main classes
Worldview
Positivistic
Interpretative
Analytical context Size, composition, growth, and The taxonomy of adaptation (theories/framewor distribution of the ten main
framework modified from Berry’s
ks/variables)
classes representing different
fourfold acculturation model;
subject areas
classificatory differences such as
knowledge categories and structures
Inferences
Descriptive statistics
Interpretation of differences between
(interpretations/
the two schemes
statistics)
Validating
Number of classification
Coding patterns
evidence
records from each class
Table 3-2 Six components of content analysis for Phase 1 and Phase 2 in Krippendorff’s (2012) taxonomy

3.5.1. Phase 1.
Through the comparison, KDC was examined to identify similarities to and differences
from DDC. Through analysis of the populations of KDC and DDC classes by size, composition,
and distribution, it was possible to discover differences through a macrocosmic lens. The
analysis is expected to identify empirical evidence of KDC’s adaptation of DDC.

67

3.5.1.1. Data collection

To compare knowledge categories and structures of KDC and DDC, all class numbers
from a total of six digital editions of KDC and eight digital editions of DDC were collected and
compared. Given the massive quantity of DDC class numbers, Online Computer Library Center
(OCLC), owner of the DDC, was contacted to obtain datasets containing the electronic records
representing the DDC class numbers. Through this process, it was learned that only DDC 20th to
23rd editions were available in usable digital forms. Other editions of DDC are also available in
digital forms – pdfs, but are not appropriate for manipulation of class numbers for purposes of
this study. For KDC, electronic datasets containing records representing individual class numbers
used in a recent study of the KDC (Jeon 2015) were obtained. The language of these data sets is
Korean, therefore referred English captions is provided in the paper copies of KDC editions. For
the first phase of quantitative analysis requiring extraction of entire class numbers, only the 20th,
22nd, and 23rd editions of DDC were used, which correspond with the 4th, 5th, and 6th editions
of KDC (table 3-3).
DDC: Full editions

Years

KDC: Full editions

Years

16th

1958

1st

1964

17th

1965

2nd

1966

18th,19th

1971, 1979

3rd

1980

Data for

20st

1989

4th

1996

Phase 1

22nd

1996, 2003

5th

2009

23rd

2011

6th

2013

Table 3-3 Editions of DDC and KDC included for comparison

This phase was intended to compare the distributions of concepts in the main classes. As
the order of KDC main classes are partially different than that of DDC (table 3-3), I matched
them first by broad discipline (i.e., represented by a main class) then compared topics within
each individual class.

68

DDC – Subjects
(KDC- Subjects)
General works, Computer science and Information
(General works)
Philosophy and psychology
(Philosophy)
Religion
(Religion)
Social sciences
(Social sciences)
Language
(Language)
Pure Science
(Natural sciences)
Technology
(Technology & Engineering)
Arts & recreation
(Arts)
Literature
(Literature)
History & geography
(History)

DDC – Class
number
000

KDC – Class
numbers
000

100

100

200

200

300

300

400

700

500

400

600

500

700

600

800

800

900

900

Table 3-4 Classes of DDC and KDC - matched disciplines

3.5.1.2. Instruments and analysis

For the first phase, a quantitative content analysis was applied to the collected
classification data. The epistemological stance of this phase is closer to empiricism, which makes
“inductions from collections of observational data” (Hjorland & Hartel 2003, 240). Without
making assumptions about the targets to be observed, researchers believe only what they
observe. This approach is also positivistic in seeking common patterns of the phenomenon. In
this phase, class numbers (three-digit integers only) from the two classification schemes were
used as data. In the analysis of Phase 1, visualizing observed results was the most effective
analytic strategy to reveal hidden patterns in the collected data. For instance, the size/growth of
classes in the two classifications were compared and changes tracked by various measures, such
as main classes or publication years. To do that, counts of three-digit integers of class numbers
were calculated excluding auxiliary numbers, of each main class and then visualized to identify
69

patterns of similarities and differences between systems. Patterns of differences were revealed
phenomenologically, not unlike aerial photographs of a large landscape. Types of difference,
location and coverage were helpful in expanding or modifying the coding scheme in comparing
class numbers one-on-one.
3.5.2. Phase 2
In the second phase, similarities and differences between KDC and DDC observed
through Phase 1 were selectively analyzed. Two main classes exhibiting the most differences
between the two classifications in Phase 1 were selected. The concepts and their relationships
were then coded by reading all terms and hierarchies, and categorized according to the
adaptation taxonomy explained below. This qualitative content analysis is expected to categorize
individual concepts and relationships into various strategies of adaptation in the attempt for KDC
to meet local sociocultural needs. Application of the adaptation taxonomy for the initial coding
resulted in developing the second coding scheme, which examines the comparable classificatory
variables. Following this was an examination of ways in which the two schemes emerge in
comparing KDC and DDC.
3.5.2.1. Data collection

Based on the results of the quantitative comparison of KDC and DDC in Phase 1, the two
main classes that exhibited the most differences were selected. The data scope of the first phase
was the six most recent editions of DDC and KDC, in examining the constancy in the
distribution of the main classes. Only the most recent editions –KDC 6 and DDC 23 - were used
for the second phase of qualitative analysis. The two selected main classes from DDC 23 and
KDC 6 revealed the different concepts and their relationships regarding the framework

70

developed for examining the adaptation strategies as required to adopt DDC and/or localize it to
meet Korean information needs.
3.5.2.2. Instruments and analysis

The coding scheme was applied to both the class numbers and captions representing the
concepts and hierarchical relationships between them. Basically, the essential elements of
classification affected by social and cultural conditions are semantic contents and structure
(Kwasnik & Chun 2004). The semantic contents of classification can represent the perspective of
a certain group of people, depending on its political, cultural, and moral contexts. So, likewise,
the structure of classification results from the cultural and intellectual infrastructure. Tennis
(2012) clarifies that semantics is a definition of categories, while structure is a representation of
semantic relationships (e.g., hierarchical relationships) among concepts. These two should be
examined separately to reveal underlying assumptions. This informed an examination of hidden
patterns through the analysis of specific examples conducted in Phase 2, described in Chapter 5.
The coding scheme applied is the taxonomy of adaptation, which is a modification of
Berry’s (1997) acculturation model. It was adjusted during the coding process and the adjustment
will be described as results of analyses in the next chapter. Berry’s theoretical model has been
used widely to explain how individuals from a certain cultural background react when in contact
with another culture and the cultural and psychological changes resulting from their reaction.
The model consists of two dimensions: the retention or rejection of an individual's minority or
native culture, and the adoption or rejection of the dominant or host culture. Four acculturation
strategies emerge in the intersection of the two dimensions (see Figure 3-2):
1. Assimilation: the person completely adopts the new dominant culture and puts little
emphasis on maintaining ties with the heritage culture.

71

2. Integration: the person endeavors to embrace the dominant culture while trying to
maintain connection with the heritage culture, such as speaking their native language and
connecting with peers of the same ethnicity.
3. Separation: the person is interested only in maintaining the heritage culture and tends to
avoid the dominant culture.
4. Marginalization: the person does not maintain the heritage culture or participate in the
dominant culture.

Figure 3-2 Acculturation strategies by Berry (1997)

Berry’s fourfold model is applicable at either the group level or the individual level.
However, his model mostly focuses on increasing identification with one’s own cultural
community when the identification is negative or discriminatory as one consequence of
intercultural contact. In the current study, KDC makes changes from the interaction of cultures to
increase validity and usefulness within its own culture. Also, previous application of the
acculturation model theoretically entails a two-way change process. In this study, the adaptation
72

is not a two-way process of change because only KDC has borrowed from DDC, never the other
way around. Thus, the fourfold model has been slightly modified to create an adaptation
taxonomy. Basically, application of the taxonomy explains the similarities and differences
progressively.
Another study consulted in devising the adaptation taxonomy was Elsass and Veiga
(1994), which took advantage of the simplistic aspect of Berry’s acculturation model to analyze
the integration of organizational cultures. They applied a force-field approach to the four
acculturation strategies to account for the effective blending of organizational cultures. (The
force-field approach is Lewin’s (1951) theory that behavior is the outcome of a dynamic
interaction of opposing forces.) The model suggested by Elsass and Veiga explains the
acculturation processes of cultural differentiation and organizational integration. Thus, in their
modified model, forces of organizational integration are substituted for maintaining relationships
with the host culture or the larger society, and forces of cultural differentiation are substituted for

73

maintaining one’s native cultural identity (see Figure 3-3).

Figure 3-3 Elsass and Veiga (1994)'s force-field analysis of acculturation model

This force-field analysis based on the original acculturation model stresses two forces in
direct opposition: cultural differentiation, when new employees or members of an organization
keep their own cultures, which conflict with that organization’s culture, and organizational
integration, when the organization tries to embrace all members in the unified cultural norms of
the organization. Thus, deculturation occurs when both forces are weak, so that no tension exists
between them and no one culture is dominant. Assimilation occurs when forces of organizational
integration are stronger than those of cultural differentiation, and separation occurs when forces
of cultural differentiation are stronger than organizational integration. Lastly, when both forces
are in opposition, acculturative tension becomes very high. According to Elsass and Veiga

74

(1994), acculturation in this theory is more likely a pathway of dynamic forces that balance the
two major forces. Thus, balanced states are not static outcomes; forces are dynamic, resulting in
different modes of acculturation. This ongoing process of balance and rebalance should finally
reach an acculturation mode.
In the modified version, for the case of KDC adapting DDC, localization is a goal of the
ideal balance from systemic tensions between two forces. The forces of indigenization replace
the forces of cultural differentiation in the intention to meet local needs and the forces of
standardization replace the forces of organizational integration with the intention to take
advantage of a popular classification. The indifference strategy occurs when neither DDC-like
nor Korean culturally specific features appear. Absorption occurs when only DDC-like features
appear; nativization occurs when only Korean culturally specific features exist; and localization
tension arises when both characteristics appear together and are integrated in some way. As this
study is designed to examine the differences between KDC and DDC by applying the coding
scheme, each caption in the data taken from the selected classes in the KDC received a code
representing one of the four strategies (Figure 3-4).

75

Figure 3-4 Acculturation framework in comparison of KDC and DDC

1. Indifference: This strategy neither takes advantage of DDC as a popular library
classification nor satisfies Korean local cultural needs; it also can be named others in
terms of following no particular culture. The importance of this strategy in measuring the
blending of the two cultures is comparatively low.
2. Absorption: This strategy can be defined as a direct import of a DDC concept into KDC.
Conceptual equivalence determines this state of DDC-like, both in terminological and
structural evidence. For terminology, the concept in DDC can be translated directly into
its counterpart in KDC; and for structure, the relationship between the two equivalent
concepts also should be equivalent.
3. Nativization: This code is used for Korean culturally specific concepts, in other words,
concepts not in DDC but only in KDC.

76

4. Integration: In KDC, the integration strategy reflects both Korean culturally specific and
DDC-like concepts together in harmony. There are some concepts that reflect being
DDC-like, but that partially differ from DDC. As the partial differences from DDC can
be considered features that only KDC has, these concepts belong to the integration
strategy.
The five degrees of interlanguage equivalence specified by ISO 5964 (ISO 1985)
seems to provide a useful tool for measuring the integrated concepts. These are: exact
equivalence (inter-linguistic synonymy), inexact equivalence (inter-linguistic quasisynonymy, with a difference in viewpoint), partial equivalence (inter-linguistic quasisynonymy, with a difference in specificity), single to multiple equivalence (too many
terms or not enough terms), and nonequivalence. Inexact equivalence and partial
equivalence mean that the concept in the two languages is similar though not exactly the
same. In other words, the concept has conceptual elements from both the original
language and the target language. Inexact equivalence accounts for the case where two
concepts can be directly translated but are used in different situations due to different
viewpoints, while partial equivalence accounts for the case where two concepts are
similar but have different specificity.
In the coding process, each strategy of the adaptation was determined not only by the
technical differences – matchiness of terms or structures – but also in view of Korean social and
cultural needs. While certain differences such as subjects related to religions or languages are
obvious, requiring no external references, others had documentary support such as KDC’s
manual for new changes for their sociocultural relevance.

77

As a coding scheme, the taxonomy was applied to analyze interactions between two
tensions of indigenization and standardization by distinguishing the concepts taken directly from
DDC (i.e., DDC-like) and from the concepts stemming from Korean culture. Additionally, an
open coding style of analysis was performed (Pickard 2007) to find unexpected patterns. To
clarify those unexpected results, a combination of inductive and deductive thinking was required
to balance between the use of the taxonomy and open coding.
Initial coding with the taxonomy of the adaptation brought about the development of the
second coding scheme. Initial coding focused on cases exhibiting similarities and differences
from social and cultural views of KDC and DDC. To determine the adaptive strategies used as
the initial coding scheme, however, it was necessary to compare ways in which the two
classification schemes represent differences and similarities. Tracking all these classificatory
features such as captions, locations, hierarchies, etc., turned up patterns for the matching of terms
and structures. This matching of terms and structures echoed the discussions of semantic
contents and structures as essential constructs of classification affected by social and cultural
conditions (Olson 2009, Tennis 2011) in Chapter 2, the literature review. Thus, discovered
classificatory features in the initial coding were categorized into semantic contents and structural
arrangements. Specifically, common patterns of differences in captions, hierarchy, locations, and
order of subordinate concepts were found. Those patterns were variables accounting for semantic
contents and structural arrangement, listed below (Table 4-5). The scheme, with these two
categories of semantic contents and structural arrangements, was developed with the observed
patterns from the comparison of the two classification schemes in the initial coding. Thus, those
categories—semantic contents and structural arrangements—and variables for each category
were framed as the scheme of observability of adaptation.
78

Categories
1) Semantic
contents

2) Structural

arrangement

Variables – Coding numbers
a) Captions*
Whether the captions match
1. Exact match
2. Inexact (viewpoints)
According to ISO 5964 (ISO 1985)’s degrees of interlanguage
equivalence, inexact equivalence accounts for the case where two
concepts can be directly translated but used in different situations due
to different viewpoints.
e.g.
KDC 384 (customs of birth, majority, wedding and funerals)/
DDC 392 (customs of life cycle and domestic life) & DDC 393
(death customs)
3. Partial
According to ISO 5964 (ISO 1985)’s degrees of interlanguage
equivalence, partial equivalence accounts for the case where two
concepts are similar but have different levels of specificity.
e.g.
KDC 563 (generation of electric power)/ DDC 621.31
(generation, modification, storage, transmission of electric power)
4. No match
e.g.
KDC 335 (problems of living) is close to the DDC 363 (other
social problems and services), given topical coverages by the
listed subordinate concepts. But, the captions of two class
numbers do not share any semantic content.
b) Quantity of subordinate class numbers
Whether the ranges of topical coverage match
1. Exact match
2. DDC class number has more subordinate numbers than the
KDC’s
3. DDC class number has fewer subordinate numbers than the
KDC’s
a) Rank (division/section)
Whether the hierarchical locations match
1. Exact match
2. The matched DDC number’s rank is higher than the KDC’s
e.g.
KDC 326 (commerce (Trade), transportation, communications)/
DDC 380-389 (commerce, communications & transportation) the DDC has a whole division for this topic)
3. The matched DDC number’s rank is lower than the KDC’s
e.g.
79

KDC 563 (generation of electric power)/ DDC 621.31(generation,
modification, storage, transmission of electric power)
b) The broader category
Whether broader categories match
1. Match
2. No match
c) Subordinate concepts
Whether subordinate concepts match
1. Match
2. Partial match
3. No match
d) Order of subordinate concepts
Whether the arrangements of subordinate numbers match
1. Match
2. Partial match
3. No match
Table 3-5 Observability of adaptation

*In the case of class numbers at division level, such as 310, 320, 330…etc., the DDC has
separate captions for both the division level and section level of class numbers, while the KDC
has only one caption for both. E.g. KDC 520 – Agriculture, DDC 630 – Agriculture (division
level), & Agriculture and related technologies (section level). In this analysis, if the KDC’s and
the DDC’s captions at the division level are the same, the captions were considered “match.”
As modern classification mostly addresses the concepts commonly shared in the modern
world, examining different representations of semantic contents and structural arrangements
would account for socio-cultural influences. Section 4.2.4. illustrates what the variables and
categories of the second coding scheme and observability of the adaptation are in the context of
comparison of the two classification schemes and their resultant patterns.
3.5.2.3. Limitation

Qualitative content analysis involves identifying patterns in text. Ideally it is carried out
in a thorough and transparent matter. Analysis accompanies an interpretive reading to discover
the meaning inherent in the text. Unlike quantitative content analysis, qualitative content analysis
leaves room for interpretation of texts because qualitative content analysis is based on the belief

80

in multiple understandings of reported reality. As in qualitative content analysis, the researcher’s
judgment is more critical. It is considered more subjective than quantitative content analysis. A
conscientious effort was made to ensure rigor in the qualitative content analysis by discussing
deviant cases and describing the coding process itself through consulting external sources such
as dissertation committee members and methodology text books, as well as mentoring via
presentations of work in progress research or colloquia for dissertators in our field. With
continued discussion of the coding scheme during the coding process, it nonetheless was possible
to code and interpret data in many ways. To prevent this natural limitation, a second coder
familiar with both Korean and English who conducted a second coding of the sample increased
reliability (Appendix 1).

3.6. Conclusion
As described above, this study is a comparative study and content analysis was applied in
a mixed methods design. Application of descriptive and analytic visualization captured a
snapshot of similarities and differences between the two classifications in Phase 1. An
interpretive approach in the second phase provided more contextualized explanations for the
changes made to KDC in adapting DDC for South Korean society. Mixing two methods, one
quantitative and the other qualitative in this study provided a mechanism by which it was
possible to mine patterns of the adaptation, either explicit or implicit, expected or unexpected. In
the interpretation of the data, it was contextualized with external sources, such as introductions to
KDC/DDC as well as with internal sources, specifically the data itself.

81

Chapter 4 Findings: Quantifying differences between KDC and DDC
This chapter describes noticeable patterns of differences emerging from a comparison of
KDC and DDC. As previously discussed, the analysis consists of two phases – a quantitative,
descriptive phase and a qualitative, analytic phase. For the first phase, multiple visualization
techniques and descriptive statistics are applied and meaningful patterns will be described. These
meaningful patterns include the resultant findings leading to the second phase of analysis and
discussion points.
Phase 1 was a quantitative comparison of DDC and KDC in terms of concepts and
structures in the two systems. The results included the total quantities of class numbers in the
recent three editions of DDC and KDC respectively; tracked changes in quantity of class
numbers of the recent three DDCs and three recent KDCs by main class; and percentage changes
of the ten main classes over the recent three editions of DDC and KDC. Class numbers included
in this phase were all those already enumerated in the schedules. Based on analysis of those class
numbers, two main classes were identified –social sciences and technology – as exhibiting the
highest degrees of difference between KDC and DDC for analysis in Phase 2.

4.1. Changes in class numbers of DDCs and KDCs.
In total, 148,901 class numbers were collected - 72,317 from the three editions of DDC
and 76,584 from the three editions of KDC. The total number of class numbers of the six editions
ranged from 21,176 (DDC23) to 27,156 (DDC22), the highest and lowest number both from
DDCs. In comparison of DDC and KDC, the average number for the three editions of KDC
(25,528) is slightly bigger than the three editions of DDC (24,105.6). Thus, DDC exhibits larger

82

variations in the quantity of class numbers among the recent three editions than does KDC
(Figure 4-1).

Figure 4-1 Quantities of the collected editions of KDC (4,5, &6) and DDC (20, 22, & 23)

The recent three editions of KDC maintained stable quantities of class numbers.
However, changes in the quantity of class numbers becomes evident in chronological tracking of
all six editions from 1964 to 2014. Figure 4-2 shows that the largest change in quantities of class

83

numbers in KDC occurred between editions 3 and 4, implying that edition 4 carried major

qunatities of class numbers
Thousands

changes and subsequent editions remained stable in terms of quantities.

KDC editions 1-6
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Edition 1

Edition 2

Edition 3

Edition 4

Edition 5

Edition 6

17613

17889

18546

25504

25527

25553

Class numbers

Figure 4-2 Quantities of the six editions of the KDC from 1964 to 2014

Because KDC and DDC share the structure of ten main classes, a quantitative comparison
of class numbers by class was feasible. A larger quantity of class numbers in a main class is an
indication of a higher level of specificity in topical coverage of a certain subject. DDC 23, the
most recent edition, however, has decreased numbers of class numbers in total as well as in
seven of the main classes in comparison with its immediate predecessor, which is possibly a
function of the increased facet features in the former, making it easier to have more built
numbers than the ones enumerated in the schedules. Interpretation of recent changes in quantities
of class numbers for DDC and KDC editions, including the changes in each main class, will be
elaborated on in Chapter 5.

4.2. Distribution of ten main classes in the DDCs and the KDCs
Distribution of class numbers of all ten main classes for the collected editions of DDC
and KDC are visualized in Figure 4-3. The top three main classes with the highest numbers of
class numbers are ‘technology’, ‘social sciences’, and ‘history & geography’ for DDC editions;
84

‘technology’, ‘science’, and ‘social sciences’ for KDC editions. The three main classes with the
lowest numbers of class numbers are ‘language’, ‘literature’, and ‘philosophy & psychology’ for
DDC editions; ‘language’, ‘literature’, and ‘computer science, information & general works’ for

Thousands

KDC editions.

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0 Computer
science,
information
& general
works

100
Philosophy
&
psychology

200 Religion

300 Social
sciences

400
Language

500 Science

600
Technology

700 Arts &
recreation

800
Literature

900 History
& geography

DDC20

696

664

1499

4941

308

3239

6444

2629

427

3138

DDC22

820

730

1945

5639

529

3573

6744

2777

454

3945

DDC23

777

692

1989

4557

516

1176

4800

2296

515

3858

KDC4

1045

1126

1119

3580

553

4457

9380

1618

562

2064

KDC5

1055

1264

1308

3398

574

4577

9276

1884

599

1592

KDC6

1053

1264

1304

3398

594

4547

9296

1904

581

1612

Figure 4-3 Frequency distributions of class numbers in the recent six editions of DDC and KDC

In tracking the changes among recent editions, corresponding main classes of DDC and
KDC were compared. As is the case with the overall quantities of DDC editions presenting more
evident changes than KDC, quantitative changes in class numbers by main class across the recent
editions are also more varied in DDC (Figure 4-4). From DDC 20 to 22, the language class
increased radically in size (71%), while the science class decreased most significantly (-67.1%)
from DDC 22 to 23. By comparison KDC editions’ class distributions by main class had not

85

changed as much. History & geography had the largest decrease (-22.9%) from KDC 4 to 5; the
largest increase in class numbers by main class is in religion from KDC 4 to 5 (16.9%).
0 Computer
science,
100
information Philosophy
& general
&
300 Social
works
psychology 200 Religion sciences

400
600
700 Arts &
Language 500 Science Technology recreation

800
900 History
Literature & geography

100%

72%

80%
60%

26%

DDC23
KDC5

1%

7%

1%

13%
6%

16%
6%

0%

5%

3%

3%
4%

0%

0%

2%

10%

14%

17%

30%
12%

1%

20%

10%

18%

40%

DDC22

KDC6

0%

-2%

-3%

-1%

-1%

-2%

-5%

0%

-5%

0%

-23%

-17%

-29%

-19%

-40%

-5%

-20%

-60%

-67%

-80%

Figure 4-4 Percentage changes in class numbers by main class across DDC and KDC editions

In previous graphs, it is evident that DDC in general displays broader ranges of changes
from edition to edition as compared to KDC. However, differences in the distributions of class
numbers across the main classes between DDC and KDC tend to be consistent across recent
editions. Figures 4-5 & 4-6 show the percentage of each main class in every edition in terms of
class numbers for DDC and KDC respectively. Comparing compositional percentages of DDC
20, 22, and 23 with its counterparts KDC 4, 5, and 6 reveals the main classes with the most
noticeable differences, which lead to selection of the main classes for the second phase of
analysis. The two main classes presenting the greatest differences in composition of knowledge
structures are technology and social sciences.
Figures 4 and 5 display percentages of all ten main class compositions for DDC 20, 22,
and 23 and KDC 4, 5, and 6. Comparing each main class of DDC and KDC, the gaps between
compositional percentages of technology and social sciences are consistently high throughout
86

editions. The main class of technology takes 27% of DDC 20, 25% of DDC 22, and 23% of
DDC 23 respectively, while its counterparts in KDC take 37% of KDC 4, 36% of KDC 5, and
37% of KDC 6. Differences in percentages of the technology class between DDC and KDC range
from 10% to 14%. The main class of social sciences takes 21% of DDC 20, 21% of DDC 22, and
22% of DDC 23, while its counterparts in the KDC take 14% of KDC 4, 13% of KDC 5, and
13% of KDC 6 respectively. Differences in the percentages of the social sciences class between
DDC and KDC range from 7% to 9%.
In the early stages of this study, I presumed that KDC and DDC would differ most in
philosophy, the social sciences, or religion. Although the social sciences class does exhibit a high
degree of difference between the two schemes, the class that turned out to have the highest
degree of difference is the technology class. Interestingly, DDC editions have more class
numbers in social sciences, while KDC editions have significantly more class numbers in
technology. It is worth noting that measuring quantities of class numbers alone does not explain
differences in concepts or hierarchical structures of the schemes. The intention in such counting
is only to assist in identifying the two classes with the greatest variations between the two
schemes for qualitative analysis in the second phase of the study.

87

DDC23, 18%
DDC22, 15%
DDC20, 13%

0 Computer science, information &
general works
100 Philosophy & psychology

4%
3% 3%3%
3% 3%
7%
6% 9%

200 Religion
300 Social sciences

2% 2%
2%

400 Language

11%
10%

21%
21%

11%

22%

500 Science
600 Technology
700 Arts & recreation

1%
2%
27%
25%
23%

800 Literature
900 History & geography

14%
13% 2%
6%

Figure 4-5 Percentages of main classes: DDC 20-22-23
0 Computer science, information &
general works
100 Philosophy & psychology

KDC6, 6% 4%
5%
2% KDC5, 6% 4%
5%
2%KDC4, 8% 4%
4%
5%
7%
7% 2%
4%5%
6%

200 Religion
300 Social sciences

13%
14%
13%

400 Language
500 Science
600 Technology

2%
2%2%
37%
36%
36%

700 Arts & recreation
800 Literature

17%
18%
18%

900 History & geography

Figure 4-6 Percentages of main classes: KDC 4-5-6

4.3. Distribution of ten divisions in two selected main classes
Figure 4-7 and 4-8 show distributions of class numbers in divisions of two selected main
classes. The class numbers included in these figures are only those at the levels of division and

88

section3 under the selected main classes. Only the most recent editions of DDC 23 and KDC 6
were compared for visualizing the size and distribution of divisions and sections under two main
classes.
The first column of Figure 4-7 represents all three-integer class numbers including
divisions and sections of the social sciences class: 300-399. Each of the remaining columns is for
a sub-discipline (i.e., a division) in the main class. The overall scope of the two chosen main
classes from DDC and KDC have shared topical coverage. However, the divisions do not match
exactly. Thus, the ten divisions of the social sciences class were integrated into nine columns in
Figure 4-7 by moving economics and commerce in DDC 23 and public administration and
military science of KDC into one column. DDC 23 and KDC 6 locate division class numbers
differently, but topical coverages are also different (e.g., DDC 23 has military science (355)
under public administration (350) but KDC 6 has military science as a separate division (390)
from public administration (350)). The last row in Figure 4-7 shows KDC 471, which covers the
topic of anthropology under the main class of natural science unlike DDC, which has social
sciences, sociology, and anthropology all together in the first division of the social sciences.
In a similar pattern, Figure 4-8 includes 99 class numbers of the technology main class in
DDC 23 and KDC 6. Figure 4-8 uses 0-99 as DDC 23 has 600-699 and KDC 6 has 500-599 for
the technology class, while Figure 4-7 uses class numbers 300-399 in both DDC 23 and KDC 6
to designate the main class of social sciences. The ten divisions of the technology class also

3

Decimal classification has three named ranks in its hierarchical structure: main class, division, and section. The
highest rank (e.g., represented by class numbers 100, 200, and 300) is named as main class, representing 10 broad
disciplines; as the second rank (e.g., 110, 120, and 130) is named as division, representing sub-disciplines under
each main class; and the third rank (e.g., 111, 112, and 113) is named as section, representing subordinate concepts
to sub-disciplines.

89

integrated into nine columns by merging two manufacturing-related divisions of DDC and three
engineering-related divisions of KDC.
In Figures 4-7 and 4-8, bars indicate the counts of all class numbers combined with
auxiliary numbers under each section (e.g., for the section number 301, all the numbers from
301.01 to 301. 98 are totaled as 98). Thus, the length of a bar indicates how many detailed
(subordinate) concepts there are under each division or section class number.
The counts and numerical display of all division and section numbers of the two selected
main classes show how class numbers in the divisions are distributed across the main class. In
KDC social sciences, six divisions (3. political science, 4. economics, commerce,
communication, 5. law, 6. public administration & military science, 7. social problems & social
services, and 9. customs, etiquette, folklore) are in different locations while the other three subdisciplines (i.e., 1. social sciences, sociology, & anthropology, 2. statistics, 8. education) are in
the same locations when compared to DDC. In the technology class, only two sub-disciplines
(i.e., 1. technology, 2. medicine & health) are in the same order and the other seven are located
differently. This difference in locations and sizes of sub-disciplines is expected to generate
insight into the comparative reading of class numbers in Phase 2.

90

91
Figure 4-7 Divisions of Social science from DDC 23 and KDC 6

92
Figure 4-8 Divisions of Technology from DDC 23 and KDC 6

4.4. Conclusion
For Phase 1, quantities of class numbers were analyzed by edition and discipline. The
visualizations of two classification systems revealed three main differences: 1) in range of
changes across editions, 2) in distribution of class numbers at the main class level, and 3) in
distribution of class numbers at the division and section levels. In terms of the quantity of class
numbers of three editions of DDC and three editions of KDC, DDC has had more changes across
editions. KDC is bigger range of changes between editions was verified not only by the total but
also by the number of class numbers in ten main classes. These changes in quantities do not
solely represent modifications or revisions of classification systems, because there could be types
of changes other than the number of class numbers, such as change of captions or relocation of
the class numbers. Nonetheless, the curves of increasing or decreasing tendencies across editions
and disciplines demonstrate differences in chronological evolution of DDC and KDC.
Despite varied curves for the changes in quantities, analyzing the quantities of class
numbers in the ten main classes exhibits a consistent tendency in distributions of class numbers
in the main classes. The main class with the highest percentage of differences in DDC was the
social sciences, while the main class with consistently high numbers of class numbers in KDC
was technology. The two main classes showing the most difference in quantities are expected to
have more differences in conceptual coverage or higher levels of specificity. Lastly, exploration
of the counts and locations of the class numbers at division and section levels uncovered the
types of differences to be examined in Chapter 5.

93

Chapter 5 Findings: Examining in-depth differences to understand
sociocultural influences
For Phase 2, the developed adaptation taxonomy described in Chapter 3 was applied to
the two selected main classes, social sciences and technology, of KDC 6 in comparison with
DDC 23. With the second coding scheme—the observability of adaptation described in Chapter
3, noticeable classificatory characteristics were examined to capture manifested sociocultural
influences in the differences of classificatory characteristics from the comparison of KDC and
DDC. The entire coding process and coding schemes will be introduced in this section along
with major findings from the coding process. The class numbers used in the examples below are
from the KDC 6.

5.1. Coding process
There were two coding schemes involved in the two parts of the coding process (5-1).
One is the adaptation taxonomy developed based on Berry’s model that captures sociocultural
differences in four progressive adaptive strategies; the other is the observability of adaptation
that captures classificatory differences in comparison of the two classifications. I examined two
coding schemes in relating one to another in order to see how the identified classificatory
differences in the observability of adaptation bear sociocultural influences examined from
application of the taxonomy of adaptation.

94

The scheme for
taxonomy of
adaptation

The scheme for
Observability of
adaptation

Initial coding

Figure 5-1 Coding process

In the first coding of the social sciences and technology classes from DDC 23 and KDC
6, the taxonomy of the adaptation was applied as the initial coding scheme. The four adaptive
strategies were indifference, nativization, absorption, and integration. The indifference strategy is
not to take either DDC-like concepts or Korean specific, nativization is to implement Korean
specific concepts into the system, absorption is to adopt DDC-like concepts as they are, and
lastly integration is to incorporate Korean specific and DDC-like concepts in harmony. The
coding, however, resulted in many class numbers being coded into two strategies simultaneously.
Short definitions and examples are listed on the next pages.
Several patterns emerged from the comparison of KDC and DDC class numbers for each
adaptive strategy. After sorting the coded cases, observable characteristics were identified. A
second coding scheme was developed for observability of adaptation based on the previously
identified components. The existing taxonomy of adaptation was analyzed with the application
of the second coding.

95

5.2. Initial coding with the taxonomy of adaptation
As discussed in Chapter 3, the adaptation taxonomy has four discrete categories
representing different strategies in the adaptation of an original classification to an adapter
system. The four categories will be described below with specific examples. Also, during the
coding process, the four categories were deemed too simplistic to account for the complexity of
adaption, because KDC’s development and adaptation of DDC is often sourced in two or more
cultural warrants. Given the two systems’ somewhat different purposes and usages, the adaptive
choices between global and local are more varied than the four simple categories. In this
analysis, three more adaptive strategies in between two nearby categories emerged, as they
exhibited distinctive characters. Two other classifications, Nippon Decimal Classification (NDC)
and Library of Congress Classification (LCC), were also examined to identify the possibility of
their influence in cases where the category of Indifference was applicable.
Indifference
Cases coded as this category show neither noticeable influence from DDC nor satisfy
Korean local cultural needs. It seems that there was some influence from NDC but no noticeable
influence from LCC. Those of NDC-influenced class numbers have captions almost identical to
the counterparts of NDC 10 (the most recent edition published in 2014).
Examples
Social Sciences
•

386 - Festival, regular annual events

•

389 - Cultural anthropology
o

DDC has no such subclass. It appears to be from the NDC. No other subdivisions
were listed under this.

96

Technology
•

517

Promotion of health, public health & preventive medicine
o

This section could have been influenced by the LCC, class RA421-790.95 Public
health. Hygiene. Preventive medicine. Many of the subordinate topics overlap
with DDC 613 (personal health and safety), but the way they are organized is
totally different; KDC 6’s approaches are public not personal, although some parts
of this section cover personal health as well.

•

532

Civil engineering mechanics and materials
o

This section bears a concept borrowed from NDC 511 (mechanics and materials).
Although DDC also covers mechanics and materials, it doesn't specify it as a
separate section.

•

533

Surveying
o

This section seems to be a concept borrowed from NDC 512 (surveying). DDC
doesn't specify it as a separate section.

•

536

Bridge engineering
o

This section appears to be a concept borrowed from NDC 515 (bridge
engineering). DDC 624 (civil engineering) covers this.

Indifference & Nativization
In this strategy, although the influences of NDC seem evident, the numbers and captions
influenced by NDC are somewhat modified for localization. Even with the influence of NDC, the
coded concepts below are likely Korean-specific in comparison with both DDC and NDC.
Examples
Social Sciences

97

•

379 Special education
o

The concept of special education is covered in DDC 371 (schools and their
activities; special education). Subordinate class numbers under KDC 379 (special
education) are close to NDC 378 (education for disabled children (special support
education)), but the captions are not matched as well as to the order.

•

381 Customs of clothing, eating and dwelling places
o

This conceptual understanding is also closer to NDC’s counterparts than DDC 23.
But, the captions are different as well as the partial coverage from NDC 383
(customs of clothing and shelter). DDC has covered it in DDC 391 (costume and
personal appearance) and in DDC 394 (general customs).

Technology
•

539 Sanitary, municipal and environmental engineering
o

NDC has two sections - 518 (sanitary and municipal engineering) and 519
(pollution, environmental engineering). KDC 539 covers concepts represented by
both NDC section numbers.

•

593 Grooming
o

NDC 595 (beauty culture). There is no such DDC section.

Absorption
Concepts in this strategy originate from DDC, preserving both the conceptual scope and
structural fidelity of their counterparts in DDC. This absorption strategy mostly has an identical
caption at the same rank (division/section/subordinate (auxiliary) number) with overlapping
subordinate topics. (The components of conceptual coverage will be discussed later.)
Examples

98

Social Sciences
•

349 - International relations
o

The captions and conceptual scope of the class under KDC 349 (international
relations) are identical to those under DDC 327 (international relations).

Technology
•

501 Technical theory
o

The section number is matched with DDC 601 (philosophy and theory), as the
Korean caption of KDC 510 is identical.

Absorption & Integration
This strategy adopts DDC-like concepts but includes partial differences, specifically the
inclusion of adjacent subjects or more subordinate numbers rather than the topic itself. This
absorption and integration strategy mostly has similar or identical captions at different levels of
class unit (division/section/subordinate (auxiliary) number) or at the same level with no
overlapping subordinate topics.
Examples
Social Sciences
•

326 Commerce (Trade), transportation, communications
o

KDC 326 has identical captions to DDC 380 (commerce, communications &
transportation). DDC has a whole division for this topic –DDC 380-389. Thus, the
topical scopes and treatment of the topic are not matched.

•

327 Financial economics

99

o

This caption is identical with DDC 332 (financial economics), but the topical
scope is not. For example, the topic of KDC 328 (insurance) as a separate section
is a subordinate concept under DDC 332 (financial economics).

Technology
•

541 Building construction materials
o

This section, starting with materials, seems almost the same with DDC 691
(building materials), given the order of subordinate numbers. But, the division is
not identical: KDC covers the subjects of construction and architecture together in
DDC they are separate.

•

548 Detail finishing and architectural decoration
o

Subordinate concepts of KDC 548.1-548.8 are same as DDC 698 (detail
finishing)'s counterparts. But, the last number, 548.9, is only in KDC and only
partially matched with DDC 747 (interior decoration) under DDC 740 (graphic
arts & decorative arts).

Nativization
This strategy is used to insert native Korean-specific systems or concepts. But this
strategy also often occurs with integration or indifference simultaneously for the cases displaying
Korean specificity in adaptation. The examples below are culturally specific subjects.
Examples
Social Sciences
•

345 Legislation
o

Due to differences between Korea and North America’s systems of law, this
section is about Korean-specific political systems.

100

Technology
•

519 Oriental medicine, Korean medicine

Nativization & Integration
Approaches to or understanding of similar concepts represent Korean local needs. The
topical concept in KDC does not match any concept in DDC, but subordinate or adjacent subjects
are found, as with the counterparts of DDC. This nativization and integration strategy usually has
different captions and unique (or Korean-specific) interpretations of the concepts in KDC.
Examples
Social Sciences
•

332 Social organizations and institutions
o

The caption is not matched at all, but DDC 305 (groups of people) under the
division of social sciences, sociology and anthropology (300-307) has partially
overlapped subordinate concepts with this KDC 332.

o

This section’s subordinate numbers start with family groups and extend to social
classes. There is no gender, age, or ethnicity addressed. DDC 305 (groups of
people) also addresses social and economic levels for groups of people. KDC
331.2 also covered those demographic groups, but not about social classes that
concern social and economic levels.

•

335 Problem of living
o

DDC 363 (other social problems and services) has partial overlaps with this
section.

Technology
•

540 Construction and architecture
101

o

At the division level, KDC 6 changed the caption to locate all architecture-related
subjects here. NDC also locates both together in 520, but this is a more recent
change and not a direct influence of NDC. In addition, the order of subordinate
sections differs from NDC. Interestingly, the order of materials, practice-related,
structures, and detailed jobs are matched with DDC. But, at the section level,
KDC 540 includes all theories and histories of not only construction but also
architecture, while DDC has a separate division for architecture in the arts and
recreation division (700-799).

Integration
The integration strategy reflects both Korean culturally specific and DDC-like concepts
together in harmony. Integration appeared in cases where there are no perfectly identical
counterparts of DDC in KDC in terminology and structure or vice versa. Unlike absorption,
which shared the concepts in terms of semantic contents and structures, integration shared either
only one or parts of each. Different captions and the level of class ranks, different broader
categories or unmatched subordinate concepts are common patterns of integration. Topics coded
as integration solely tend to be reflections of general disciplines compared to the other two
coding categories that were culturally influenced – ‘Absorption & Integration’ and ‘Nativization
& Integration’.
Examples
Social Sciences
•

319 Demography (Population statistics)
o

DDC has population under section number 304 (factors affecting social behavior),
while KDC 6 has population under a division of social statistics (310-319).

102

•

321 Economic theories or thoughts
o

This section covers a variety of topics that DDC 331-333 (economics of labor,
finance, land, and energy) covers.

Analysis of cases coded in these categories provides a snapshot of the adaptation
regarding two cultural warrants, most originated from nationality in this study. In both main
classes, the social sciences and technology, the percentage of cases coded as integration is the
highest, 46% in the social sciences and 37% in technology (Tables 4-1&4-2). The percentage of
cases coded as nativization is higher than absorption (31% vs. 16%) in the social sciences, while
the percentage of the cases coded as absorption is slightly higher than that of nativization (25%
vs. 21%) in technology. The percentage of cases coded as indifference for the social sciences is a
lot less than that for technology (5% vs. 15%).
The social sciences
1 Indifference

2 Absorption

3 Nativization

4 Integration

6

20

37

55

Table 5-1 Number of cases in each category in the social sciences

Technology
1 Indifference

2 Absorption

3 Nativization

4 Integration

28

45

38

67

Table 5-2 Number of cases in each category in technology

As described earlier, the four categories are inadequate in capturing various adaptive
strategies. Thus, a coding rule allowing two or more categories to be coded at the same time was
created. In most cases, two adjacent categories were coded together; three categories rarely
occurred simultaneously. Tables 4-3 and 4-4 show the number of cases for co-occurring
103

categories. The most commonly co-occurring categories were integration and nativization and
the second were integration and absorption in both the social sciences and technology. However,
in the technology class, indifference and nativization was the third most commonly co-occurring
pair, and the indifference category more frequently occurred in the coding for technology (Table
4-3 &4-4).

1 Indifference
2 Absorption
3 Nativization
4 Integration

The social sciences
1 Indifference
2 Absorption
3 Nativization
6
0
4
0
20
1
4
1
37
1
13
20

4 Integration
1
13
20
55

Table 5-3 the number of coding for co-occurred categories (the social sciences)

1 Indifference
2 Absorption
3 Nativization
4 Integration

1 Indifference
28
1
21
19

Technology
2 Absorption
1
45
2
27

3 Nativization
21
2
38
31

4 Integration
19
27
31
67

Table 5-4 the number of coding for co-occurred categories (technology)

The counts for the four categories were also examined in relation to a distribution of divisions in
the social sciences and technology.
Social Sciences
The class numbers coded as indifference were mostly found in KDC’s division of
customs, etiquette, & folklore (380-389). The indifference category is, however, always coded
concurrently with other categories. The sequence of the most commonly concurrent categories is:
integration, nativization, and absorption.

104

Absorption appeared mostly in the first division of the social sciences, which includes
general subjects such as types of materials or regional/local names. Standard tendency in decimal
systems, such as taking the subjects from standard subdivisions into the first subclass, are
applicable to both the social sciences and technology main classes. The division of education
exhibited absorption most frequently. Nativization appears mostly in the division of law, which
reflects the different law systems of the two countries. All 10 divisions include class numbers
coded as integration, but military science presents the most cases of integration with no other
concurrently coded categories. Exploring the way these four strategies appear by division in the
social sciences, integration was found to be most common, followed by nativization. In most
cases, integration accompanies nativization. Concerning the two categories, absorption and
indifference either occur together or each one occurs individually. One exceptional case is the
first division of the social sciences, which had absorption and integration categories coded for
most of its numbers.
300-309 Social Sciences - This division in KDC differs from DDC’s corresponding
division. KDC 301 to 309 employs the straightforward application of standard subdivisions,
while DDC 300-309 focuses specifically on sociology and anthropology. Section 301 covers
general topics in sociology and anthropology, then 302-307 lists specific topics such as social
interaction, social processes, factors affecting social behavior, groups of people, culture and
institutions, and communities.
310-319 Statistics - Statistics as an academic discipline has been moved to the natural
sciences class. The current edition of KDC classifies statistical resources in 310-319. Thus,
subordinate subjects are somewhat different from DDC. Specifically, 311-313 of DDC were not
adopted as they are [Unassigned] class numbers. KDC has assigned the three-digit numbers from
105

311 to 317 for general statistics of specific places. Similarly, DDC has assigned 314-319 for
general statistics of specific continents, countries, and localities in the modern world.
320-329 Economics – This division corresponds to DDC 330-339. KDC’s division of
economics includes similar topics to those in its DDC counterpart division, but most of them are
located/organized differently. Thus, more nativization emerges along with integration. It is
interesting to note that KDC covers commerce, transportation, and communications in a section
numbered 326 while DDC has an entire division devoted to this topic – 380-389. Although the
terms and scopes of this class are about same as those in DDC, levels of the topics are not.
327 Financial Economics - DDC 332 (financial economics) has the same subject name
and covers shared topics but with a different scope. DDC 332 is broader in terms of topical
scope. KDC has multiple subdivisions for the same scope of DDC 332 (financial economics) e.g. the KDC 328 (insurance) belongs to DDC 332 in terms of topical scope. DDC 332 (financial
economics) also partially covers KDC 328 (insurance) in terms of credit and loan functions of
insurance companies, and DDC 344 (labor, social service, education, cultural law) and 346
(private law) under the division of law (340-349) also cover different kinds of insurance.
However, as a comprehensive subject for insurance, DDC covers it in section number 368
(insurance), which is in the division of social problems and social services (360-369). On the
other hand, KDC does not include insurance in its divisional counterpart - sociology and social
problems. Rather, KDC has it in the economic division only. One possible explanation for this is
the differencing strategies in the development of social welfare systems between the two
countries and the notion of insurance as either social welfare or financial asset.

106

330-339 Sociology and Social problems - KDC covers sociology and social problems
together in a division, while DDC locates sociology with social science and anthropology (300309) and social problems in social services (360-369). KDC’s first section number 331
(sociology) partially overlaps with the subjects under DDC 305 (groups of people). KDC 332
(social organization, institutions) begins with family groups extended to social classes. Unlike
DDC 305 (groups of people), however, there is no mention of gender, age, or ethnicity, as well
as social and economic levels for groups of people in KDC. In this division, interesting cases of
KDC’s distinctive topical differences from DDC were found. They are listed below:
334 (social problems) lists homosexuality as a sexual issue, along with crimes, etc.
335 (problems of living), although labeled differently, overlaps with DDC 363 (other social
problems and services).
337 (problems of women) - Both KDC and DDC locate feminism under sociology. This notion
of women as a gender is comparatively widely spread out across all main classes in DDC, as
DDC has listed subdivisions for groups of people in any subjects. On the other hand, KDC has
only a few classes addressing women – religion, sociology and social problems, laws, customs,
medical, and clothes. The caption for KDC 337 (problems of women) is limited as well.
Although this subdivision covers topics related to feminism, it mostly includes roles and
occupations of women, topics which do not match with the caption—problems of women—.
340-349 Political Science - KDC 340 (political sciences), corresponds to DDC 320
(political science (Politics and government)) as a subdivision. But DDC 320 has more detailed
subordinate concepts listed. For example, KDC 344 (elections and suffrage) overlaps with part of
324.6 (election systems and procedures; suffrage) under DDC 324 (the political process). Also,
107

KDC 346 (political parties), is a part of DDC 324 (the political process), corresponding to DDC
324.2 (political parties).
350-359 Public Administration - Public administration is a whole division in KDC, while
DDC has it combined with military science. Secondly, detailed scopes are somewhat similar in a
sense that both KDC and DDC cover public administrative agencies and divisions/managements
and other issues at a general level. For example, KDC 351-357 (administration in specific
countries) has equivalences in DDC. Interestingly, however, the level of classes is different:
DDC has specific locational administrations under DDC 351 (public administration), such as
DDC 351.1 (administration in areas, regions, places in general), and DDC 351.3-351.9
(administration in specific continents, countries, localities).
360-369 Law - In general, the subclasses of law are difficult to compare as the law
systems of the two nations are different. In the KDC law class, civil law and commercial law are
possibly from NDC. However, the order of the law class, especially the first to the third sections
of KDC, is more similar with the DDC. The KDC 369 (foreign law) addresses different law
systems such as continental law and Anglo-Saxon law.
370-379 Education - The most similar subdivision (even the number is the same) is
education. But, KDC's entire education class is small in quantities of refined subordinate
numbers. For example, KDC 371 (policy and administration of education) overlaps with the
DDC 379 (public policy issues in education). The scope overlaps in many parts. But, DDC 379
(public policy issues in education) addresses more debates on major policy issues and
controversial issues.

108

380 -389 Customs, Etiquette, Folklore - This subdivision displays the most conceptual
coverage differences from DDC. Many of the concepts were borrowed from NDC, such as
“customs of clothing, eating and dwelling places”, “customs of ages, sexes and social class”,
“festival, regular annual events”. However, KDC 385 (etiquette) adopted DDC 395 (etiquette
(manners)), as NDC has no separate subclass for etiquette. In comparison with subordinate
concepts for DDC 395 (etiquette (manners)), only a small amount of different numbering is
observed, but the order of etiquette-related topics matches with KDC.
390 - 399 Military Science - DDC places military science under the division of public
administration and military science (350-359), but NDC has a division of military science for
390-399. Although the detailed sections of NDC’s military science are not exactly matched with
KDC, more influences from the NDC were observed on this subject.
Technology
KDC has had three engineering-related divisions since the first edition, while DDC has
had one division. Thus, the indifference category was mostly found in all engineering-related
subclasses with the exception of chemical engineering. Interestingly, the listed sections in
chemical engineering are close to DDC’s. Thus, most of the class numbers in chemical
engineering were coded as absorption. As in the social sciences class, the first subclass for
technology also follows many parts of the standard subdivisions rather than deploying related
subjects hierarchically. Although the divisions of technology, such as mechanical engineering
and electrical engineering, were influenced by NDC, they had some KDC-only concepts and
structures contributing to the integration code. Other than engineering-related subclasses,

109

construction and architecture was the exemplary case for integration concurrently coded with
absorption or nativization.
Compared to the social sciences, the technology main class presents more cases of
indifference and absorption. While the social sciences have maintained almost the same
divisions, different subordinate concepts are listed, including sections. The technology class has
divisions structured differently, but it maintains similar subordinate concepts including sections.
Medical science, however, exhibits the highest number of integration strategy examples due to
fewer structural differences but more detailed subordinate concepts. In both cases, structures of
divisions and subordinate concepts mainly displayed characteristics of integration.
500-509 Technology - The first division of the technology class mostly matches with
DDC 600-609, because the first division covers subjects from standard subdivisions. DDC 23
adjusts the standard subdivisions to be more suitable with this technology division, while KDC 6
always follows almost the same standard subdivisions regardless of division topics. For example,
the KDC 504 caption was ‘Essays and lectures’ while the DDC 604 caption was ‘Technical
drawing, hazardous materials technology’. And KDC 508 was simply ‘Collection’ from the
standard subdivisions, but DDC 608 covers ‘Patents’.
510-519 Medical Science - The division headings from DDC 23 and KDC 6 are different:
DDC 610 (medicine & health) and KDC 510 (medical science). Sections such as surgery;
gynecology, obstetrics, pediatrics; and pharmacy matched with DDC in topics, but not in order.
Some of the KDC class numbers with auxiliary numbers cover details of the topics in medicine.
For example, KDC 511 (basic medical science) listed 236 subordinate numbers, covering the
concepts from two DDC section numbers, 611 (Human anatomy, cytology, histology) and 612

110

(Human physiology). In KDC, there is also oriental medicine, Korean medicine (519), which has
no concept counterparts in DDC.
520-529 Agriculture - Division captions do not match with DDC’s division of
agriculture; most of the listed concepts in this division only partially overlap with their DDC
counterparts of DDC. In the case of KDC 522 (agricultural economics), the corresponding
concept is placed in the economics division of DDC, 333.73-.78 (economics – natural resources).
530-539 Engineering, technology, civil and environmental engineering - This division
consists mainly of civil and environmental engineering as subjects. The DDC division of
engineering (620-629) covers civil and environmental engineering as well. But, DDC 621
(applied physics) includes electronical and mechanical engineering knowledge as well, while the
KDC has mechanical engineering and electronic engineering as separate divisions. At the section
level, KDC 530 (engineering, technology, civil and environmental engineering) is more likely to
list components of engineering such as materials, measurements, etc., but DDC 620
(engineering) addresses operations allied with engineering such as nanotechnology, vibrations,
and human factors and safety engineering. This division has influences of NDC in its listed
concepts. For example, KDC 532 (civil engineering mechanics and materials), KDC 533
(surveying), KDC 534 (roads and highway engineering), and KDC 535 (railway engineering) are
likely borrowed from NDC.
540-549 Construction and architecture – At the division level, the current edition of KDC
changed the name of captions to locate all architecture-related subjects with construction. NDC
also has both together in NDC 520 (architecture, building), but this is a recent change. Thus, it is
not a direct influence of NDC. In addition, the order of sections is different from NDC.

111

Interestingly, the deployment of materials, practices-related, structures, and detailed jobs are
quite similar to DDC’s counterparts. One of the noticeable cases for nativization is KDC 544
(green building and construction for specific purpose). DDC 693 (construction in specific types
of materials and for specific purposes) covers both KDC 543 (structural mechanics and general
building constructions) and 544 (green building and construction for specific purpose). But, it is
interesting that KDC 6 has a separate section for green building while DDC has it combined with
specific kinds of construction or materials.
550-559 Mechanical engineering – This division has no counterpart at the division level
in the DDC, but conceptually overlaps with DDC 620.103-620.107 (engineering mechanics
(applied mechanics)) and DDC 629 (other branches of engineering).
560-569 Electrical, communication and electronic engineering - Although the caption of
this division seems influenced by NDC 540 (electrical engineering), concepts covered in KDC
sections 560-569 are matched with the subordinate numbers for DDC 621.3 (electrical, magnetic,
optical, communications, computer engineering; electronics, lighting).
570-579 Chemical engineering - This division is matched with the division of chemical
engineering and related technologies (660-669). Captions of most section numbers are either
exactly matched or partially matched for their specificities.
580-589 Manufactures – At the division level, subordinate concepts ordered by materials
are very similar with their DDC counterparts (671-677). The last two section numbers of KDC,
588 (apparel manufacture(clothing)) and 589 (manufacture of small articles), however, are not
adopted from DDC. Interestingly, although KDC 580-587 covers the same concepts as 670-677
of DDC, caption names are slightly different: e.g. DDC - Manufacturing/KDC – Manufactures.
112

590-599 Human ecology - The division name differs from both DDC’s human and family
management and NDC’s domestic arts and sciences, although concepts in this division are
similar compared with either DDC or NDC in part. One interesting section number is KDC 593
(grooming), which corresponds to NDC 595 (beauty culture). It may or may not indicate an NDC
influence. There is no such section in the DDC division.

5.3. Cross analysis with the adaptive taxonomy and the observability of
adaptation.
This subsection reports on the cross analysis with both the adaptive taxonomy and
observability of adaptation. The listed classificatory variables in the observability of adaptation
were analyzed to see patterns relating the observability of adaptation to the adaptation taxonomy.
The social sciences and technology classes has shown few different patterns regarding which
variables were more evident in which adaptive strategy. In general, the choices of adaptive
strategies showed more variations in the social sciences and technology main classes.
1) Semantic contents
In similarities and differences of corresponding concepts between KDC and DDC, three
elements account for the semantic contents which draw boundaries for shared semantic contents
– caption, rank, and quantity of subordinate numbers. Similarities of captions examined semantic
contents of a certain concept by identifying boundaries of the concept. The types of
similarities/differences are derived from the five degrees of interlanguage equivalence in ISO
5964 as discussed in Chapter 3. The quantity of subordinate numbers intuitively indicates how
specifically the concept has been enumerated.

113

In the cross analysis, the observability of adaptation presents a certain pattern in relation to
the adaptive taxonomy. The patterns of semantic contents and structural arrangements were
analyzed for the social sciences and technology main classes respectively.

1) Semantic contents

Figure 5-2 Cross analysis with the adaptation taxonomy and the observability of adaptation (the social sciences)

114

1) Semantic contents

Figure 5-3 Cross analysis with the adaptation taxonomy and the observability of adaptation (technology)

Figures 4-10 and 4-11 show the coding results for the cross analysis of semantic contents.
Percentages noted in the figures are based on the number of cases for each coding number of the
classificatory variables/ total number of cases coded as each adaptive strategy. For the
corresponding captions of KDC and DDC in the social sciences, cases coded as No match were
the most common (28), followed by Inexact (viewpoint) (21), Exact (20), and Partial (10). No
match cases commonly appear in indifference and nativization. Exact match captions were found
mostly in absorption and integration. Interestingly, two in-between codes, Inexact (viewpoint)
and Partial matches show slightly different patterns. Inexact (viewpoint) takes one third of
indifference and integration, followed by nativization. Partial (specificities) were found mostly
in integration and absorption. Patterns of different levels of specificity were more evident in
DDC-like adopted concepts, while different viewpoints were identified/seen/noted (pick one) in
115

cases of adapting the adopted concepts to local needs. So, when the adaptation localizes concepts
of DDC, KDC captions tend to reflect more different viewpoints than different levels of
specificity. Interestingly, the corresponding captions in the main class of technology show
different patterns in captions. The most commonly occurring code was No match, but the code of
Partial matches came next, followed by Inexact (viewpoint) and Exact. As with the coding from
the social sciences, No match cases were mostly found in indifference and nativization while
Exact matches were seen in absorption and integration. However, in technology, Partial matched
cases occurred more frequently in nativization and integration, whereas Inexact (viewpoint)
matches were found in absorption and integration. This could mean the emergence of different
viewpoints was more common in the adopted concepts from DDC, unlike the observations of the
social sciences.
The quantity of subordinate numbers was also compared when corresponding concepts
were in one to one relationship. The code more subordinate numbers are listed under DDC
number was the most common in the social sciences, followed by the code that less subordinate
numbers are listed under the DDC number than the corresponding KDC number. Exactly
matched subordinate numbers was a rare occurrence – only two were found. When more
subordinate numbers were listed under the DDC number, the adaptive strategy of absorption,
was the most common. When more subordinate numbers were listed under the KDC number, the
adaptive strategies of nativization and integration were more commonly found. In the case of
technology, there were no noticeable differences among three types of coding for the second
variable of semantic contents—quantity of subordinate class numbers—for quantity of
subordinate numbers. All three have absorption and integration as the most common cases. It is
worth noting that both the social sciences and technology classes have shown more absorption

116

and less nativization for the third code, that fewer numbers of the DDC’s subordinate numbers
are listed.
2) Structural arrangement
Classificatory differences identified from the comparison inevitably involved structural
arrangement of the shared concepts. Four main categories accounting for similarities and
differences of structural arrangement are rank, the broader category, subordinate concepts, and
order of subordinate concepts. Determining rank for a concept presents the contexts of the
concept within the classification’s structure. Some adopted concepts are placed at different ranks
in that one classification’s treatment of the concept is broader than the other. The broader
category is to indicate the upper part of the hierarchy of the concept. The subordinate concepts
and order of the subordinate concepts are to indicate the lower part of the hierarchy of the
concept.

117

Figure 5-4 Structural arrangement analyzed with the adaptation taxonomy (the social sciences)

118

Figure 5-5 Structural arrangement analyzed with the adaptation taxonomy (technology)

Figures 4-12 and 4-13 show coding results for the cross analysis of structural
arrangements. The percentages noted in the figures are based on the number of cases for each
coding number of the classificatory variables/the total number of cases coded as each adaptive
strategy. Rank for a concept was only judged when both KDC and DDC share one concept
represented by a single class number. In the case of a corresponding concept not in one-to-one
relationship (e.g., KDC 334 – Social Problems matches DDC 361, 362, and 363), the comparison
cannot be made. Among the three matching codes for rank, Exact match was most commonly
119

assigned in the social sciences, followed by lower rank in DDC. The same pattern was evident in
the technology class as well.
Only a couple of cases belong to higher rank in DDC. Half of cases coded as integration
and absorption are also coded for Exact match. In a case that the DDC number is at the lower
level than the corresponding KDC number, integration and nativization are commonly coded
simultaneously in the social sciences and indifference and nativization are coded more in
technology. When KDC and DDC share similar concepts, 68% of the cases are at the same level,
and 25-28% of the cases (25% for the social sciences and 28% for technology) have DDC
numbers at a higher level than KDC. However, there are no noticeable relations found between
rank and the adaptive taxonomy.
The matching of the broader category exhibits relatively simple patterns of the adaptive
taxonomy. When the broader categories match, absorption and integration strategies claim most
cases. Indifference and nativization occurred for most cases coded as Not match for broader
categories. Both the social sciences and technology show the same patterns in terms of matching
broader concepts.
The third and the fourth categories of structural arrangement (i.e., subordinate concepts and
order of subordinate concepts) display a similar pattern across the two classes. There are three
codes of matching – match, partial match, and not match for both presence and order of
subordinate concepts. When subordinate concepts of a corresponding concept match for either
presence or order, absorption is the only major strategy. In case of partial matches, absorption
occurs the most often, followed by integration. When the subordinate numbers do not match,
there are strong tendencies of indifference and nativization. These results are observed both in
the social sciences and technology classes.

120

5.4. Conclusion
The comparison of two bibliographic classifications yields noticeable results. Phase 1
quantitative comparison of class numbers in the two systems led to the selection of two main
classes exhibiting the most differences for Phase 2 analysis. In Phase 2 of the study, two coding
schemes were employed to examine differences in the two chosen classes between the most
recent edition of KDC and that of DDC. On one hand, the taxonomy of adaptation, originating
from Berry’s acculturation model for examining immigrants’ adoption of a new culture, provided
four strategies applied in cross-cultural adaptation of classification. It facilitated the examination
of KDC’s strategies in adaptation of DDC to meet the sociocultural needs of South Korea. On the
other hand, a cross analysis was conducted by adding the observability of adaptation as a second
coding scheme to the results of the initial qualitative analysis. The cross analysis helped form a
better understanding of the differences between the two classifications as manifested in the
semantic contents and structural arrangements of individual concepts. In the next chapter, a more
in-depth discussion of the findings will provide further interpretation of KDC’s strategies in
adapting DDC.

121

Chapter 6 Discussions
In Chapter 4 and 5, based on the major results from the quantitative comparison of DDC
and KDC, patterns of sociocultural influences in classificatory variables including semantics and
structures were analyzed. This chapter provides further interpretation of the major results and
patterns from the comparison in answering the research question. Furthermore, the newly
developed notion of intercultural warrant as a ramification of the study of cross-cultural
classification is addressed.

6.1. Answering the research question
The sole research question of the present study is “How does the KDC adapt the DDC in terms of
the underlying sociocultural perspectives in a classificatory form?”
6.1.1. Phase 1.
Phase 1 was designed to compare the enumerated concepts and knowledge structures of
two classification schemes. The interpretation of the differences in quantities of class numbers
for the chosen DDC and KDC editions illustrate two aspects of the comparison: structure and
size.
Interpretation 1. Structure

The introduction to DDC implies that a bibliographical classification is meant to be
practical rather than philosophical. KDC, as a national library classification, also aims to be
practical. Originally, DDC, aiming to cover all kinds of knowledge from a body of literature,
followed the reverse order of Bacon’s basic forms of human intellectual production: reason,
imagination, and memory. This explains the current structure of the order of DDC’s ten main
classes. The introduction of DDC 23 claimed literary warrant as the basis for the development of

122

a class or the explicit inclusion of a topic in the schedules, tables, or relative index. KDC’s
adoption of DDC replicated these characteristics, but the comparative analysis of the main class
structures of the two systems demonstrates ways in which KDC developed as a result of
localizing DDC.
Because it is not a straightforward Korean translation of DDC, KDC does not share the
identical set of class numbers and captions. KDC was built and modified extensively in view of
Korean needs derived from cultural warrant. During the Korean National Library Association’s
early development of KDC in the 1960s (Cho 1995), relocations affected many fields (e.g., the
relocation of the language class to support the convenience of users looking for language-related
materials in closer proximity to literature-related materials). Relocating architecture KDC into
the division of engineering and construction in the most recent edition of KDC also supports user
convenience; rather than locating architecture-related materials in two separate locations—
engineering and arts—it enables users to find all such materials in one place.
Interpretation 2. Size

Level of specificity is a significant factor affecting the size of main class. This, in
general, may account for differences in academic discipline development between South Korea
and the United States. In many cases, KDC’s class numbers represent almost the same coverage
of concepts as the DDC’s. However, KDC has far more class numbers in technology. DDC has
more class numbers in the social sciences, especially the divisions of social problems, education,
law, and political science, whereas KDC exhibits a high density of class numbers in engineeringrelated divisions in technology. This is mainly because KDC has three divisions for engineering,
compared with DDC’s single engineering division. Tables 5-1 and 5-2 are the exemplary cases
showing the difference in specificity and size for corresponding divisions of KDC and DDC. As
123

Table 5-1 shows, DDC’s political science division includes more specific concepts than KDC’s,
which partially accounts for the differences in the total size of class numbers for the political
science divisions.
DDC 23 class number and caption
size KDC 6 class number and caption
320 Political science (Politics and
60
340 Political sciences
government)
341 Form of state and government
321 Systems of governments and states
26
342 Relation of the state to their members
322 Relation of the state to organized groups 10
and groups
and their members
[343] [Unassigned]
323 Civil and political rights
44
344 Elections and suffrage
324 The political process
186 345 Legislation
325 International migration and colonization 15
346 Political parties
326 Slavery and emancipation
2
[347] [Unassigned]
327 International relations
33
[348] [Unassigned]
328 The legislative process
56
349 International relation
[329] [Unassigned]
Total 432
Total
Table 6-1 Divisions of Political science from DDC 23 and KDC 6

size
26
19
20

10
15
7

15
112

However, the divisions of engineering, mechanical engineering, and electrical engineering in
KDC include more specific concepts (Table 5-2). Although DDC’s division of engineering
covers all three engineering divisions (engineering, mechanical engineering, and electrical
engineering), the number of sections for the division is a lot smaller than that of KDC. For
example, while KDC has two sections related to the subject of civil engineering—531 (civil
engineering) and 532 (civil engineering mechanics and materials), DDC has one—624 (civil
engineering). Moreover, KDC has sections addressing roads and railways respectively in the
division of engineering—534 (roads and highway engineering) and 535 (railway engineering)—
but DDC has one section covering both railroads and roads—625 (engineering of railroads and
roads).

124

DDC 23 class number and caption
620 Engineering/ Engineering and allied
operations
621 Applied physics
622 Mining and related operations
623 Military and nautical engineering
624 Civil engineering
625 Engineering of railroads and roads
[626] [Unassigned]
627 Hydraulic engineering
628 Sanitary engineering
629 Other branches of engineering

size
78
258
34
113
38
35
1
19
64
160

KDC 6 class number and caption
530 Engineering, technology, civil and
environmental engineering
531 Civil engineering
532 Civil engineering mechanics and materials
533 Surveying
534 Roads and highway engineering
535 Railway engineering
536 Bridge engineering
537 Hydraulic engineering
538 Harbor engineering
539 Sanitary, municipal and environmental
engineering
550 Mechanical engineering
551 Mechanics, parts and design machine
552 Tools and fabrication equipment
553 Heat engineering and prime movers
554 Fluid mechanics, pneumatic and vacuum
technologies
555 Precision instruments and other devices
556 Motor vehicle engineering
557 Railroads rolling stock and locomotives
558 Aerospace engineering, astronautics
559 Other engineering

Size
154

560 Electrical, communication and electronic
engineering
561 Circuits, measurement, materials
562 Electric machinery and apparatus
563 Generation of electric power
564 Electric transmission and distribution
565 Electric lighting, illumination engineering
567 Communication engineering
568 Radio communication(wireless)
569 Electronic engineering

1

Total 765
Table 6-2 Divisions of Engineering from DDC 23 and KDC 6

Total

19
36
13
37
47
29
33
27
104
4
25
52
36
29
36
94
26
190
472

35
28
28
30
29
92
45
67
1818

As discussed, main classes with differences in size from the comparison of DDC and KDC are
expected to differ in specificity and topical coverage. For further examination of those
differences, the two main classes showing the most differences in quantities were selected for
Phase 2: the social science main class displays a high number of class numbers in DDC, whereas
the technology main class exhibits a high number of class numbers in KDC.

125

6.1.2. Phase 2.
Phase 2 was designed to compare the concepts and their relationships of the social
sciences and technology in examining the changes made in KDC’s adaptation of DDC.
Interpretations of patterns revealed in the qualitative coding address three discussion points:
application of standard subdivisions, adaptation taxonomy, and adaptation observability.
Interpretation 1. Application of standard subdivisions

As we have seen, KDC has applied captions and concepts from standard subdivisions to
section numbers in the first division of each main class, whereas DDC has included more subject
specific concepts in the first division of main classes. In Table 5-3, KDC’s captions in the first
division of the social sciences main class are almost identical to those in the first division of
KDC’s technology main class, while DDC’s captions are most subject-specific to social sciences
and technology. This tendency of KDC to list almost identical sections for the first divisions
prevails across main classes, whereas DDC’s listing of various subject-related sections for the
first divisions is more common. This application of the standard subdivisions as they are for the
first division of each main class is a part of KDC’s adoption of the standard subdivisions
inherited from DDC. On the other hand, it could be considered KDC’s adaptation of standard
subdivisions, unified across all the main classes, unlike DDC, whose first division is more
specific to subject areas. Section 5.1.3, which discusses sociocultural influences, will discuss
cases of KDC’s adaptation of DDC’s divisions and sections other than adoption and adaptation
of standard subdivisions.
DDC 23

KDC 6

126

300 Social sciences, sociology & anthropology
300 Social sciences
301 Sociology and anthropology
302 Social interaction
303 Social processes
304 Factors affecting social behavior
305 Groups of people
306 Culture and institutions
307 Communities

300 Social sciences
301 Social thoughts
302 Miscellany
303 Dictionaries, encyclopedias
304 Essays and lectures
305 Serial publications
306 Organizations and societies
307 Study and teaching
308 Collections
309 Social and cultural situations

600 Technology (Applied sciences)
601 Philosophy and theory
602 Miscellany
603 Dictionaries, encyclopedias, concordances
604 Technical drawing, hazardous materials
technology; groups of people
605 Serial publications
606 Organizations
607 Education, research, related topics
608 Patents
609 History, geographic treatment, biography

500 Technology
501 Technical theory
502 Miscellany
503 Dictionaries and encyclopedias
504 Essays and lectures
505 Serial publications
506 Organizations and societies
507 Study and teaching
508 Collections
509 History of technology

Table 6-3 The first divisions of the social sciences and technology main classes for DDC 23 and KDC6

Interpretation 2. The taxonomy of adaptation

The application of the fourfold taxonomy of adaptation in the analysis led to a discovery
of complexity in strategic choices for cross-cultural adaptation of the bibliographic classification.
One strategy alone cannot explain all cases. Rather, most cases of comparisons fall between two
strategies because of the granularity in the interplay between Korean-specific concepts and those
from DDC. For example, absorption strategy matches both semantic contents and structural
arrangement. However, the in-between category of absorption and integration matches only
either semantic contents or structural arrangement (e.g., commerce, communications, and
transportation). Both KDC and DDC have the same captions and almost identical narrower
categories to cover the subject, but KDC has covered it as one of the section numbers for the
Economics division, whereas DDC has a whole division for it. Thus, despite the same topical
coverages for commerce, communications, and transportation, the ranks of the two classification
systems, one of elements for structural arrangement, are not matched. At the other end of

127

granularity for matchiness, integration strategy has unmatched parts for both semantic contents
and structural arrangement. Table 5-4 describes the four adaptive strategies from the preliminary
framework and three in-between strategies identified as a result of the preliminary coding. As in
the adaptation taxonomy discussed, indifference, absorption, nativization, and integration are
positioned by the two forces that are more standardized and indigenized. The three added
strategies are located between indifference and nativization, nativization and integration, and
absorption and integration. No strategy exists between indifference and absorption that includes
characteristics of both indifference and absorption.

128

Nativization
This strategy is used to insert
native Korean specific systems
or concepts. But this strategy
also often occurs with
integration or indifference
simultaneously for cases
displaying Korean specificity
in the adaptation. The examples
below are culturally specific
subjects.

Nativization & Integration
The approaches to or
understanding of the similar
concepts are the result of Korean
local needs. The topical concept
in KDC does not match any
concept in DDC but subordinate
or adjacent subjects found like
the counterparts of DDC. This
strategy usually has different
captions and unique (or Korean
specific) interpretations of the
concepts in KDC.

Indifference & Nativization
In this strategy, the influences
of NDC seem evident. But,
those numbers and captions
influenced by NDC are
somewhat modified for
localization. Even with the
influence of NDC, these are
likely Korean specific in
comparison with both DDC and
NDC.
Indifference
The cases neither show
noticeable influence from DDC
nor satisfy Korean local
cultural needs. It seems that
there was some influence from
NDC but no noticeable
influence from LCC Those of
NDC-influenced class numbers
have captions almost identical
to their counterparts of NDC 10
(the most recent edition).

Integration
The strategy reflects both Korean
culturally specific and DDC-like
concepts together in harmony. The
integration appeared as the cases
for which there are no perfectly
identical counterparts of DDC in
KDC in term and structure or vice
versa. Unlike absorption, which
shared the concepts in terms of
semantic contents and structures,
integration only shared either one
or parts of each. Different captions
and level of class ranks, different
broader categories or unmatched
subordinate concepts are common
patterns of integration.
Absorption & Integration
This strategy adopts DDC-like
concepts but with partial
differences included. Partial
differences are inclusion of
adjacent subjects or more
subordinate numbers rather than
the topic itself. This Absorption &
Integration strategy mostly has
similar or identical captions at the
different level of class unit
(division/section/subordinate
(auxiliary) number) or at the same
level with no overlapped
subordinate topics.
Absorption
Concepts in this strategy originate
from DDC, preserving both the
conceptual scope and structural
fidelity of their counterparts in
DDC. This absorption strategy
mostly has an identical caption at
the same rank
(division/section/subordinate
(auxiliary) number) with
overlapped subordinate topics.
(The components of semantic
contents will be discussed later)

Table 6-4 The four adaptive strategies of the preliminary framework and three in-between strategies

129

Interpretation 3. Observability of adaptation

Two classificatory features—semantic contents and structure— also matched with the
categories discovered by the comparison of classification systems in the bottom-up approach.
Moreover, the variables for semantic contents and structural arrangement in the observability of
adaptation support the validity of the comparative criteria from Kwasnik and Chun’s (2004)
study of KDC and DDC and ISO 5964 (ISO 1985)’s degrees of interlanguage equivalence. Table
5-5 compares the observability of adaptation and the matched comparative criteria from Kwasnik
and Chun or ISO 5664. Captions, the first element of semantic contents, consider the matchiness
of semantic contents, and the two codes of matchiness for the element—inexact and partial
matches—originate in the differences in viewpoint and scope respectively. I have borrowed the
labels “inexact” and “partial” from ISO 5964’s degrees of interlanguage equivalence. In
Kwasnik and Chun’s study, the difference in scope of a concept was used as a criterion, labeled
“differences in specificities”; they also determined the scopes’ differences through the
comparison of the narrower categories. I also examined the quantity of subordinate numbers
(narrower categories) as well as the subjects’ specificities in this study. Two elements from
structural arrangement—rank and broader category—correspond to “differences in class
placement” . “Empty lexical or conceptual categories” from Kwasnik and Chun’s study exhibited
the cases in which a certain concept existed in one system but not the other. This category is
partially matched with the last category, nationality, which, in the scheme of observability of
adaptation, includes only prominent cultural differences, such as Korean-only concepts, and
excludes subtle national or sociocultural influences emerging through different class numbers or
structures. The observability of adaptation uncovers the classificatory features representing
different types of differences induced by sociocultural influences and responds to previous
studies grounding the comparison of cross-cultural classifications. Because it contains more
130

categories of classificatory features that can bear sociocultural influences, the scheme presented
in this study is applied to make a systematic comparison of classifications across cultures. The
scheme also could be useful in comparing classification systems of a certain field across distinct
cultures.
Semantic contents
a) Captions – 1. Exact match/ 2. Inexact/ 3.
Partial/ 4. No match
Semantic contents
c) quantity of subordinate numbers
Structural arrangement
a) rank (division/section/+auxiliary number)
Structural arrangement
b) Broader category
Nationality

ISO 5964 (ISO 1985)’s degrees of
interlanguage equivalence &
Kwasnik & Chun (2004): 2. differences in
term specificity
Kwasnik & Chun (2004): 2. differences in
term specificity
Kwasnik & Chun (2004): 3. Differences in
class placement
Kwasnik & Chun (2004): 3. Differences in
class placement
Kwasnik & Chun (2004): 1. Empty lexical or
conceptual categories.

Table 6-5 Comparative classificatory features matched with previous studies.

Comparison of KDC and DDC reveal ways in which structures of the classification systems
address conceptual categories in terms of various devices of classification. Olson (2009), Tennis
(2011), and Kwasnik & Chun (2004) discussed classificatory structures in addressing different
viewpoints. Both DDC and KDC are structured by discipline, or field of study, and most
concepts are common to both. But there are apparently different approaches in representation of
concepts. These appeared in semantic contents and structural arrangement. The second coding
scheme with two categories of semantic contents and structural arrangement is an exemplary
case that describes diverse viewpoints in classificatory structures. The scheme could be
identified because KDC shared the same classificatory principles and main classes but has been
developed to be a national library classification reflecting the development of Korean academic
disciplines.

131

6.1.3 Sociocultural influences in adaptation
Adaptation of bibliographic classification across cultures reveals sociocultural influences
on knowledge representations through semantics and structures. In this study, two main classes
of KDC and DDC, the social sciences and technology, were compared by applying the taxonomy
of adaptation to reveal sociocultural influences. Interestingly, adaptation strategies varied
depending on the discipline. In other words, the examination of the two selected main classes
revealed differences in sociocultural influences by discipline. The social sciences class had more
numbers coded for nativization than for absorption, while technology had more numbers coded
for absorption than for nativization. Also, co-occurrence of nativization and integration was
found frequently in both classes, but the gap between nativization and integration and absorption
and integration was larger in the social sciences than in technology.
In terms of sociocultural influences, comparing KDC and DDC, shows no big differences
in the social sciences at division level, not the case at the section level. On the other hand,
differences in the technology classes of KDC and DDC are more evident at division level but less
so at section level. Although the technology classes of DDC and KDC comprise different
divisional structures, at the section levels, the social sciences main class reflects sociocultural
differences. The social sciences’ divisions in KDC correspond to all the divisions of the social
sciences in DDC, except for DDC 350 (Public administration and military science) and 380
(Commerce, communications and transportation). KDC has two separate divisions for public
administration and military science corresponding to DDC 350, and KDC’s section number 326
under the division for Economics (320–329) covers commerce, communication and
transportation, corresponding to DDC division 380. Although those subjects—public
administration military and commerce, communications and transportations—are located at
132

different levels, their semantic contents were mainly matched. On the other hand, DDC and KDC
technology divisions exhibit different compositions. In KDC, three divisions correspond to DDC
division 620 (engineering): KDC 530–539 (engineering, technology, civil and environmental
engineering), 550–559 (mechanical engineering), and 560–569 (electrical, communication and
electronic engineering). Where KDC has a single division (580–589) addressing manufacture,
two divisions of DDC (670–679 and 680–689) cover the same topic. Additionally, DDC’s
division of 650-659 covers the topic of management and public relations, which KDC’s
technology class does not cover. KDC adapted DDC by changing the constitution of divisions in
the technology class. However, at the section level, technology has many matched narrower
categories (subordinate numbers) and their matched order. By contrast, the social sciences class
displays more variations in both the presence and order of sections/narrower categories. For
example, the technology class has almost identical sections for the division of chemical
engineering, as Table 5-6 shows.
DDC 23
KDC 6
660 Chemical engineering and related technologies
570 Chemical engineering
661 Technology of industrial chemicals
571 Industrial chemicals
662 Technology of explosives, fuels, related products
572 Explosion and fuels engineering
663 Beverage technology
573 Beverages technology
664 Food technology
574 Food technology
665 Technology of industrial oils, fats, waxes, gases
575 Technology of industrial oils, fats, waxes, gases
666 Ceramic and allied technologies
576 Ceramic and allied industries
667 Cleaning, color, coating, related technologies
577 Cleaning, dyeing and related industries
668 Technology of other organic products
578 High polymer chemical industries
669 Metallurgy
579 Other organic chemical products
Table 6-6 Divisions for chemical engineering in DDC23 and KDC6

On the other hand, in the social sciences, the division of education displays different
deployments of sections, implying a partially different understanding of education systems.
Table 5-7 shows ten sections of the education division from DDC and KDC.

133

DDC 23
KDC 6
370 Education
370 Education
371 Schools and their activities; special education
371 Policy and administration of education
(372-374 Specific levels of education)
372 School administration and management
372 Primary education (Elementary education)
373 Methods of teaching
373 Secondary education
374 Curriculum
374 Adult education
375 Elementary education
375 Curricula
376 Secondary education
[376-377] [Unassigned]
377 Higher education
378 Higher education (Tertiary education)
378 Life-long education
379 Public policy issues in education
379 Special education
Table 6-7 Divisions for education in DDC23 and KDC6

From the differences in deployment of sections in the education division in DDC and KDC, we
may infer that the two cultures have a different understanding of higher education. DDC lists
specific levels of education: 372 (primary education), 373 (secondary education), and 374 (adult
education). Higher education is not considered a continuous level after those three levels of
education in the life cycle. However, KDC lists the levels of education: 375 (elementary
education), 376 (secondary education), 377 (higher education), and 378 (lifelong education).
Higher education immediately follows secondary education. The listed levels of education based
on the life cycle from elementary to lifelong education imply that higher education is continued,
rather than voluntarily pursued.
These examples suggest that the social sciences, as a discipline, contains more
sociocultural influences. Interestingly, the quantitative analysis in Phase 1 has shown more
quantitative differences in the technology class between KDC and DDC. As the second analysis
reveals, the quantitative description of class numbers is limited for reading sociocultural
differences. Thus, such a study needs multidimensional observations on captions, broader and
narrower concepts, and hierarchical locations in classification along with comparison of the
quantities of class numbers. Therefore, the frameworks applied in this study—the taxonomy of

134

adaptation and the observability of adaptation—would provide methodological ground for future
studies of sociocultural influences in adaptation of classification.
6.1.4. Sociocultural influences and adaptation of classification
By examining a case of adaptation, I identified three added strategies (i.e., indifference &
nativization, nativization & integration, and integration & absorption) for modifications to
accommodate South Korea’s sociocultural needs in KDC’s adaptation of DDC. Generally, I
could observe two types of sociocultural influences in adaptation: prominent influences and
subtle influences.
Concepts or social systems only used in one culture indicate prominent sociocultural
influences. Prominent influences are represented by establishing new concepts for existing class
numbers or classification system features, such as hierarchical locations or captions that
manipulate the representation of the concept that DDC and KDC share. For example, sections for
Korean medicine are represented in KDC’s adaptation of DDC through the addition of a newly
added concept. Technically, the DDC may represent Korean medicine using tables for
geography. KDC, however, has a separate section for Korean medicine in the medical science
division. This case shows the differences in concepts represented by class numbers that result
from sociocultural influences.
Although the law division in both systems seems to be classified similarly as one of the
divisions for the social sciences, patterns of sections and narrower categories appear differently
in order to organize the different legal systems of South Korea and United States. Basically,
concepts addressed in the law divisions from the two systems overlap in scope, but in most cases
the shared concepts are located differently, implying distinctive sociocultural influences within

135

each classification system. As examples, commercial law is represented as section 366 in KDC,
while in DDC commercial law is a narrower category of a section of private law (346).
Moreover, concepts covered in a section for foreign law (369) in KDC are in section 341, the
narrower category of laws of nations, in DDC. Likewise, administrative law, a section of KDC
363, is represented in DDC as part of section 342, constitutional and administrative law. Those
subjects—Korean medicine, and law—demonstrate how the degree to which sociocultural
influences affect classification. They mostly appear in the nativization strategy in the taxonomy
of adaptation.
Other cases generally exhibit subtle sociocultural influences in two ways, either in
viewpoint or in scope of the concept shared or used commonly in both cultures. In the case of
concepts that demonstrate different viewpoints—broader categories, such as general
management, insurance, agricultural economics, and construction and architecture—are not
matched even though most of their narrower categories are matched.
DDC represents general management as a division in the class of technology, while KDC
includes it as a section under the division of economics. Although in both KDC and DDC general
management concepts share many similarities, DDC emphasizes the technological dimension of
general management, whereas KDC categorizes it as a narrower category of economics,
demonstrating two different perspectives on the subject. The concept of management in terms of
managing resources appears across disciplines in DDC, but general management as a field of
study is classified under technology rather than economics. In the case of insurance, KDC
includes the concept in financial assets, making it one of KDC’s narrower economics categories.
However, DDC includes insurance partly in the law division and partly under social welfare
systems in the division of social problems and social services, whereas KDC has no class
136

numbers representing insurance in the division of social problems and social services. Although
Korean medical insurance is included in social services, insurance is classified under financial
assets in the classification. The representations of agricultural economics in KDC and DDC also
demonstrate locational and hierarchical differences. DDC locates agricultural economics under
natural resources in the division of economics, while KDC locates it in the division of agriculture
under the technology class. This may be because agricultural economics is interdisciplinary and
the two systems classify the concept using different approaches. Because KDC prioritizes user
convenience, the concept of agricultural economics is in the division of agriculture, making it
easier for users to browse, just as in construction and architecture.
Along with locational differences resulting from different viewpoints, the scopes of the
two systems differ particularly regarding the narrower categories for the matched concepts in
both systems. Consider education policy and administration and a section on child rearing. The
educational policy addressed by KDC 371 (policy and administration of education) shares some
narrower categories with DDC 379 (public policy issues in education), but the specific subjects
classified under the two concepts are different. DDC, as the caption indicates, addresses more
controversial policy issues such as “specific elements of support and control of public
education,” "specific policy issues in public education,” and “public policy issues in private
education” in comparison with KDC, which lists subjects of policy according to the education
system such as “permit to establish education institutions, scholarship, voucher, and budget.”
Moreover, some concepts in KDC sections 371 (policy and administration of education), 372
(school administration and management), and 373 (methods of teaching) are covered in DDC
371 (school and their activities; special education). Thus, although the education divisions of
KDC and DDC share similar concepts, the scopes of the sections for those concepts differ.
137

Technology divisions DDC 640 (home and family management) and KDC 590 (human
ecology) share concepts relating to technology for daily life. Both divisions have a section for
child rearing; however, the former, but not the latter, includes home care of people with
disabilities and illness in section 649, the caption of which indicates that the section addresses
those two subjects equally: child rearing, and home care of people with disabilities and illnesses.
Such differences in the scopes of DDC and KDC sections do not mean that the concept appearing
in a section in the DDC but missing in a corresponding section in the KDC cannot be represented
at all in the KDC. Both the DDC and the KDC allow for expansion of class numbers thanks to
decimal classifications features such as tables and auxiliary numbers. However, I only address
differences in scope regarding classification units (class, division, and section) based on the class
numbers already enumerated in the schedules of both systems. In general, the class numbers
listed in the schedules are maintained because of the needs and demands of literary warrant,
despite regular modifications such as removal or addition of or changes to class numbers. The
differences in location or scope carry indirect sociocultural influences, and those cases mainly
are coded as nativization and integration according to the taxonomy of adaptation.

6.2. Development of intercultural warrant
This study is an exemplary case, focusing on the KDC, for examining sociocultural
influences in a cross-cultural environment where plural cultures or perspectives interact within
the KOS. For such a KOS to be ethical, proper treatments of multiple cultures require an
understanding of the interplay of those sociocultural influences within the KOS. Thus,
developing the notion of intercultural warrant would contribute to an operationalization of
cultural warrant for more effective system design.

138

6.2.1. Cultures and ethics for KOS
Star et al. (1998) suggested ethical concerns as consequences of sorting that are more
likely to be fundamental challenges for KOS. In practice, those ethical concerns can result from
any exercises of classificatory activities using symbols and systems, according to Adler and
Tennis (2013). With respect to cultures, ethical concerns are significant.
Beghtol (2002) was the first to propose ethical treatments of KOSs in consideration of
cultural warrant, the recognition of which within the KOS leads to realization and
acknowledgement of multiple cultural views. Beyond recognizing pluralistic perspectives in
organizing knowledge, an ethically-minded approach emerges for taking actions to prevent one
view from suppressing another. A KOS usually comes from one cultural perspective. However,
in an environment involving multiple cultural perspectives, focusing on the dominant culture and
disregarding the others in representing knowledge will lead to a harmful KOS, which raises
ethical concerns.
6.2.2. Practical approaches to culture and ethics of KOS
Beghtol’s cultural hospitality is a useful concept in the design of KOSs that recommends
appropriate treatment of multiple cultures. Although her presumption that an ideal KOS could be
constructed that is suitable for all users is more likely to exist in theory than in practice, her
suggestion for sharing universal concepts and making space for cultural variety/diversity is
meaningful for practical construction of KOSs.
Likewise, in discussing information ethics across cultures, Hongladarom (2016)
mentioned universalism and relativism, an old framework that is still useful for looking at
cultural differences. He takes a rather pragmatic approach in defining information ethics (i.e.,

139

value systems). Although he does not aim for an ideal system for all users, his practical guidance
aligns with Beghtol’s cultural hospitality in that it is universal for commonalities and relativistic
for differences.
6.2.3. Cross-cultural classifications: translation and adaptation
Based on this understanding of KO ethics and its relationship with multiple cultures, I
will discuss two approaches to ensuring that a KOS is ethical and accommodates diverse
cultures: translation of the DDC and adaptation of the DDC.
How does the system incorporate multiple cultures in the cross-cultural uses of KOS?
What are the requirements for each case? Cultures, especially those recognized within one unit
such as a nation, can be incorporated for cross-cultural use of KOS. The first approach is to have
a globally useful predominant system that accommodates multiple cultures, and the second is a
system (within the influences of Western scientific disciplines) that has adapted the dominant
system to become locally useful. Both call for intercultural survey of national cultures and the
classification systems that embed them.
In the case of the translated DDC, the new scheme includes identical DDC class numbers
with identical scopes and structures so that the numbers can communicate across linguistic
boundaries. The DDC and the translated DDC are expandable to accommodate diverse social and
cultural characteristics by respecting vernacular contents based on literary warrant (Beall 2003).
Translation enables supplementation of the DDC for the need of diverse cultures. However, the
accommodation of diverse social and cultural characteristics is still heavily based on the DDC’s
existing structures. Adaptation of the DDC, however, does not change either the DDC or the

140

adapter system. Because the DDC does not share the same numeric representations, the system is
built and modified radically based on the adapter’s local needs.

Figure 6-1 A system (mostly dominantly used) to be globally useful – accommodating multiple cultural warrants

In Figures 5-1 and 5-2, the square represents a system and a circle represents a culture. In
the DDC’s case, the system is warranted by the American culture. To have the translated DDC
and to expand the DDC in accommodating vernacular contents found from the translations, a

141

survey of both cultures, the original culture that warrants the DDC and the culture of the adopter
is necessary.

Figure 6-2 A system (within the influences of Western scientific disciplines) to be locally useful – adaptation of the
dominant system

Likewise, the system adopting and/or adapting the original system requires a survey of
both cultures to meet local needs as well as to borrow concepts and structures long validated in
the scientific domains from the original system. In any case, the new system always incorporates
two distinct cultures. Thus, the newly introduced concept of “intercultural warrant” is suggested
as an operational framework to the survey of dynamics of distinct cultures and is necessary for
ethical classification in the current system.
6.2.4. Values of intercultural warrant
Warrant is the grounds on which the KOS is built. For example, literary warrant refers to
the literature on which the KOS is based, and users’ behaviors or perceptions are grounds for the
KOS in user warrant. The broader scopes of warrant can be cultural and ethical: the KOS is
based on sociocultural contexts and guidelines or activities regarding ethical concerns. Thus,
142

intercultural warrant describes the principle that requires the KOS to be based on the dynamics
of cross-cultural considerations.
A study of cross-cultural dynamics such as the case involving the KDC would validate
this notion of intercultural warrant. To understand multiple cultures and their dynamics in a
KOS, it is useful to discuss documentation of intercultural warrant. The documentation includes
tracking which changes were derived from either conflicts or harmonization and what
classificatory features were strategically used for the changes made. The tracking of changes and
updates derived from the cross-cultural dynamics not only verifies the values of the KOS in a
certain sociocultural context but also qualifies the KOS as meaningful data for study of diverse
sociocultural perspectives. In addition, the notion of intercultural warrant and the documentation
would contribute to defining a relationship between KOSs. Networked Knowledge Organization
Systems (NKOS) is a group of researchers and developers who are working toward KOSs such
as classification systems, thesauri, gazetteers, and ontologies as networked interactive
information services to support the description and retrieval of diverse information resources.
The NKOS has developed vocabularies for describing KOSs and the relationships between
KOSs. However, there is no relationship such as “adaptation of” indicating the case of one
KOS’s adaptation of the KOS. The relationship “adaptation of” can be found in Family of Works
as one of the derivative relations between works (Figure 5-3). This derivative relationship,
“adaptation of,” can be applied to the family of KOSs as well. The current vocabulary describing
the relationships among KOSs includes a similar relationship to the derivative: “is based on”
(Table 5-8). The newly proposed relationship “is adaptation of,” as one of the types for “is based
on” relationships, describes a type of interaction between KOSs which has not previously been
articulated. Along with other types of “is based on” relationships such as “is translation of,” “is
143

extension of,” or “is version of,” the addition of this specific type of relationship “is adaptation
of” will expand understanding of interactive KOSs, especially those in cross-cultural
environments and in which multiple cultures warrant interplay (Table 5-8).

Figure 6-3 Family of Works (Tillett & Kuhagen 2011). Library of Congress RDA Workshop for Georgia Cataloging
Summit
based-on:
is based on
is basis for
.translation
of
.abridgment
of

.extension of

.version of

A is based on B.

nkos:isBasedOn

B is basis for A.
A is translation of
B.
B has translation A.
A is abridgment of
B.
B has abridgment
A.
A is extension of B.

nkos:isBasisFor
nkos:isTranslationO
f
adms:translation
nkos:isAbridgment
Of
nkos:hasAbridgmen
t
nkos:isExtensionOf

B has extension A.
A is version of B.
B has version A.

nkos:hasExtention
dct:isVersionOf
dct:hasVersion

A
Canadian Subject
Headings (CSH)

B
Library of Congress
Classification(LCSH)

DeweyDezimalklassifikation 22

DDC 22

DDC Abridged Edition 15

DDC 23

A localized version
of NLM Classification

NLM Classification

DDC 23

DDC

Table 6-8 NKOS Vocabularies
(https://github.com/dcmi/repository/blob/master/mediawiki_wiki/NKOS_Vocabularies.md#KOS_Types_Vocabulary)

144

6.3. Conclusion
The interpretations of the comparison discussed in this chapter disclose some noticeable
differences in structures and distributions of class numbers in the main classes of KDC and DDC.
The two classifications have been developed in different historical and sociocultural contexts, so
that the major principles of organizing knowledge through the systems inevitably also show
somewhat different viewpoints on how the systems should be constructed and what their major
purposes are. In a broader sense, the different approaches and viewpoints on organizing
knowledge are also considered as related to cultural warrant. The study’s investigation of
multiple sociocultural influences or perspectives in the adaptation of the DDC into the KDC
proposes the development of a notion of intercultural warrant. It has theoretical and practical
implications as a KO study in filling a gap between cultural warrant and ethical warrant.

145

Chapter 7 Conclusion
7.1. Summary of the study
Knowledge organization systems (KOSs), including library classification, represent
knowledge in ways that reflect how people understand knowledge as it is shaped by social and
cultural factors. Based on this understanding of KOSs, I investigated a cross-cultural adaptation
of library classification. Since American library science was a leader in the early development of
library classifications, many libraries in other countries subsequently based their own national
library classifications upon American library classification schemes. South Korea was one such
case. Under American influence following the Korean War, South Korea adapted Dewey
Decimal Classification (DDC), directly adopting its basic rules, principles, and parts of the
original DDC schedules. But, unlike the German or French translation of Dewey Decimal
Classification schemes, which share DDC’s schedules with translated captions, Korean Decimal
Classification (KDC) developed its own schedules of class numbers for many of its subjects in
order to meet the needs of South Korean society. As a result of this adaptation, KDC both has
similarities to and also differs from DDC. For this reason, it was an ideal choice for a study on
the ways in which social and cultural contexts influence the adaptation of KOSs cross-culturally,
and it is the focus of this study.
This study was conducted to investigate the adaptation of bibliographic classifications in
examining the influences of sociocultural differences through the case of KDC’s adaptation of
DDC. Chapter 2 reviewed related literature regarding sociocultural contexts in KO. Through the
review, it also discussed the need for studies recognizing multiplicity in epistemologies and
addressing this diversity. Consideration of comparative approaches also led to the study’s
methodological approach, which seeks to explore the differences in knowledge representation in

146

various cultures and applications of established KO frames in different sociocultural contexts.
The final section of Chapter 2 described the background and developmental history of KDC’s
adaptation of DDC.
Chapter 3 detailed the process by which a methodological plan was developed for
conducting comparative research on the cross-cultural adaptation of classification. The study was
specifically designed to apply sequential explorative mixed methods. Phase 1 was a quantitative
analysis itemizing and visualizing the differences between KDC 4, 5, and 6 and DDC 20, 22, and
23, specifically in terms of class numbers and classificatory structures. For the qualitative
analysis of Phase 2, Berry’s (1997) acculturation model of intercultural communication was
adopted as the basis for developing a taxonomy of cross-cultural classification adaptation as a
coding scheme. The taxonomy of adaptation explains similarities and differences between the
two classifications progressively within a fourfold frame: indifference, nativization, absorption,
and integration. Application of the taxonomy of adaptation as an initial coding scheme led to the
second coding scheme to capture the major comparable classificatory variables in semantic
contents and structural arrangement—observability of the adaptation.
Chapter 4 reported the major findings from the first phase of the comparison. Phase 1
included a focus on three main differences between the classifications in (a) range of changes
across editions, (b) distribution of class numbers at the main class level, and (c) distribution of
class numbers at the division and section levels. DDC exhibits greater variations in the quantities
of class numbers among the recent three editions than KDC’s three recent editions. Secondly, the
differences in the distributions of class numbers at the main class level tend to be consistent
across recent editions of both. Comparing the compositional percentages of DDC 20, 22, and 23
with their counterparts of KDC 4, 5, and 6 at main class level reveals the main classes with the

147

most noticeable differences. The two main classes presenting the most differences between DDC
and KDC are the social sciences and technology. Then, two main classes of DDC and KDC were
compared to see how the divisions are distributed across the main classes. Chapter 6 discussed
the interpretation of the differences in the structure and size of main classes.
In Chapter 5, the first coding with the taxonomy of adaptation in Phase 2 clarified the
scope of each category in interpretation of the coded examples. The adaptation taxonomy has
four categories representing different strategies in the adaptation of an original classification to
an adapter system. The second coding scheme, developed from the observed patterns of major
comparable classificatory variables in semantic contents and structural arrangement, was applied
to analyze cross-cultural adaptation of bibliographic classification. This analysis revealed
patterns of variables of semantic contents and structural arrangement in relation to adaptive
strategies in the taxonomy of adaptation.
a) Semantic contents: For the classification captions of KDC and DDC in both the social
sciences and technology, the codes of unmatched captions were the most common,
and those cases mostly appeared in indifference and nativization adaptation strategies.
In addition, in technology, different viewpoints in captions emerged more commonly
in the adopted concepts from DDC. The codes that more subordinate numbers are
listed under DDC number are the most common in the social sciences and cooccurred with the absorption strategy. In the case of technology, there were no
noticeable differences for quantity of subordinate numbers in comparison of DDC
and KDC.
b) Structural arrangement: Among three types of matching for rank, exact match were
the most commonly coded cases in the social sciences. This pattern was found in

148

technology as well. However, there are no noticeable relations found between rank
and adaptive taxonomy. When the broader categories were matched, absorption and
integration strategies took most parts of the cases while indifference and nativization
occurred for most parts of unmatched broader categories. Both the social sciences and
technology show these patterns.
Chapter 6 further addressed the study’s main research question, “How does KDC adapt
DDC in terms of underlying sociocultural perspectives in a classificatory form?” Interpretations
of the results from Phase 1 and Phase 2 answered the research question. In Phase 1, I analyzed
differences in quantities of class numbers in two aspects: structure and size. The structure of
main classes and divisions was different, especially regarding South Korea’s efforts to localize
the structure to meet users’ needs. Also, the main classes with differences in size also differ in
specificity and topical coverage. DDC has more class numbers in the social sciences in the
divisions of social problems, education, law, and political science, which show more specificities
in topics, whereas KDC exhibits higher specificities in engineering-related divisions in
technology.
Interpretations of the patterns revealed in Phase 2 address application of standard
subdivisions, the taxonomy of adaptation, and the observability of adaptation. First, the KDC’s
adoption of the standard subdivisions inherited from DDC also can be viewed as KDC’s
adaptation of the standard subdivisions, unified across all the main classes, unlike DDC, whose
first division is more specific to the subject areas. Second, the application of the fourfold
taxonomy of adaptation in Phase 2 also led to a discovery of the complexity in strategic choices
for the cross-cultural adaptation of the bibliographic classification. Most cases of comparison fall
between two strategies because of the granularity in the interplay between the Korean-specific

149

concepts and those from DDC. Lastly, in Phase 2, two major categories for classificatory
characteristics were discovered by the comparison of classification systems in a bottom-up
approach: semantic contents and structural arrangement. Moreover, the variables for semantic
contents and structural arrangement in the observability of adaptation complement the existing
comparative criteria from Kwasnik and Chun’s (2004) study of KDC and DDC and ISO 5964
(ISO 1985)’s degrees of interlanguage equivalence.
In this study, the taxonomy of adaptation was applied to reveal adaptive strategies
regarding sociocultural influences in the comparison of KDC and DDC with two selected main
classes, the social sciences and technology. The examination of the two selected main classes
discloses differences in sociocultural influences by discipline. The social sciences class has more
numbers coded for nativization than for absorption, while technology has more numbers coded
for absorption than for nativization. These examples suggest that the social sciences, as a
discipline, is more influenced by sociocultural differences.
Regarding sociocultural influences in cross-cultural adaptation of classification, all
observed cases seemed to be of two types: prominent influences and subtle influences. The
prominent involve concepts that are unique to one of the two cultures, such as the Korean
medical and legal systems. Those examples—Korean medicine and law—demonstrated how
prominent sociocultural differences affect cross-cultural adaptation of the classification.
Furthermore, given that they mostly appear in the nativization strategy, the prominent
sociocultural influences led to adaptation affected by indigenization forces. There are also more
subtle influences such as DDC’s placement of general management in its main technology class
but KDC’s placement of general management in economics within the main social sciences class.

150

The differences in location or scope carry subtle sociocultural influences, and those cases mainly
are coded as the in-between strategy of nativization and integration.
The ethics of KOS in cross-cultural environments would require proper treatments of
multiple cultures. To understand multiple cultures and their dynamics in a KOS will maintain an
ethical KOS. The patterns discussed above, of sociocultural influences in cross-cultural
adaptation of a classification scheme, offer a path to the development of a notion of intercultural
warrant: the principles of KOS in cross-cultural environments requires an understanding of
interplaying social influences in classificatory features.

7.2. Limitations and Future studies
As an exploratory qualitative study, an in-depth analysis of a purposefully selected case
of cross-cultural adaptation of classification was conducted. The scope of its data was limited to
the class numbers and captions of the two comparable classification systems. There are extensive
organizing devices in the decimal classifications, meaning that multiple interpretations and
analyses are possible, given resources and classificatory devices other than the schedules of class
numbers.
A variety of data types leads to methodological variety. However, the current study is
unidimensional because the comparison was to carry out a phenomenological examination to the
differences appearing in a cross-cultural adaptation of the classification scheme. For a
multidimensional study of KDC’s adaptation of DDC, it would be necessary to collect external
resources related to both systems and use multiple methods to analyze them, such as a document
analysis or interviews with system editors. This section discusses limitations of the study and
some external resources that might be useful for future studies.

151

I focused on KDC’s adaptation of DDC, and discovered enormous sociocultural
influences in the adaptation. However, it seems unavoidable that KDC and DDC will be
compared with Nippon Decimal Classification (NDC), particularly because influences of NDC
were discovered in culturally relevant concepts. Because NDC also adopted major principles of
DDC, the taxonomy of the adaptation developed in this study revealed the interrelations between
these three systems: KDC and NDC, NDC and DDC, and DDC and KDC. The study of the
interplay of two or more cultural warrants in a KOS would thus be valuable as an extended case
of intercultural warrant in future research.
I compared the meanings and relationships of concepts that were listed in the schedules
of DDC and KDC at the section level and above. Such a study has at least two limitations. First,
classifiers may interpret concepts, including those identified as the same in the comparison,
differently according to their cultural perceptions and practices. Second, concepts represented by
class numbers at levels lower than section and concepts requiring number building are not
considered in the current study. Thus, some of the refined concepts can be differences between
two systems, which might be covered by the practices of subject cataloging. To obtain subject
cataloging practices in the use of DDC and KDC, a future study could be designed to examine
actual library collections from South Korea and America, addressing how books on the same
subject have been classified. Such instances would show cases of either a shared understanding
or a partially shared understanding of subject and terms. Also, interviews with the classifiers
putting these systems into practice could also uncover how they understand and use class
numbers in assigning them to bibliographic products, which could complement collections
relevant to the two systems.

152

Additionally, data types other than class numbers and captions will enable additional
interpretation and comparisons, as discussed earlier. Potential data types of the bibliographic
classifications are described below.
Relative Index – A relative index would provide information about multiple instances of
a shared concept and related concepts beyond the selected main classes. In this way, the
inclusion of a relative index as a secondary data source might find cases of the same topic in
different locations.
The editorial boards – A document analysis of data, as mentioned above, could examine
the results of the adaptation, but one limitation is that it could not identify the participants’
intention in the creation, design, or revision of the systems. Melvil Dewey’s thoughts on the
studies of DDC, as well as those on the agendas of the editorial boards for subsequent editions,
have been documented; it appears comparatively straightforward to track historical changes over
the editions in their chronological order. Nevertheless, documentation of the editorial activities in
studies of KDC have often not been to the same extent. Access to documents containing editorial
agendas is another factor, because they are not available to the public. Regarding KDC’s
relatively short history of only six editions, a researcher might be able to interview the previous
editors or editorial board members, especially of the more recent editions. Combined with
documents written by previous editors or editorial boards, interviews with these key figures
would enable an examination of the sociocultural complexities of the adaptations as well as the
editors’ interpretations of their consequences. Thus, interviews could either validate or modify
the adaptation process and identify sociocultural influences such as those examined in this study.
Chapter 6 introduced the notion of intercultural warrant as an actionable approach when
the researcher also bridged cultural warrant with ethical warrant. To examine whether the

153

documented intercultural warrant of the current study aids the KOS in its actual ethical practices,
ethnographic observations of and direct interviews with the editorial board of KDC would be
useful. In turn, such contacts with editorial board members could enhance awareness of ethical
choices of classification activities, which could be determined by examining the
intentional/unintentional or conscious/unconscious ethical choices made when two different
cultural warrants conflict.
I proposed the taxonomy and observability of adaptation to examine the cross-cultural
adaptation of bibliographic classifications. Although they contribute to studies on interplays of
cross-cultural views in the classifications across cultures as well as their documentation, the
validity of the taxonomy and observability of adaptation need to be affirmed by applying them to
multiple cases of cross-cultural adaptation of KOS. In this study, there were some relations found
between adaptation strategies by the taxonomy of adaptation and classificatory features by the
observability of adaptation but we couldn’t answer how and why those patterns of relations
appeared clearly. Future studies of multiple cases of the cross-cultural adaptation and utilization
of the discussed external data are expected to address the complex relationships between two
frames revealed in this study, the taxonomy of adaptation and the observability of adaptation.

7.3. Concluding remarks
Knowledge organization systems, such as library classifications or thesauri, are often
shared and adapted across cultures. When systems are adapted, some parts of the original scheme
may stay intact and others may be modified in light of cultural differences. Comparing two
classification systems provided a more systemic illustration of how sociocultural influences
emerge in classificatory structures.

154

Two frameworks developed in this study—taxonomy of adaptation and observability of
adaptation—suggest the development of intercultural warrant as a theoretical view to understand
the KOSs shared and used worldwide. Along with the theoretical implication of this study, the
developed frameworks would serve as both designing principles and an evaluation tools for
cross-cultural classification systems in practice. In designing or planning the cross-cultural
adaptation, the frameworks would answer questions such as:




What are major sociocultural differences requiring changes when adapting the
classification scheme?
What adaptive strategies would be the most appropriate for examined sociocultural
differences?
What classificatory variables—the observability of adaptation would be needed to
implement a certain adaptive strategy?

On the other hand, when evaluating an existing classification system shared or used crossculturally, the frameworks would also answer questions such as:





Are existing classificatory variables suitable to accommodate sociocultural differences?
Does a certain sociocultural difference appear prominent or subtle? What classificatory
variables would need to be altered to reflect either prominent or subtle sociocultural
influences?
Is the adaptive strategy a right choice? Would it be justified regarding cultural warrant of
the classification scheme?

The aim of conducting this cross-cultural comparative study is to understand the dynamics of
the diverse cultures of classification systems. That is beyond the scope of a study of
classification based on (or warranted by) a society or a culture because the KOS becomes more
international and cross-cultural. Understanding the dynamics and finding a model to explain
them could uncover sociocultural influences on classification, thereby improving the ethics of
classification by treating plural perspectives properly.