PROFESSIONAL ROLES OF LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS:
PERSPECTIVES OF ADMINISTRATORS AND LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS
By
Lisa S. Stevenson

Abstract
PROFESSIONAL ROLES OF LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS:
PERSPECTIVES OF ADMINISTRATORS AND LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS
By
Lisa S. Stevenson
The importance of this study was to improve the overall learning communities in
schools by determining the professional role perceptions of library media specialists, and
the sources that developed these perceptions, based on viewpoints of administrators and
library media specialists. By identifying the causes that created perceptions, areas were
examined to improve the media center services. The research design was a concurrent,
qualitative approach using a methodological triangulation of data collection with
questionnaire, interview, and observation instruments that provided thematic analysis.
The themes of instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time
were recurring throughout the participants’ responses. The groups acknowledged that the
current use of library media specialists was in the best interest of student learning and
teacher support, therefore the professional roles of teacher, information specialist, and
instructional partner were the most significant. The responsibilities of program
administrator and leader were supplemental to the other tasks. The information gathered
provided knowledge that administrators and library media specialists could use to build
dialogue, producing a common understanding about professional role practices.
Administrators and library media specialists could evaluate their viewpoints; reflect on
the causes developing these perspectives, and make changes in the use of the library
position to better support student and school performance.
Keywords: administrators, professional roles, perceptions, media specialists

Chapter 1 – Introduction
The priority in public education today is to prepare students with the academic
skills to be successful by developing them into life-long learners who are college- and
career-ready (Maryland Department of Education, 2010a). College- and career-ready
students graduate to become contributing members of society by thinking critically,
making informed decisions, sharing knowledge, and continuing to learn (American
Association of School Librarians, 2007). Since school library media specialists work with
every grade level and content area, they hold an important position to influence
instructional and cultural changes needed to accomplish this task (Loertscher & Lewis,
2013). A school library media specialist is an educator with a library science certification
whose professional roles and responsibilities include information specialist, instructional
partner, leader, program administrator, and teacher (American Association of School
Librarians, 1998a).
These professional roles and responsibilities are carried out in the library media
center, an area in the school where resources are available and instruction is delivered by
the school library media specialist. The overall mission of a functioning media center
managed by a school library media specialist is to provide students with access to current
resources, developing them into knowledgeable media consumers. The school
administration and library media specialist who have a common understanding about the
professional responsibilities performed in the media center can effectively make changes
that positively affect student progress. Discovering the perceptions of the professional
roles of school library media specialists, from both the school administration and library
media specialists themselves, are personally and professionally significant to me and
relevant to the focus of this investigation.
1

My Background and Topic Selection
The perspectives on the practices of school library media specialists and a
comparison of these perceptions among these educators, and to their daily practices are
relevant to my professional position and concerns within my educational region. I work
in a small, rural county overseeing multiple administrative areas. Currently, I am the
supervisor of school library media services and an elementary assistant principal. As a
researcher, I investigated the perspectives of library media specialists to uncover their
values, beliefs, and attitudes toward the professional responsibilities they were directed to
perform by the school administration. As part of my supervisor responsibilities, I
advocate for school library media specialists and their valuable contributions to the
school culture in order to maintain these educational positions. As a researcher, I
investigated the perspectives of school administrators to uncover the values, beliefs, and
attitudes that influenced their decisions to place the library media personnel in specific
roles. As part of my assistant principal responsibilities, I work with administrators and
recognize that the tasks they assign to library media specialists benefit the school.
Obtaining the viewpoints of administrators and school library media specialists
leads to establishing a common understanding about the library media personnel and
identifying the necessary professional roles practiced by these personnel that affect
student success. I will present the results of this research to the superintendent, Board of
Education members, school administrators, and library media specialists to actively
promote essential partnerships among these educators. This investigation contributes to
the existing research regarding school library media personnel in the educational
environment. With my unique administrative responsibilities, I am in a position to use
this knowledge to improve personnel practices that lead to students being college- and
2

career-ready.
Due to budget constraints, there have been changes at the secondary level in my
district, impacting school library media specialist positions, which revealed conflicting
viewpoints from administrators regarding the value of this position. My concern was that
the same development would occur at the elementary level. The knowledge I had
acquired from my experiences in both of these positions made me uniquely qualified to
explore this situation. Many elementary administrators and school library media
specialists inquired about my dissertation topic. Their reactions were supportive and they
volunteered to be participants due to the fear of losing personnel in their school and not
having an educational expert to manage resources and instruct research skills. These
educators recognized that this research was crucial to their school performance.
Traditional Professional Roles of School Library Media Specialists
In the traditional view, a school library media specialist is one who is placed in
the media center with the responsibility of selecting and purchasing materials, organizing
shelves, and circulating resources (Fisher & Schroeder, 2015). These are the professional
responsibilities of a program administrator and information specialist, still practiced in
my district, and they are the foundation of current professional roles and responsibilities.
School library media specialists are located in a school and deliver services to faculty and
students. They communicate with other school personnel to inquire about materials
needed to support instruction. School library media specialists are responsible for
maintaining the collection and circulating library resources, overseeing the entire
management of the media center. Through a review system, they select resources that are
appropriate and meet the requirements of all content areas. These are the customary
practices that are still necessary in today’s schools but are not enough to meet college3

and career-ready expectations.
21st Century Professional Roles of School Library Media Specialists
Along with being a program administrator and information specialist in the
traditional image, a contemporary school library media specialist is also a leader,
instructional partner, and teacher (Ballard, 2009). The school library media specialist
demonstrates visible leadership by being active in achieving the school’s mission and
being knowledgeable about implementing the College- and Career-Ready Standards
(Scholastic, 2016). The College- and Career-Ready Standards are identified national
criteria that high school students must meet to be prepared for college expectations and
career performance. The following standards are those that apply to the school library
media specialist (Loertscher & Lewis, 2013):


Advance reading comprehension by reading a variety of literature and
informational texts in order to understand different perspectives and expand
knowledge.



Advance various writing approaches through supportive evidence and to
present research projects.



Advance speaking and listening skills by evaluating and sharing information
received through interactions and media.



Advance language development through conversations, instruction, and
reading to increase vocabulary.



Advance technology use to analyze media and create awareness of authentic
and ethical practices.

As an instructional partner, the school library media specialist contributes as
much as classroom teachers in the area of instruction to meet the intellectual needs of
4

students (Scholastic, 2016), making their position essential to student success. The school
library media specialist helps develop multiple literacies, such as information, media,
visual, and technology, to empower students to become astute users of information and
contributors to society (Ballard, 2009). The most important impact for the 21st century
school library media specialist is passing on their knowledge in order for students to be
able to acquire, organize, preserve, and disseminate information (Luhtala, 2012) and
become lifelong learners. The 21st century expectations of school library media
specialists are consistently promoted in my district.
Professional Role Misconceptions
Entrance into the 21st century brought abrupt changes that directly affected the
professional roles of school library media specialists. However, Glaze (1992) and Roys
and Brown (2004) found that administrators’ expectations of school library media
specialists still reflected past practices, while school library media specialists felt the
pressure of present accountability in which their professional roles needed to evolve or
face extinction. “Lack of consensus leads to role confusion” (Person, 1993, p. 5) which
can be seen in the various interpretations of real and ideal professional roles. As
confusion about the school library media specialists’ professional roles continue to create
a discrepancy in perspectives, the current services will remain inadequate until this
position receives administrative support reflective of 21st century expectations (Nelson,
2014).
As a school-based administrator, I recognized the power to establish the school
culture by assigning responsibilities to faculty, structuring the functions of the
organization through decision-making, and setting high expectations with an open
mindset (Haycock, 2002). Administrators in my district required school library media
5

specialists to perform duties that were not recommended by national and state library
organizations such as the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) in
publications such as Information Power: Building Partnerships for Learning (1998),
Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (2009), and the
Code of Maryland: Public School Library Programs (Maryland State Department of
Education, 2000). I also understood that school library media specialists were teachers
and librarians, accountable for the same instructional responsibilities as classroom
teachers while managing a program that served the entire school community as servantleaders (Brantley, 2011). When these library professionals were assigned inappropriate
tasks, or not used as an instructional resource, students and the overall school program
were negatively affected (Church, 2008). If there is not a common understanding of the
professional roles of the school library media specialist between the administrator and the
school library media specialist, the consequential problem is continuous instability in the
services provided and less effective use of this professional (Forcht, 2011).
In past research relating to the performance of school library media specialists,
there were inconsistencies regarding expectations of practices (Berggren, 2013; DeGroff,
1997; Forcht, 2011; Francis & Lance, 2011) based on the professional roles assigned by
the administrator. Various job responsibilities in my district included tasks such as
providing professional development to peers, reviewing the resource collection for
current needs, searching for relevant resources to support learning and curricula,
integrating technology into lessons as a tool to expand and share knowledge, repairing
technology, and facilitating the website. Budgets and educational positions had decreased
in my district; therefore, additional duties were also assigned. Examples of these
responsibilities included being the gifted and talented teacher, classroom and office
6

substitute, reading and writing intervention specialist, typing instructor, testing
coordinator, school improvement chair, and the public address system announcer. These
additional assignments interfered with delivery of literacy and research instruction, which
was supposed to be the main responsibility of this educator.
Given that there are federal and state guidelines regarding the responsibilities of
the school library media specialist in the 21st century, it was unclear to me why these
guidelines were not implemented in the school environment. This was a concern to me as
an administrator and library supervisor due to accountability justifying the value of
personnel (Roys & Brown, 2004). Therefore, an investigation that strove to determine
how administrators and school library media specialists perceived the professional roles
of school library media specialists could be used to strengthen relationships, clarify
expectations, and inspire positive change.
Impact of Limited Access to School Library Media Specialists
For the past two years, my district employed fewer school library media
specialists. As a supervisor, I oversaw a high of 21 schools with full-time certified school
library media specialists to the current low of only 11 remaining at school sites. In the
eight secondary schools, there are six library assistants and one half-day library media
specialist who also instructs in foreign languages. With the five-hour work schedule and
low pay, there is constant change in the personnel hired as library assistants, leading to
inconsistency in library services. At the elementary level, there are three half-day school
library media specialists, who also serve as pre-kindergarten teachers in the lower
populated schools. I face the challenge of continuing to deliver the same quality programs
consistently at every school, which is impossible without full-time qualified personnel to
manage the media center and provide appropriate program services.
7

In my district, schools without access to certified school library media specialists
have immediate concerns that could develop into long-term problems. As library media
specialists are removed from the school environment due to budget limitations,
instruction in multiple literacies and management of resources are forced on other
educators without library science certification. When responsibilities increase, tasks are
often prioritized leading to ineffective delivery or elimination of content, limiting
students’ knowledge in the areas of research and library skills. Without an expert in this
field incorrect selection procedures are used, resulting in inadequate collections due to
resources being purchased that are not appropriate or supportive of instructional content.
Research has shown that academic assessments are lower in schools without these
personnel, severely impacting students who are considered in most need of support
(Francis & Lance, 2011). Schools can maintain a media center, but without a school
library media specialist’s expertise, there is no guidance for student learning, endangering
the students’ future success.
As students graduate from high school without multiple literacy and library skills,
they are likely to be unprepared to meet college and career expectations. This can lead to
an inability to compete with peers who have been instructed by certified school library
media specialists (Owen, 2010). Without the practical tools to operate in a library facility
and knowledge of using digital resources, college freshmen are more likely to drop out
and job responsibilities for all high school graduates become more challenging. Lack of
confidence and high stress levels, referred to as library anxiety (Foote, 2016) lead to
dropping out of college and unemployment. Without a library expert providing support
and instruction during the elementary and secondary school years, the transition to
college and careers is at risk (Boyer, 2015).
8

Relevance of Research
Previous studies conducted by Berggren (2014), Gregg (2007), McCracken
(2000), and Page (2014) explored views about the value of the school library media
specialist position, the topic of my study, yet these investigations did not address the
specifics of my research. The data collection instruments, with their state-related
references and evaluation tools, were not applicable to my district. The research questions
posed by the investigators identified particular professional roles and included details that
were specific to the district and state being examined. While none of the studies’ research
questions included factors that affected perspectives, this area was addressed in the
research conclusions. Two of these studies included both administration and school
library media specialists as participants, while the others studied only one of these
educational positions. Data regarding perspectives is personal. Questions centering on the
participants’ professional interactions involve viewpoints that are formed from prior
experiences, making them selective and individualized when applied to situations.
Since replicating a study was not an option, I created and piloted multiple
instruments that were targeted to my particular research investigation. As a past library
media specialist, I had participated in library media practices. As a school administrator, I
determine tasks to be performed by school library media specialists. As a supervisor, I
provide guidance in the district regarding the services of the library media program. As a
researcher, my educational expertise increased, enabling me to become more helpful in
the professional roles and services I carry out in the district. This study will contribute to
the educational research field by examining personnel relationships, discovering
convergent and divergent viewpoints, and advocating for the best use of professionals to
make a difference in school performance. I conducted this research as a representative of
9

educational administrators and library media specialists, comparing personal perceptions
that influenced decision-making and assignments in a school culture.
This study was unique due to my personal educational experiences and the
location in which the research took place. There has been limited research in small, rural
districts facing a budget crisis and eliminating library positions. School libraries and the
expertise of the library media specialists are crucial in these areas due to the students
having limited access to neighborhood libraries and the scarcity of resources. As the
researcher conducting the investigation, I have served in the positions of the study’s
participants and, thus, understood the information they contributed. Although this
indicates the potential for favoritism, I recognized at the outset that biases existed. I
separated my personal opinions from the investigation by maintaining detailed records,
reporting all data outcomes, acknowledging limitations, sharing the study’s progress with
my dissertation committee, and allowing participants to approve the data, results, and
conclusions prior to publication. I am also in a position to use the results to influence
necessary changes; therefore, the investigation will not be published and forgotten, but
will be presented and employed to benefit my district.
Impact at the District, State, and National Levels
Professional role misconceptions are not confined to my district but are also a
state and national issue. The Code of Maryland (COMAR) Public School Library
Programs (2000a) is an administrative policy issued by state agencies that identifies the
school library media program’s integration into the district’s instructional programs
through certified school library media personnel. The state college- and career-ready
initiative created standards that contain core school library instructional components, yet
the COMAR policy does not mandate hiring of these certified personnel. The policy
10

provides a framework with which districts develop their own public school library
services. This policy interpretation can be affected by misperceptions and a lack of
understanding of the importance of school library media specialists. Therefore, the
professional role of the library media specialist varies with regard to the school level,
services, instruction, and administrative expectations. With the emphasis on research,
technology, and inquiry learning, school library media specialists are needed in my
district in order to support the College- and Career-Ready Standards. School library
media specialists’ positions are at risk of being eliminated at a time when these personnel
could impact students’ learning, providing them with skills necessary for future education
and careers (Zmuda & Harada, 2008).
Decision-making dynamics omit school library media representation and lead to
resource misallocation, inconsistent procedures, and authoritative conflicts. The
Maryland evaluation guidelines do not categorize school library media specialists as
teachers (Maryland State Department of Education, 2012). Based on these guidelines,
districts’ Human Resource offices place school library media specialists in a noninstructional category due to their not being a “teacher of record,” devaluing their
education, expertise, and influence on student achievement. Along with other Maryland
library media supervisors, I worked with a team of school library media specialists to
develop an evaluation system for these personnel. With various evaluation methods being
implemented throughout the state, varying expectations of this professional continue to
be formed. Therefore, when districts face a budgetary shortfall, it is often addressed by
eliminating school library positions due to their categorization at the state and county
levels; this leads to a negative impact on learning (Loertscher, 2012). With the national
emphasis on accountability, rigorous academic expectations, and measurement through
11

state and national assessments, school success cannot be accomplished without a strong
instructor knowledgeable in the area of library science (Loertscher & Lewis, 2013).
Statement of the Problem
Researching this topic uncovered the perceptions of elementary school library
media specialists and administrators regarding the professional roles carried out by
school library media specialists. In the elementary school, there exists a
misunderstanding about which professional roles are appropriate to assign to these
personnel (Person, 1993). School library media specialists have limited authority and are
often restricted from using their expertise gained in the library media field (Lau, 2002a).
It is detrimental to have a vague concept of the professional roles of school library media
specialists in the school environment because it leads to inequity of supervision (Person,
1993), which results in questioning the necessity of the position (Cooper and Bray, 2011).
Research needs to continue and the results need to be applied in order to clear up
misperceptions causing the elimination of a vital educational position.
Previous studies (Church, 2007; Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Kaplan, 2006), provided
evidence that a difference of opinion remained between the administrators and school
library media specialists concerning the most valuable professional roles to be fulfilled.
These studies revealed that administrators were supportive of the AASL’s five
professional roles of leader, teacher, information specialist, program administrator, and
instructional partner but disagreed on which professional roles were the most important,
which was reflected in their task assignments. When there are conflicting perceptions
about the professional roles of school library media specialists, the importance of this
position is tested, as specific tasks differentiate them from their educational peers (Forcht,
2011). Although research has shown that school library media specialists elevate student
12

achievement (Hartzell, 2002a), most principals are unaware of the expertise of these
personnel, having minimal administrative training on the proper use of this position. A
study that examines the perceptions of the professional roles carried out by the school
library media specialist could professionally establish a common understanding.
Information Power: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (AASL,
1988) indicated the significance of principal and school library media specialist
collaboration. A subsequent publication, Information Power: Building Partnerships for
Learning (AASL, 1998), described the school library media specialist professional roles
in the school environment as teacher, instructional partner, information specialist, and
program administrator (AASL, 1998). The professional roles were then extended to
include leadership in Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media
Programs (AASL, 2009a). I have used these materials for professional development of
school library media specialists to clarify professional role expectations. Although the
publications are available, they are not familiar to aspiring administrators (Kaplan, 2006),
who become the authority determining how the school library media specialist is used in
the school setting. The educational theorists Hoy and Miskel (2013) examined
organizations and found that honest dialogue about performance expectations increased
the achievement of goals. Administrators and school library media specialists share
common career responsibilities (Gregg, 2007; Harvey, 2008a; Krueger, 2015; Wong,
2014) centering on curriculum, finance, policy, and services, resulting in busy schedules
that leave no time to engage in discussions that might lead to changing mental models
that influence perceptions (Senge, 2006).
School administrators assign tasks to be performed by the school library media
specialist, and then disagreement occurs as the tasks are often not related to student
13

learning, teacher support, or library management (McCracken, 2000). This disagreement
is due to administrators assigning tasks that are not supportive of the recognized
instructional standards (AASL, 2007; Maryland Department of Education 2000b, 2010a)
and curriculum (Maryland State Department of Education, 2010b). The AASL developed
21st century student learning standards in the library science field, based on the belief that
school libraries are necessary for developing life-long learning skills (AASL, 2007). The
standards are listed below (AASL, 2007, p. 14):


Standard 1 – Inquire, think critically, and gain knowledge.



Standard 2 – Draw conclusions, make informed decisions, apply knowledge to
new situations, and create new knowledge.



Standard 3 – Share knowledge and participate ethically and productively as
members of a democratic society.



Standard 4 – Pursue personal and aesthetic growth.

These instructional standards have been established by professional organizations and
educators, requiring a change in past practice and a reason for school library media
specialists and administrators to reassess the professional roles and services delivered in
the school library media center (Loertscher & Lewis, 2013). School library media
specialists’ role ambiguity could be eliminated. These standards indicate specific
performance tasks evident in highly effective school library media programs that promote
student achievement. The research of Francis and Lance (2011) concluded that
administrators and school library media specialists need to work together to establish the
responsibilities of this educational position, eliminating the inconsistency of library
media services among schools.
For these reasons, it was imperative that I gather information from administrators
14

and school library media specialists to discover and compare perceptions. The data
collected was analyzed to reveal viewpoints to determine necessary interventions related
to the professional roles of school library media specialists. According to Gary Hartzell
(2002a), over 50 years of research has been conducted on the value of the school library
media specialist position, yet more research was necessary in order for school library
media specialists to be recognized as indispensable 21st century educators.
Purpose and Rationale of the Study
This study’s purpose was to discover the perceptions of elementary administrators
and school library media specialists regarding the professional roles of school library
media specialists. I plan to utilize this research with both administrators and school
library media specialists to bring about changes in the use of these personnel to better
support student and school performance. As the school leader, the administrator has the
obligation to direct and guide the school library media specialist, while the school library
media specialist educates the administrator regarding library science matters; both
approaches benefit students and the school environment. The information gathered from
this research provides knowledge that each of these educators can use to build dialogue,
producing a common understanding of the professional roles of the school library media
specialist.
As administrators and school library media specialists share personal attitudes,
beliefs, and values about the school library media position and services, expectations can
be clarified and a more efficient and effective program can be created. Evidence has
shown that what is valued by educators in any position influences actions and behaviors
affecting the specific professional roles carried out in an organization (Katz & Kahn,
1978).
15

To alter perceptions, a change in mental models is critical. Senge (2006, p. 8)
describes mental models as “deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even
pictures or images that influence how we understand the world and how we take action.”
Dialogue using inquiry and advocacy, while sharing personal opinions, can be an
effective way that to change mental models (Senge, 2006). Changing perspectives
regarding the professional roles of school library media specialists requires both the
school library media specialist and the administrator to be active participants in
establishing mutual respect. Open communication between the school library media
specialist and the administrator remains a challenge (Levitov, 2009), but I believe I can
begin the process due to my positions in the district.
Significance of Study
The aim of my study is to improve the overall learning communities in presentday schools by determining the professional role perceptions of school library media
specialists and comparing these perceptions to those of the school administration. In
order to fulfill their professional roles effectively, collaboration with the administration
and clarity of professional role expectations are essential (Harvey, 2008b). As school
library media specialists perform tasks that are not considered a high priority in their
educational field, a feeling of inferiority compared to other school personnel can be
manifested. Feeling disregarded, school library media specialists struggle to develop the
confidence to promote their educational identities due to the challenges of changing an
established mindset (Ewbank & Moreillon, 2007). McGhee and Jansen (2010) predicted
that school library media specialists’ professional roles would remain inconsistent
without educational interventions targeting common expectation mandates between
school library media specialists and administrators.
16

School library media specialists cannot be held to the same standard of other
educators when administrators do not assign them the appropriate professional tasks to be
delivered in the library media center (Francis & Lance, 2011). This situation continues to
remain critical, especially with standardized instruction and assessments for
accountability. Differences in perspective can no longer be arbitrary because they have
relevance in measuring school achievement (Gavigan & Lance, 2015). In order for school
library media specialists to meet national instructional standards and be evaluated as
equal school professionals, administrators need to understand the directed professional
roles and responsibilities of the school library media specialist.
Leadership is recognized as a valuable attribute in educational positions that can
influence perceptions in my district (Gavigan & Lance, 2015). The American Library
Association’s mission (AASL, 2009a) identifies leadership as a core professional role
carried out by school library media specialists to promote the profession and retain the
school library media specialist position (Martin, 2013). Through leadership, professional
relationships can be built, resulting in honest dialogue, effective collaboration, and an
understanding of school library media specialists’ professional roles (Sokol, Reeve, &
Flater, 2015). For school library media programs to be relevant, they must be supported
by an interdependent leadership relationship between the school library media specialist
and the administrator.
With evidence of administrators’ minimal understanding of these professional
roles and of contradictory views about school library media specialists’ responsibilities
(Martin, 2011), a movement toward influential leadership would ignite reform efforts.
For school library media specialists to be viewed as equal stakeholders in an education
setting, they must display leadership by advocating for their positions. To initiate change,
17

the school library media specialist is the key resource for educating others about their
valuable skills needed to perform the professional role expectation in their educational
position (Hansen, 2012). As leaders, administrators are responsible for creating the
schedule of tasks school library media specialists perform, which is based on their
personal knowledge of the position (AASL, 2016). Some research studies have suggested
improving administrators’ perceptions, not only through better relationships with school
library media specialists (Harvey, 2008b), but also through certification training courses
(Forcht, 2011), principal education publications (Kaplan, 2006), and continuous
professional development (Page, 2014). As better understanding is gained by the
administrators, viewpoints shift, provoking changes for more productive outcomes
(Shannon, 2012; Wong, 2014).
Theoretical Framework
Educational partnerships between administrators and school library media
specialists are constructive when there is awareness that the professional roles of school
library media specialists contribute to school success (Jensen, 2008; Shannon, 2009).
Theory development by Wayne Hoy and Cecil Miskel (2013), along with Peter Senge
(2006), supports the development of best practices in social interactions to develop an
effective organizational culture. There are personal disciplines that can integrate to form
innovative practices into systems thinking that shift the mind to recognize one’s
perceptions in an educational organization (Senge, 2006). Behavioral expectations
develop through characterizations based on concepts, assumptions, and generalizations
and socially associated with members in an organization (Hoy & Miskel, 2013). These
organizational theorists investigate group structures to provide an understanding of social
interactions and to determine aspects, such a relationships and perspectives of
18

administrators and school library media specialists, that can affect performance. These
organizational theories are directly related to my specific research questions.
Organization theorists, Hoy and Miskel (2013), researched organizational
effectiveness. They acknowledged that organizational theory is represented in a school,
which is a social system that changes based on ideas, expectations, and generalizations of
the school’s behavior (Hoy & Miskel, 2013). Within a social system, leadership can
influence changes. The leader of the organization is in the most significant position to
affect performance, yet the leadership dynamics are influenced by group contributions.
Leaders are responsible for giving direction, while allowing individuality so that change
can occur. Effective leadership uses both supervision and independence to encourage
behaviors that are task, relationship, and change-oriented (Hoy & Miskel, 2013).
Organizational effectiveness (Hoy & Miskel, 2013) is evident in my investigation, which
establishes that administrators can positively affect the performance of a school by
building relationships and assigning relevant tasks to the school library media specialists,
leading to valuable contributions toward overall school success.
The Learning Organization Theory (Senge, 2006) encompasses five integrated
disciplines that can transform an organization into a learning system at its most effective
potential. Senge’s (2006) five discipline areas comprise the following:


Personal mastery is vital for aligning individual perspectives with current
realities to develop goals and measure achievements.



Mental models establish thinking and behaviors in an organization.



A shared vision is a common purpose created by the organization and
individually accepted.



Individual talents are acknowledged in an organization, developing honest
19

dialogue and forming team learning.


Change is effected through systems thinking in which problems are identified
and interventions are implemented to achieve long-term improvements.

The Learning Organization Theory (Senge, 2006) establishes disciplines that are relevant
to my research topic, particularly those that maintain that personal perspectives can be
reshaped by developing a common understanding of the performance expectations of the
school library media specialist that will have the biggest impact on school performance.
The role expectations of members create the social structure in an organization
(Person, 1993). As tasks are assigned, behaviors connected to each performance leads to
the development of individual roles within the system (Person, 1993). As roles become
integrated, patterns are formed that become identified with each member. This
identification is established and influenced by perceptions associated with performance
expectations. Yet, perceptions are subjective and are largely formed by prior experiences
and formal training; therefore, there is often inconsistency with the relevance of
professional roles (Katz & Kahn, 1978). Individual interactions shape reality in an
organization’s culture; school library media specialists and administrators need to openly
communicate to understand each other’s professional values and attributes (Hoy and
Miskel, 2013). Individual perceptions impact productivity; school library media
specialists and administrators need to welcome new approaches for their schools to
advance by strengthening school library media services (Senge, 2006). School library
media specialists and administrators model new expectations by using the school library
media specialist position for the most effective educational purposes, resulting in the
stability and growth of a successful school organization.
Both of these theories support my investigation, as a successful relationship
20

between the school library media specialist and the administration requires shared
expectations concerning the professional roles to be fulfilled by the school library media
specialist. In the school setting, values and expectations are reinforced by educational
training, occupational experiences, and cultural orientation (Person, 1993). The
professional roles of the school library media specialist are identified by behavioral
descriptions and are carried out in the school environment according to administrative
authorization. When there is disagreement between the administration and school library
media specialists regarding role expectations, erroneous assumptions can compromise the
quality of the school library program and services, thereby impacting the total school
performance.
Research Design Overview
A concurrent, qualitative research design was selected. The qualitative method
was utilized in order to discover true personal views and experiences. I gathered
information in a triangulation format through questionnaires, interviews, and
observations. The questionnaire information was collected simultaneously, while the
interviews and observations were conducted based on the availability of participants. The
participants were in common groups consisting of principals, assistant principals, and
library media specialists. A sampled set of school library media specialists was
interviewed and observed. The data from each group was analyzed through
transcriptions, categorization, and coding. I cross-referenced each groups’ information,
leading to an interpretation of the data based on recurring patterns and themes (McMillan
& Schumacher, 2010). The information collected was used to generate a descriptive
explanation of perception development toward the professional roles of school library
media specialists (Creswell, 2014).
21

In this Maryland district, I requested that all 14 elementary schools participate.
For the questionnaire data, 22 administrators, both principals and assistant principals, and
14 school library media specialists completed an online questionnaire distributed through
Google Forms; no sampling was used since all participants were included. For the other
data collection, three school library media specialists were selected for a pre- and postobservation interview using purposeful sampling; these participants provided much
useful information for the research investigation (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). I
observed these three school library media specialists over a three-day period in their
library media centers and reviewed documents associated with their professional roles.
The qualitative data was analyzed and interpreted to obtain valid and substantial results.
The data collected reflected administrators’ and school library media specialists’
perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists, allowing
comparisons to be made between these educators and between the school library media
specialists’ perceptions and their daily practices.
Research Questions
In order to determine the variance in views toward the professional roles of school
library media specialists, from both the administrators’ and school library media
specialists’ perspectives, I compared beliefs that were disclosed on the questionnaires. I
also examined whether the shared perceptions were evident in the actual practices of the
school library media specialists. The following questions guided the research study:


What are the perceptions of elementary administrators regarding the
professional roles of school library media specialists?



What are the perceptions of elementary school library media specialists
regarding their professional roles?
22



How do the professional role perceptions of administrators compare to the
professional role perceptions of the school library media specialists?



How do the professional role perceptions of school library media specialists
compare with their daily practices?

Assumptions
As I approached the research, I made the following assumptions:
1. The experiences shared by elementary administrators and school library media
specialists would reveal details that influence perceptions.
2. The perceptions shared by the elementary administrators and school library
media specialists were held personally by the individuals participating in the
study.
3. Misconceptions regarding the professional roles of school library media
specialists were a major factor that influenced perspectives.
4. Relationships were initiated between the participants and myself since I
previously held the position of a school library media specialist and am
currently the district supervisor.
Limitations
The following limitations were taken into consideration for this research
investigation:
1. The results of this study revealed personal perceptions of the professional
roles of school library media specialists and how I interpreted their responses.
2. Participants in the research were located in a small, rural school district in the
state of Maryland; therefore, similar results might not be obtained in larger
school systems.
23

3. School library media specialists and administrators at the elementary level
were the targets of this study; therefore, replication of this study might
produce different results at the middle and high school levels due to the
different professional roles, responsibilities, and scheduling that pertain in
secondary schools.
4. A non-probability method of purposeful sampling may be misleading due to
my bias in selecting participants based on specific criteria such as experience,
certifications, and school characteristics that may be less representative of a
larger population (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
Delimitations
The choices I made in approaching the investigation resulted in the following
restrictions:
1. Of the 14 elementary schools in the district, four were not considered in the
purposeful sampling for interviews and observations due to three having parttime school library media specialists, which could limit data collection, and
one being the school where I serve in an administrative position.
2. An individual case study was not selected as a research method due to
exploring multiple professional roles and responsibilities of school library
media specialists, which are scheduled and assigned by administrators.
3. Data collection instruments used in previous research pertaining to this topic
did not support the specific research questions; therefore, I constructed the
data collection instruments for this investigation, which were evaluated in a
pilot study to test validity and reliability.
4. Other educators, such as teachers, were not included as participants because I
24

wanted to focus on the views of and relationships between the administrators,
who have the most authority in a school environment, and the school library
media specialists.
Definitions
I have used the following definitions throughout this study, which are listed for
clarification purposes and to avoid the risk of bias, which could potentially arise during
data collection.
21st Century Skills. Interpersonal and relational skills, displayed through critical
thinking, problem-solving, and effective communication; using knowledge at higher
levels to develop innovations through collaboration (AASL, 2009a).
Actual Roles. Daily professional roles carried out by school library media
specialists (Person, 1993).
College- and Career-Ready Standards. Identified national criteria that high
school students must meet to be prepared for college expectations and career
performance.
Elementary Level. Schools that comprise pre-kindergarten through fifth grades.
Ideal Roles. Professional roles that school library media specialists would like to
carry out daily (Person, 1993).
Information Specialist. A person having knowledge about technology tools and
resources in various formats, connects the school and the global community, and follows
ethics when using information (AASL, 2009a).
Instructional Partner. A person who collaborates with others to deliver lessons
and resources; can communicate, contribute, and be a team member working toward a
common goal (AASL, 2009a).
25

Leader. A person who is a continuous learner, knowledgeable about the
education profession, accepts challenges and opportunities, builds relationship, and
promotes student learning (AASL, 2009a).
Mental Models. “…deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even
pictures or images that influence how we understand the world and how we take action”
(Senge, 2006, p.8).
Perceptions. Personal views formed from many factors that affect the affiliation
(Foote, 2015).
Professional Development. Continuous learning to remain expert in the
educational field (Powell, 2013).
Professional Roles. In reference to school library media specialists, these roles
are identified as leader, teacher, information specialist, program administrator, and
instructional partner (AASL, 2009a).
Program Administrator. A person who provides supportive resources, manages
the media center services, and oversees the organization of the media center (AASL,
2009a).
Role Ambiguity. Vagueness about the responsibilities of school library media
specialists, leading to inequity in school services and student learning (Francis & Lance,
2011).
School-Level Administrator (Principal and Assistant Principal). Authority in
the school; establishes the school’s structure and assigns the tasks of each school
employee (Church, 2007).
School Library Media Center. Library area in a school where resources can be
obtained and instruction is provided by the school library media specialist.
26

School Library Media Specialist. Educator who provides library services,
instruction, and resource support in a school setting (AASL, 1998).
Secondary Level. Schools that are labeled middle, comprising sixth to eighth
grades, and high, comprising ninth through twelfth grades.
Servant-leaders. Leaders who provide various services that meet the needs of
others (Brantley, 2011).
Teacher. A person who instructs to empower students to be independent,
encourages multiple styles of reading, builds a foundation of research skills, and accepts
diversity (AASL, 2009a).
Organization of Study
This research study consists of five main chapters. The Introduction, Chapter 1,
includes my background as it relates to the topic; relevance of the research at the micro
and macro levels; an overview of the problem and purpose of the study; the research
design overview and research questions; and the relevant assumptions, limitations,
delimitations, and definitions. The Literature Review, Chapter 2, provides information
about the AASL standards, previous studies concerning administrators’ and school
library media specialists’ perceptions of the professional roles of school library media
specialists, relationships between administrators and school library media specialists,
historical development of the professional roles of school library media specialists,
theoretical frameworks regarding social organization concepts, and past research on the
professional roles of school library media specialists. Chapter 3, Research Design and
Methodology, presents a detailed description of the approach to the investigation, the
sample population, instruments used to gather data, and the procedures followed for
collection and analysis. Chapter 4, Findings, presents an analysis of the results. A
27

summary, Chapter 5, shares the conclusions drawn from the study, presents implications
that are applicable to other school districts, and offers considerations for future research
on this topic.

28

Chapter 2 – Review of Literature
The professional roles of school library media specialists in the school
environment continue to evolve in the 21st century. These personnel provide
instructional, although challenges to educational practices exist. The American
Association of School Librarians’ (AASL) Information Power: Building Partnerships for
Learning (1998) and Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media
Programs (2009a), along with the Code of Maryland: Public School Library Programs
(Maryland State Department of Education [MSDE], 2000), present complementary
initiatives, yet they do not mandate the professional roles of school library media
specialists. The national Standards for the 21st Century Learner (AASL, 2007), the
Maryland College- and Career-Ready Standards for School Library Media Programs in
Maryland (MSDE, 2000), and the Maryland School Library Media State Curriculum
(MSDE, 2010b) provide instructional guidance for the profession, listing specific student
learning objectives that are often unknown to school administrators.
The state annual library report (MSDE, 2016) collects statistical data of the school
library media specialist’s professional roles. Based on the perceptions of school library
media specialists, the percentages reflecting time devoted to professional role practices
are ranked as:


teacher (42.41%);



information specialist (12.45%);



program administrator (11.01%);



technology support (9.82%);



instructional partner (9.53%);



other (7.90%);
29



leader (6.70%) (MSDE, 2016).

Uncertainty about school library media specialists’ professional roles result in the
fulfillment of responsibilities not endorsed in state and national documents, leading to
inequity in library services and student learning (Francis & Lance, 2011). School
administrators are the decision-makers regarding school library media specialist role
assignments. When administrators are unfamiliar with the purpose and responsibilities of
the school library media specialist, the assignment of tasks can vary greatly. The existing
perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists remain
complicated, limiting the effectiveness of this educational resource.
This literature review investigates perceptions concerning the professional roles
of school library media specialists in the educational environment. Referenced in the
literature review are critical research studies and peer-reviewed articles relating to the
perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists based on
administrators’ and school library media specialists’ interpretations. This chapter includes
the following sections: (a) historical development of the professional roles of school
librarians; (b) generational implications of limited professional library services; (c)
standards for school library media specialists; (d) research on the professional roles of
school library media specialists; (e) perspectives of administrators; (f) perspectives of
school library media specialists; (g) influences on perspectives; (h) approaches to
changing perspectives; (i) impact of perspectives; (j) relationships between administrators
and school library media specialists; (k) theoretical frameworks regarding social
organization; and (l) chapter summary.
Historical Development of the Professional Roles of School Librarians
In the history of librarianship, the professional roles of school library media
30

specialists have changed significantly and remain an area that needs to be further
established. The current professional roles of school library media specialists stemmed
from types of information networks and federal funding initiatives (Michie & Holton,
2005a), resulting in more intensive maintenance of materials and delivery of instruction.
The expansion of resources required systemic organization and strict methods of delivery
for accountability.
There are many versions of the origins of school libraries and the librarian career,
with various contradictory dates (Muller, n.d.). In the early 1800s, education was
delivered in a one-room schoolhouse, with state library services provided from covered
wagons that circulated among townships to deliver classroom sets of books (Michie &
Holton, 2005b). The New England states became leaders in developing a school and
public library partnership, building collections, encouraging visits, and proposing that
city schools be given volumes of books to start library stations, which would become the
core of the school library concept (Michie & Holton, 2005b). At the early stages of
librarianship, responsibilities centered on collection, organization, and circulation. As
libraries became part of the school setting, classroom collections were centrally located
and the professional roles of librarians started to transform.
The expansion of school libraries caused the need for dedicated resource
management by designated school personnel, which was supported by the School Library
Section, a part of the National Education Association (NEA), in 1896. Mary Kingsbury,
librarian at the Brooklyn Erasmus High School in 1900, is said to be the first
professionally trained and employed librarian. Her expertise was immediately recognized
and valued by the school principal and superintendent (Miller, 2003). The professional
roles assigned to her were fixed, consisting of building the collection with books and
31

equipment that supported the curriculum while maintaining an attractive library setting
(James, 1953). The model of school librarian that she established was replicated, building
the foundation for the present professional roles of school library media specialists in the
school environment (Miller, 2003).
Mary E. Hall is believed to be the second professional librarian, appointed to the
Brooklyn Girls High School in 1903 and the first president of the American Library
Association [ALA] (Pond, 1976). Identifying specific librarian roles and program
responsibilities because the occupation of “…school librarians are sufficiently different
from those of other library workers…” (ALA, 1915, p. 14); she was the librarian that was
involved in the development of the first standards for school libraries, Standard Library
Organization and Equipment for Secondary Schools of Different Sizes (ALA, 1920),
which included the following:


No superintendent or principal organizes a library without the expertise of a
trained librarian.



The librarian is an integral part of the school.



The librarian displays the qualities of both a librarian and a teacher.



The librarian will perform administrative requirements.



The librarian will have educational work, including instruction.



The librarian will oversee the selection, distribution, and care of books.

Similar to today’s standards, this first document contained recommendations, not
mandatory tasks of this profession. Librarians’ responsibilities were extended beyond
resource management to enrich the curriculum by helping students develop good reading
habits and study skills. With libraries in schools and standards published to justify the
profession, school librarianship, as a career, began to be accepted in the 1920s, with the
32

aim of meeting the academic expectations of students and managing the various resources
(Pond, 1976).
In the 1930s, the Educational Policies Commission re-evaluated education to
focus on democracy. The library was then viewed as equal to the classroom in the school
facility, essential for student achievement. By 1945, the concept of loaning library
collections was diminishing for both city and rural schools. Classroom collections were
permanently located in the schoolhouse (Michie & Holton, 2005b), no longer circulated
from public or university libraries, leading to more jobs for school librarians. ALA
created the first national standards for K-12 school libraries, School Libraries for Today
and Tomorrow, published in 1945, for growth and accountability of the librarian
profession (Michie & Holton, 2005b). These standards addressed libraries as integral
components of schools and became the framework for current media centers. These
standards referred to the responsibilities of school librarians, as distinct from public
librarians, which they listed under six headings (Michie & Holton, 2005b):


School librarians and libraries are part of education.



School librarians provide services to pupils and teachers.



School librarians are personnel with specific standards.



School librarians are responsible for the book collection and library resources.



School librarians oversee the housing of the library.



School librarians have the tasks of administration, supervision, and extension
of library services.

This unique identity proved that librarianship was an important educational profession.
School librarians’ professional roles focused on literacy, information, guidance, and
instruction (Michie & Holton, 2005b).
33

Also during this period, the federal government designated funding for school
libraries. Federal support became available through the 1958 National Defense Education
Act (NDEA) Title III to purchase books and instructional materials. However, many of
the funded materials were not located in school libraries due to the perceptions of
administrators and librarians. At this time, principals and librarians did not see a
connection between librarians and classroom instruction and libraries were used in a
supportive role (Michie & Holton, 2005a). Yet in the1960s, the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA) Title II provided direct funding assistance for school
library resources. The AASL created new standards, Standards for School Library
Programs, which made a significant shift in the professional roles of the school librarian.
As the collections increased and the standards were revised, new responsibilities in
leadership were given to school library media specialists in the areas of selecting and
organizing the materials (Michie & Holton, 2005a). School librarians provided services
to students and teachers to enrich their educational experiences. Librarians became
teacher-librarians and taught specific library skills, promoting to administrators the
importance of library services through the professional roles that librarians performed
(AASL, 1998).
Throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, ALA and the AASL continued to
promote the positive effects school libraries had on education. Materials and resources
expanded to include non-print materials with the introduction of technology beginning in
the 1970s, which increased the functions of librarians. Instructional and collaborative
professional roles were needed to teach students and teachers how to locate information
in multiple formats and to develop competence in listening, viewing, and reading
(Craver, 1986). AASL published Media Programs: District and School in 1975,
34

proposing standards for an organized approach to school library media services. By
providing principles and standards for school library media programs, which could assist
in decision-making (AASL, 1998), this publication advanced the professional roles of
librarians in the areas of design and consultation (Craver, 1986). The popular 1988
publication, Information Power: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs,
emphasized the importance of collaboration between the principal, teacher, and school
library media specialist. Again, the inclusion of new informational resources broadened
the professional role of the school library media specialist into a decision-maker,
evaluating for authenticity and accuracy, and facilitating the access to and use of
information (Michie & Holton, 2005b).
Societal changes and developments in new technology affected the educational
curriculum and led to the revision of the 1988 AASL guidelines. The updated literature,
Information Power: Building Partnerships for Learning (AASL, 1998), advanced the
idea of the school library media specialist as the heart of the school, performing
professional roles in the school environment as a teacher, an instructional partner, an
information specialist, and a program administrator (AASL, 1998). This publication
remains a guide to school library media specialists facing new developments in the field
regarding technology, curriculum, and accountability.
More recent publications released by AASL addressed the changing professional
roles of school library media specialists. Standards for the 21st Century Learner (AASL,
2007) offered teaching and guidance as the school library media specialist developed into
an educational leader. Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media
Programs (AASL, 2009a) further defined the professional roles of the school library
media specialist as leader, instructional partner, teacher, program administrator, and
35

information specialist. Then in 2012, A 21st Century Approach to School Librarian
Evaluation represented school librarianship, supporting the professional role expectations
and providing guidance to administrators and school library media specialists regarding
the performance of this faculty member (AASL, 2012). These supportive publications
offer direction and standards for the professional roles of the school library media
specialist and are continuously updated by national organizations as educational
expectations change.
The services of public school libraries and the professional roles of school
librarians evolved from the 1900s to the present. Throughout this period, school libraries
broadened from the initial focus on literature and reading to encompassing all types of
informational formats for inquiry and research, increasing the value of school library
media specialists. The professional role expectations described in these aforementioned
national publications need to gain administrative support and understanding in order to
have a successful library media program that is aligned with the school’s vision. An
expert in library media instruction and library management has always been essential in
the school environment.
General Implications of Professional Library Services
The history of librarianship has shown that services provided by a certified
librarian impacts education and continuously evolves to meet the needs of the users. At a
time when this position is being eliminated, library science skills are more essential than
ever to creating competent adults. Boyer (2015, p. 63) shared that a “mindset shift is
critical if students are going to master and apply research skills proficiently prior to
college.” Therefore, a perception gap between the school administrator and school library
media specialist regarding services also obstructs students’ academic success (Donham &
36

Rehmke, 2016). This becomes evident when library instruction is delivered consistently
by a professional at the elementary level, and then changes during the secondary years to
limited lessons overseen by library assistants. This shift leads to students being
unprepared and struggling with confidence when doing research at the college level
(Barack, 2014). According to a study cited by Barack (2014), Kate Lawrence, EBSCO’s
senior director, interviewed high school and college students about literacy instruction,
which revealed that knowledge gained in high school was critical for a positive college
experience. School library media specialists are essential contributors in the school
culture; therefore, administrators need to assign them appropriate tasks at all educational
levels, targeting necessary academic services to students, which will affect their chances
of future success.
In a study conducted by Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1995), as referenced by Foote
(2016), library anxiety inhibited students’ likelihood of completing tasks due to
inexperience with research tools and being overwhelmed with the library organization.
Students learn best in a setting of comfort and familiarity. Supportive experiences in the
elementary and secondary years of education contribute to students having a feeling of
security when using academic libraries as young adults (Foote, 2016). Engaging library
experiences are necessary to transform a high school student into a life-long library user
at the college- and career-readiness levels. Cited by Owen (2010), Carr and Rockman
(2003) estimated that half of 21st century college students will not graduate due to
insufficient ability to use informational resources. Students who lack the ability to
navigate sources of information are not qualified for many 21st century jobs. College
dropout and unemployment rates are negatively affected by the lack of skills due to
limited library use and guidance from professionals during high school (Foote, 2016).
37

Knowing how to use a media center will help prepare students to be college- and careerready.
American Association of School Librarians, 21st Century Learning, and the Shifting
of Professional Roles
The American Library Association (ALA), founded in 1876, and the American
Association of School Librarians (AASL), formed in 1914, are national organizations that
have established specialized standards for the professional roles and expectations of
school librarians and library services. The ALA’s mission is to “provide leadership for
the development, promotion, and improvement of library and information services and
the profession of librarianship in order to enhance learning and ensure access to
information for all” (ALA, 1996, para. 1). The AASL’s mission is to “empower leaders to
transform teaching and learning” (American Association of School Librarians, 2003,
para. 5). Although these organizations articulate different missions, they both support
goals that have remained the foundation of the school library media profession. These
associations continue to be active today, advocating for and promoting the five
professional roles that need to be agreed upon by administrators and school library media
specialists: leader, instructional partner, information specialist, teacher, and program
administrator.
These five professional roles have evolved to accommodate the ever-changing
societal demands while maintaining access to information, with reading and inquiry as
priorities. In the 20th century, the Industrial Age centered on manufacturing (AASL,
2009a), requiring efficient and reliable workers who performed similar, repetitive
activities for mass production. The focus changed to interpersonal skills for the 21st
century Information Age, which required employees with critical thinking, problem38

solving, and effective communication skills (AASL, 2009a). With the anticipated
approach that some call the Knowledge Age, these relational skills determine success due
to the way knowledge is used at higher levels to develop innovations through
collaboration (AASL, 2009a). The school library media specialist has also evolved,
fulfilling the professional roles of the position to support and develop a 21st century
learning environment for 21st century learners.
Encouraging library users to interact as teachers, learners, producers, and
contributors (AASL, 2009a) required delivering innovative instruction and real-world
learning in the 21st century. Therefore, school library media specialists’ responsibilities
and professional roles needed to be reassessed. The Standards for the 21st Century
Learner (AASL, 2007, p. 2) proposed a common belief statement that “school libraries
are essential to the development of learning skills.” Not only does this require a safe
physical space and equal access to resources, but it also includes the expertise of a school
librarian providing collaborative instruction integrated with grade-level curriculum and
teaching 21st century strategies and skills.
A Vision Summit was organized in December 2006 (AASL, 2009a) to
brainstorm how the library media profession would evolve in a 21st century learning
environment. Phone interviews conducted with school library media specialists and
administrators revealed criteria needed to meet the challenges and take advantage of
upcoming education trends (AASL, 2009a). Key from these discussions included access
to resources 24-7, global networking projects, technology integrated with curriculum,
library instruction outcomes connecting with school goals, and an increase in teacher
collaboration and support (AASL, 2009a). Online surveys identified school library media
specialist responsibilities that were shifting. In 2006, the functions of a school library
39

media specialist were ranked as (1) teacher; (2) information specialist; (3) instructional
partner, and (4) program administrator (AASL, 2009a). At that time, future shifts in these
functions were predicted to be (1) instructional partner; (2) information specialist, (3)
teacher, and (4) program administrator (AASL, 2009a). Based on the data collected, the
Vision Summit group identified an additional professional role of leader. Leadership was
determined to be a valuable professional role for the longevity of the profession and
significant for student success (Martin, 2013). For more than ten years, these five
professional roles have remained focused on increasing student achievement and
accountability, connecting at the global level, integrating emerging technologies, and
developing 24-hour virtual access to the school library media center (AASL, 2009a).
The American Association of School Librarians uses Information Power:
Building Partnerships for Learning (1998) as a foundation, developing expectations of
library personnel from the philosophy, vision, and mission of the library media program.
Accomplishment of the mission and attainment of the vision is based on each school
library media specialist’s fulfillment of the five professional roles. The diverse roles of
leader, teacher, instructional partner, information specialist, and program administrator
have an important part in the school educational program. Each role has an intentional
function designed to be implemented by a certified school library media specialist in
collaboration with the administration (Forcht, 2011). As a nationally recognized group,
the AASL is striving to support school library media specialists by advocating for these
professional roles with the ultimate goal of school library media specialists’ influence
leading to student success.
Clarifying the five professional roles by providing a detailed description of school
library media specialists’ job performance expectations can affect perceptions of this
40

educational position. Such a description developed by the AASL (2009a) suggests the
following professional roles and are indicators of an effective 21st century school library
media specialist:


As a leader – the school library media specialist is an instructor and a learner;
listens and implements creative ideas; is knowledgeable about professional
challenges and opportunities; is actively involved in the local and global
networks; builds relationships with stakeholders; advocates for students.



As an instructional partner – the school library media specialist is a team member
in the school and community; collaborates with teachers for instructional and
assessment outcomes; communicates in multiple formats.



As an information specialist – the school library media specialist is
knowledgeable about technology tools; uses multiple formats and resources;
serves as a liaison between the school and the global community; provides all-day
access to library services; ethically uses information.



As a teacher – the school library media specialist is always empowering students
to become self-learners; promotes critical thinking; expands the love of reading in
all formats; develops investigative researchers; builds principled information
users; creates a diverse and current collection.



As a program administrator – the school library media specialist is a supportive
resource throughout the school community; monitors budgets and the media
center; strives to fulfill the school and district vision and mission.

These five professional roles, when integrated, have the potential to be a strong
component in a school environment (Brantley, 2011). Collaborative teaching, supported
by accurate resources and delivered by an expert school library media specialist, is
41

necessary to create a library media program that stimulates the school and community
culture (AASL, 2009a).
Research on the Professional Roles of School Library Media Specialists
There remains a distinction between the perspectives of administrators and school
library media specialists regarding the professional roles of school library media
specialists. As AASL attempts to create a common vision of the professional roles of
school library media specialists, a review of the past and current literature reveals that
school administrators and school library media specialists have perceptions that are not in
alignment (Berggren, 2013; DeGroff, 1997; Forcht, 2011; Francis & Lance, 2011). In
reference to the established professional roles, the research indicates that there remains a
constant struggle between administrators and school library media specialists (Church,
2007; Edwards, 1989; Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Kaplan, 2006; Scott, 1987). McGhee and
Jansen (2010) speculated that these professional roles will continue to be a contested area
and remain a significant challenge in the relationship between school library media
specialists and administrators unless they come to a common understanding about the
proper professional roles and responsibilities.
Much of this disconnect is the result of the vagueness associated with the
definition of these professional roles, causing misunderstandings to occur between the
administration and the school library media specialist (Person, 1993). With the
publication of ALA’s Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media
Programs (2009a), the five professional roles of leader, teacher, instructional partner,
program administrator, and information specialist have been, and will continue to be,
promoted as necessary components of successful schools. Open, honest dialogue between
the administrator and the school library media specialist must continue to clarify
42

expectations and build stronger relationships. Both of these professionals must work as a
team to clearly define the professional roles that are necessary to move the school toward
attaining its mission and vision. This begins with the transformation of perspectives.
Perspectives of School Administrators
Most of the literature emphasized that the principals were the authority having the
greatest influence in determining the professional roles to be implemented (Alexander,
Smith, & Carey, 2003; Francis & Lance, 2011; Greg, 2007; Hartzell, 2002b; Harvey,
2008b; Krueger, 2015; Lau, 2002b; Nelson, 2014; Shannon 2009). As the leaders in their
schools, administrators hold the power in the educational environment, controlling
selection of faculty and determining their responsibilities. Administrators determine the
school’s structure and assign the tasks of each employee in order for the organization to
function at the greatest potential (Church, 2007); exemplary libraries have been identified
as those having the strongest administrative support (Haycock, 2002). Studies that
examined administrative perceptions of the school library media specialist revealed that
many administrators do not understand the professional roles of school library media
specialists due to the limitations of published information, professional training, and
personal experiences (Church, 2008; Kaplan 2006; Oberg, 2006; Wilson, Blake &
Lyders, 1993).
Perspectives of School Library Media Specialists
As in the past, the perspectives and uses of the school library media specialist are
complex and inconsistent (Ewbank & Moreillan, 2007; Lea, 2013; McCoy, 2001;
Shannon, 2002; Turner & Riedling, 2003). The professional roles of school library media
specialists have evolved to become the five core categories recognized by national
organizations, yet there is little consensus about them at the school level due to the
43

diversity of tasks actually practiced (McCracken, 2000). Professional literature identifies
school library media specialists’ responsibilities as (a) actual professional roles that are
daily performed; (b) ideal professional roles that want to be performed; or (c) AASL
recommended professional roles (Braxton, 2008; Carey, 1998; Church, 2011; Cooper &
Bray, 2011; Drake, 2007). School library media specialists are highly qualified and are
required to administer a library media program that meets set expectations, but they
perceive that they cannot fulfill these professional roles to the best of their abilities
(McCracken, 2000). Even though AASL has proposed effective standards determining
how to meet the needs for these specific professional roles, school library media
specialists often face challenges to fulfill these responsibilities. This is mainly due to
miscommunication between themselves and the administration because of the lack of
mandates and the obscurity of these tasks (Church, 2011; McCracken, 2000).
Influences on Perspectives
Despite the longevity of the presence of school library media specialists in the
school setting, administrators continue to have varying mental models of this position
that are opposed to those of the school library media specialists. Therefore, there is not a
common understanding about the position of the school library media specialist. Ewbank
and Moreillon (2007) asserts that a worldview is based on beliefs, values, and
perceptions, influencing daily interactions, and has the potential to be reassessed. School
library media specialists have a librarianship outlook that influences areas they deem as
priorities, which may or may not be shared by the administration. When these views
conflict, school library media specialists and administrators need to reexamine their
assumptions to arrive at common expectations that lead to the success of the learner
(Ewbank & Moreillon, 2007).
44

Educational Publications. Professional library organizations have published
literature to convey the expectations of school library media specialists, publicizing their
standards and guidelines. However, school administrative groups do not often address the
subject of school libraries or the position of the library personnel in their literature
(Church, 2008). Researchers have observed that there is a ten-year lag before
administrators fully adopt standards associated with school library media specialists
(Drake, 2007), a lag that is sometimes longer for administrators who are unfamiliar with
the library science field. These library publications serve as a resource primarily for
school library media specialists to enhance their professional learning communities. The
literature uses language particular to the library science field, which is often
misunderstood in administrative circles, resulting in the opinion that this position is
expendable in the school setting (Cooper & Bray, 2011).
Professional Training. Administrators receive limited or even no training
regarding the professional roles of the school library media specialist. Aspiring
administrators receiving a course that is specific to the school library media profession
and programs understand the importance of this service (Alexander et al., 2003; Church,
2007; Forcht, 2011; Roys & Brown, 2004). Kaplan’s (2006) study identified the limited
information concerning the use of library media specialists in administrative training
programs and textbooks as a reason that administrators assigned non-instructional tasks
to these personnel. Without the necessary training, the administrator views the school
library media specialist as more of a support person, whose jobs are defined by the needs
of the administration (Hartzell, 1997). This perspective will be difficult to change unless
training begins early in the career of an administrator. Louise Sutherland, a program
manager for school library programs in the Department of Health, Education, and
45

Welfare's Office of Education, stated that prior to approval of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965, school librarians and libraries were
“…regarded by administrators as an appendage to the educational process rather than an
integral part…” (Michie & Holton, 2005a, p. 1). She stated this in 1970, and the same
impression still pertains.
Searching for a practical approach for administrators to deepen their knowledge
about school librarianship, Levitov (2009) examined administrators’ perceptions of
library media specialists and media programs through having them participate in an
online course. The purpose of the research was to educate administrators about the
professional roles and programs of school library media specialists in order to create
administrative advocates for school libraries. Through surveys, course assessments,
feedback forms, and interviews, a positive change in administrators’ perceptions,
communication, and awareness was observed, along with increased support of
appropriate job responsibilities (Levitov, 2009). Another examination of administrators’
perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists was conducted
using a cross-sectional survey focused on media center services relating to learning
standards (Page, 2014). It identified a knowledge gap based on administrative training
and personal experiences. Page’s (2014) and Levitov’s (2009) research supported the idea
that communication, along with professional development, would clarify the job
qualifications and expectations resulting in school library media specialists being used in
their true professional capacities. Overall, for a school to establish a first-class library, the
school leader should take a mandatory course on library personnel and operations, which
will better prepare the administrator to make informed decisions that will lead to a highquality program (Shannon, 2012; Sleeman, 1989).
46

To assist administrators in understanding the professional roles of school library
media specialists and enlist their support, Fisher and Schroeder (2015) recommend a
Wisconsin workshop approach. This method educated teachers and administrators about
the evolution of school library media specialists’ professional roles, how these
professional roles affect the school, and what these professional roles entail. A
comparison of 35 pre- and post-workshop surveys showed an increase in understanding
of the professional roles of school library media specialists. The survey requested the
participants to identify the most important responsibilities of a school library media
specialist. The professional responsibilities most often mentioned on the pre-workshop
survey were the traditional ones such as teaching, reading support, collection
development and management, technology support and integration, program
administration, teacher collaboration, and information specialist (Fisher & Schroeder,
2015). The professional responsibilities most often mentioned on the post-workshop
survey were 21st century ones such as leadership, professional development, advocacy,
selecting and providing resources, and school-wide initiatives engagement (Fisher &
Schroeder, 2015). Although many of the pre-workshop responses in Fisher’s and
Schroeder’s research (2015) reflected the traditional library roles, the participants
recognized specialized expertise, advocacy, and leadership skills in the post-workshop
responses, adding to the value of the school library media specialist position in the 21st
century school learning environment.
Changing the perspectives of administrators regarding this position cannot be
accomplished without school library media specialists first attaining professional
knowledge themselves through educational training. A study by Powell (2013)
determined that in order for school library media specialists to contribute to school
47

success, they needed a shared understanding of their professional roles and
responsibilities. Using a multi-method approach, she gathered perceptions from
alternatively certified and traditionally certified school library media specialists. The
outcome revealed that regardless of the certification method, mentorship training was
essential, along with continuous professional development, for school library media
specialists to remain experts in the field of library science (Powell, 2013). Shannon
(2002) reaffirmed the complexity of the school library media specialist position due to
the variety of professional and personal competencies required to fulfill the job
responsibilities. She acknowledged the reality of entering this career field of continuous
education and professional training and the necessity for school library media specialists
to be proactive in communicating their professional roles to a school community unaware
of their potential contribution to education.
Personal Experiences. The most helpful administrative support of school library
media specialists is based on knowledge of the school library program (Alexander et al.,
2003), which can only result from learning about the professional roles. Many studies
have shown that the strongest factor in the creation of the knowledge gap is the history of
the administrators’ personal experiences with school library media specialists (Church,
2007; Hartzel, 2002a; Lau, 2002b). Personal experiences begin with principals’
interactions with school library media specialists when they were students, and then
continue to build during their teaching and administrative careers. Early impressions tend
to identify the school library media specialist as a different type of faculty member, set in
a separate location apart from classrooms, and sharing information during a restricted
scheduled period. The image is reinforced by experiences when, as a teacher, the school
culture values classroom above library contributions in the school environment. These
48

personal experiences are then carried over as teachers become administrative leaders.
These perceptions affect their expectations of the school library media specialist’s
professional roles (Edwards, 1989). Administrators view school library media specialists
as empowering others, but their contributions get absorbed into the overall instructional
program, and successes outside of the library media center are never acknowledged as
outcomes of library instruction (Hartzell, 2002a).
When school library media specialists’ professional roles are recognized, there is
not often a consensus on the ranking of these tasks in the school setting. In 1989,
Edwards explored the perceptions of Arizona administrators and school library media
specialists, discovering conflicting role specifications. The administrators felt that school
library media specialists spent only 27% of their time in the professional role of teacher
and believed that they spent the majority of their time as program administrators. By
contrast, the school library media specialists indicated that they spent 48% of their time
as teachers and believed that they needed more time for the professional role of program
administrator. In a more current investigation, the perceptions of administrators and
school librarians in Louisiana were examined by Berggren (2014) to determine the value
placed on specific professional roles. Using surveys and interviews, Berggren’s (2014)
research showed that administrators’ and school library media specialists’ perceptions
were similar in viewing school librarians as educational leaders.
School library media specialists have struggled to assert their educational
identities. This situation is more critical than ever due to standardized instruction and
assessments for accountability. Evidence gathered through in-depth interviews, document
analysis, journal responses, and observations conducted with beginning school library
media specialists showed that perceptions of them as a whole were based on the
49

experiences that administrators had with previous personnel in the same positions
(Sandford, 2013). This outcome correlated with Lea’s (2013) study on professional roles
of school library media specialists, which also centered on previous experiences and
personal views. This research study revealed that mental models were personal and
influenced views on school library media specialists’ identities and performance.
Due to administrators’ experiences shaping the tasks assigned to school library
personnel, the administrator needs to become more aware of the responsibilities that are
appropriate to school library media specialists (McGhee & Jansen, 2010). In a study
conducted by Scott (1987), 46% of principal participants rated technological media
instruction and interpersonal relations as important jobs of school library media
specialists. Moving forward to 1992, Glaze’s investigation revealed that improvement
was needed in collaboration and that administrators perceived school library media
specialists as performing the traditional tasks associated with program administration. In
an Iowa study (Forcht, 2011), administrators acknowledged the value of the school
library media specialist as a teacher, collaborative partner, and a facility manager,
recommending a commonality on the expectations of school library media specialists’
professional roles. Gavigan and Lance (2015) led a study in South Carolina in which 273
principals participated. Responsibilities pertaining to the professional roles listed as
important were leadership, teacher, and collaborative partner. The principals recognized
the value of the professional roles, affirming the following (Gavigan & Lance, 2015):


School library media specialists’ leadership role was the one most desired by
administrators.



Much value was placed on school library media specialists by the
administrators when there was evidence that collaboration was being
50

practiced.


School library media specialists were viewed as ‘everybody’s teacher,’
contributing to student success.

The administrators who participated indicated that their experience of building an
exemplary school media program was due to allowing the school library media specialist
to carry out the professional roles determined to be effective by AASL (Gavigan &
Lance, 2015).
Another South Carolina study, which was conducted by Shannon (2009),
analyzed 189 responses from administrators to an online questionnaire about the
importance of tasks performed by school library media specialists in the educational
setting. The findings showed that the principals supported the professional roles
recognized by national organizations, selecting teacher, information specialist, and
program administrator as the most important. Roys and Brown (2004) designed a study to
determine what administrators consider to be an ideal school library media specialist
candidate and discovered that educational administrators from Washington, Oregon, and
Idaho selected the areas of working well with others and possessing excellent
management and technological skills as the highest values. These areas center on the
professional roles of instructional partner and program administrator, yet the specific
characteristics they valued are still reflective of a more traditional personnel position.
Hartzell stated that when librarians are not perceived by administrators as direct teachers
of students, they are “one step removed and their quality and contribution cannot be
measured” (1997, p. 25).
Communication. Administrators are the school leaders who can establish the
acceptance of the professional roles of the school library media specialist so that the
51

remaining faculty and staff follow. School library media specialists should know their
importance in the school setting and that the school library media center is a place where
essential learning happens. Therefore, they are responsible for informing the
administration about their professional roles and the importance of their appropriate
employment in the school environment (Hansen, 2012). School library personnel also
need to be active and professionally assertive in demonstrating their educational value
and skills (Hansen, 2012). They are kept from fully implementing their professional
responsibilities when administrative decision-making that affects scheduling limits their
professional role performance.
Forcht’s (2011) research revealed that even when administrators support the
school library program, they are unlikely to understand professional role expectations
and, therefore, rely on the school library media specialist to promote the job functions. As
principals learn about the responsibilities of school library media specialists’ professional
roles from school library media specialists themselves (Church, 2007), the burden is
placed on the person who is lacking authority and is not the instructional leader in the
school environment. Administrators will view the AASL’s professional roles as more
valuable only when the school library media specialists take the initiative to articulate
their connection to the mission of student learning and school success (Lau, 2002b).
Therefore, the school library media specialist becomes a teacher to the principal
(Shannon, 2009; Yetter, 1994).
Church (2008) conducted a survey of Virginia elementary principals that
determined that the responsibility of promoting the professional roles of instruction and
collaboration rested with the school library media specialist. The principals based their
views of this position on their past working experiences. This study revealed that the
52

principals were not knowledgeable about the professional roles of the school library
media specialist, which widened the communication gap between the principal and the
school library media specialist. Communication is an essential component providing
professionals an opportunity to make clear the purpose of their position in the school
(Sokol et al, 2015). Failure of communication results in difficulty with the appropriate
discharge of school library media specialists’ professional responsibilities. Better
communication between the administrator and the school library media specialist
increases awareness of the professional roles that need to be fulfilled (Harvey, 2008b),
and collaboration will make that fulfillment become a reality.
Obscurity of Professional Role Descriptions. Defining the professional roles is
challenging, which leads to miscommunication between school library media specialists
and administrators. Information Power: Building Partnerships for Learning (1998, p. 4)
states that the school “library media specialist plays a unique and pivotal role in the
learning community” and provides services as a teacher, instructional partner,
information specialist, program administrator, and leader (AASL, 2009a). Imprecise
professional role definition is the main obstacle facing school library media specialists.
Although publications state that these professional roles intersect, they are vague about
how they are integrated in practice (Drake, 2007). To accomplish full implementation of
the professional role responsibilities associated with this profession, all national
educational associations need to collaborate to devise clear, mandatory standards for the
school library program (McCracken, 2000).
Specifically, the AASL worked with Achieve, an education reform organization,
to develop a document that identified librarians’ professional roles in relation to common
state standards. This initiative was to support school library media specialists and
53

administrators in reassessing the professional roles and services carried out in the school
library media center. The goal was to eliminate the traditional isolation of school library
media specialists by changing how this position was envisioned in the school
environment, showing school library media specialists how to be proactive, and allowing
administrators to view them as integral to the mission of student learning. This document
supported the school library media program guidelines (AASL, 2009a), which was
written to revise the traditional library practices, devising a new description of the five
professional roles to encourage administrators to adopt a modern view when hiring
school library media specialists (Ballard, 2009).
Approaches to Changing Perspectives
It is often stated that if something is not personally experienced or witnessed, then
it is not valuable or believable. The majority of administrators seem unaware of, or
ignore, the professional roles established by the AASL, preventing library media
programs to actively contribute to academic achievement in the school (McCracken,
2001). Olsen and Meyer (1996) explained that a principal who did not visit the library
would not promote the essential national standards (AASL, 1998). When administrators
do not comprehend this educational position, then school library media specialists cannot
perform to the best of their abilities (Roys & Brown, 2004).
The task of being visible falls on the school library media specialist, who must
advocate to administrators that they are educational leaders who can deliver instruction
and collaborate with faculty (Hartzell, 1997), while managing the library program and
providing research services to students. “School libraries are the places of opportunity”
(Haycock, 2003, p. 6), yet they can only be fully experienced when the professional roles
performed by school library media specialists are respected and acknowledged by the
54

administration. For administrators to appreciate the school library position, school library
media specialists must interact with administrators and come to a common understanding.
The integration of these professionals’ expectations leads to library services that are vital
to all school members. Through active leadership and advocacy, changing past
perceptions can be accomplished and a career that faces elimination can be saved (EhlerHansen, 2014; Hansen, 2012; Heindel, Roberts, Southworth, & Thomas, 2014; Ray,
2012).
Interpersonal Skills. Administrators feel that school library media specialists
need to develop better interpersonal skills (Shannon, 2009) to effectively implement all
five of the professional roles and for the overall success of librarianship (Edwards, 1989).
Interpersonal skills are necessary for carrying out the five professional roles and are
critical when working with administrators in the school environment (Shannon, 2002).
An investigation by Cooper and Bray (2011) determined that school library media
specialists communicate their professional value through collaboration, which then
demonstrates their vital roles to the administration. To develop this positive perception,
school library media specialists not only promote it, but are seen in action by the
administrator, carrying out the five professional roles. Increasing influence by using
interpersonal skills is a proactive approach that the school library media specialist can use
to develop an image that characterizes the library’s services (Wittig, 2014).
Often, reversing established mental models about the professional roles of school
library media specialists must begin with school library media specialists themselves. In
other words, positive attitudes from the professional source can generate a ripple effect,
impacting all stakeholders. McCracken (2001) investigated how school library media
specialists viewed their ability to fulfill professional roles. By analyzing 505/1,000
55

surveys returned by school library media specialists, she identified various attributes that
allowed full implementation of professional role responsibilities to be achieved, one of
which was the attitude of the individual respondent. School library media specialists
acknowledged the following factors for successful fulfillment of practices:


personal creativity and trying new things;



desire to serve and willingness to move forward;



continuing interest in learning;



self-determination;



no fear of change;



plans to benefit others;



and enjoyment of supporting students and staff (McCracken, 2001).

Attitude is something that school library media specialists have the ability to change. A
personal attitude can result in school library media specialist changing their personal
mindsets about their professional roles in order meet the needs of the school (McCracken,
2001) and create a positive perception towards librarianship.
Commonality. The school library media specialist may be the solitary figure in
this position, yet his or her professional roles are more closely linked with the
administration than with any other faculty member. These commonalities include the
following:


As program administrators, they oversee multiple functions, directing them
towards the vision and managing a budget (Jensen, 2008).



As instructional partners, they collaborate to build relationships with all staff
members and communicate program expectations (Jensen, 2008).



As leaders, they are visible and vocal, while maintaining a vision for the
56

school program (Yetter, 1994).


As teachers, they model and mentor by delivering professional development
(Gregg, 2007).



As information specialists, they are current in educational trends and locating
materials and tools to move the school forward (Gregg, 2007).

In their degree programs, both the school library media specialist and administrator
complete coursework involving finance, policy, curriculum, and evaluation of programs
and services (Gregg, 2007).
Impacting perceptions begins by identifying the commonalities between an
administrator and a school library media specialist, not the differences. Both have a
mission of delivering best services and instructional practices to students, which requires
change through trust (Foote, 2015). A partnership between the administrator and school
library media specialist clarifies the professional role expectations, building proactivity
and commitment to the needs of the school (Haycock, 2002; Wilson et al., 1993).
Leadership. Perspectives can be altered through the professional leadership role.
School library media specialists can be described as servant-leaders, those being leaders
of various services that meet the needs of others (Brantley, 2011). Often, this leadership
role is unnoticed by the administration. The school library media specialist can exercise
leadership through collegiality and collaboration, networking skills that enrich the school
community and strengthen student achievement. Often administration does not view
these employees as leaders, therefore, school library media specialists work in isolation
and must find opportunities to demonstrate leadership (Brantley, 2011).
Differences in perception of leadership roles in school librarianship exist. For that
reason, Martin (2011) conducted a study of school library media specialists, which
57

examined the importance of leadership in practice. The evidence indicated that school
library media specialists perceived all leadership roles to be an important part of their job
responsibilities, but they found them difficult to implement. This research indicated that
the support of school administrators was the most essential factor in expanding the
professional roles of school library media specialists to include instructional leader.
Researchers, deGroot and Branch (2011), examined library science graduates and their
experiences, revealing that leadership was an area needing attention due to the evolution
of traditional professional roles to meet 21st century responsibilities. If school library
media specialists cannot develop leadership skills, then administrators cannot be expected
to include them in decision making. The themes connected with leadership center on
changes, trends, and advocacy, which have been identified in the following areas
(deGroot & Branch, 2011):


More leadership roles require background theory and practice to connect with
expected performance.



Leadership training should be included in all courses that can be adapted
realistically to a school setting.



Leadership development advocated through professional organizations
provides a network of continuing educational opportunities.

As the professional roles of school library media specialists continue to be more diverse,
leadership is needed to advocate for the job functions and the value of the library media
specialist.
Advocacy. The inappropriate responsibilities that an administrator assigns to the
school library media specialist tend to be stereotypical (Dorrell & Lawson, 1995) and
pose a challenge that limits fulfilling AASL’s five professional roles. A school library
58

media program can be greatly impacted by a school administrator (Hartzell, 2002a).
Administrators are the primary authorities that steer perceptions of the school library
media specialist by being advocates of the program and removing barriers blocking
professional role expectations (Francis & Lance, 2011). When given the opportunity,
school library media specialists can create a creditable presence in the schools by
carrying out the five professional roles defined by the AASL. Although administrators
agree that some tasks do not support these key professional roles, they still identify them
as important and continue assigning these inappropriate responsibilities to school library
media specialists (Shannon, 2009).
Moreillon and Starrett (2014) were highlighted in a blog posted by Nelson (2014)
in which they shared what they learned about principals’ perceptions toward school
library media specialists’ impact on student achievement through the effectiveness of the
five professional roles. An advocacy video was created that featured the culmination of
their research project, which was intended to promote school librarianship. Their insights
about the vital professional roles are listed below (Morellion & Starrett, 2014):


School library media specialists have the greatest influence in the professional
roles of leader and instructional partner.



School library media specialists are information specialists, used by
administrators as professional developers.



School library media specialists are teachers, delivering formal instruction
through workshops and by mentoring others.

To be viewed as equivalent to other staff in the school setting, school library
media specialists must advocate for their professional roles to gain administrative
support. Hansen (2012) stated that, as information specialists, school library media
59

specialists are expert in stimulating awareness about the librarian position and locating
resources to be professionally proactive and, thus, influencing the perceptions of others.
This can be achieved through the following (Hansen, 2012):


Building relationships with all stakeholders.



Being culturally active from the micro to the macro levels.



Continuing to expand knowledge of evidence-based practices in the library
field.



Documenting the impact of professional roles.

Through a continuous struggle, advocates for the school library media specialist position
have promoted the impact their services have on school success (Drake, 2007). Advocacy
can begin through the coursework in degree programs and continue in educational
training provided to administrators and school library media specialists.
Shannon (2002) and Ehler-Hansen (2014) also recognized that when school
library media specialists promoted their position, then other educators acknowledged
their influence in the educational environment and viewed them favorably. To revise
views associated with their professional roles in the school community, school library
media specialists must become activists, using grassroots advocacy by educating
stakeholders; presenting evidence of their effectiveness; meeting with colleagues to
enhance integration; collaborating with library associations; creating district, regional,
and state cohorts; inviting parents and the community into the library media center; and
showcasing events through various communication and media sources (Ehler-Hansen,
2014). Advocacy begins with the school library media specialist making connections with
stakeholders to show how their professional roles “transform teaching and learning”
(Ehler-Hansen, 2014, p. 18), valuable steps necessary to change perceptions of this
60

position.
Impact of Perspectives
Preconceptions determine information that is deemed relevant, based on the
evidence provided (Hartzell, 2002a) and, therefore, the impact administrators have on
school library media specialists’ professional roles cannot be overstated (Shannon, 2009).
Changing the influence of administrators toward the professional roles of school library
media specialists begins with positive perceptions of this valuable position. Hartzell’s
(2002a) and Shannon’s (2009) studies confirmed that even though the AASL has outlined
specific professional roles for school library media specialists that support effective
library media programs, administrators were not applying these principles. The effective
use of school library personnel and services is dependent on administrators knowing the
practices of school library media specialists (AASL, 2016). This will only improve with
better administration certification programs at the college level (Alexander et al., 2003),
more staff development at the district level (Page, 2014), relevant educational
publications at the principal level (Kaplan, 2006), and stronger collaborative relationships
between the school library media specialist and the administration at the school level
(Harvey, 2008b). Hartzell (2002a, p. 106) stated straightforwardly that changing
principals’ perceptions will only be accomplished “by assaulting them directly,
repeatedly, and from a multiplicity of directions.”
Relationships Between Administrators and School Library Media Specialists
Relationships influence perspectives and perspectives influence relationships
(Wong, 2014). Research has shown that perspectives are formed from many factors,
affecting the affiliation between school administrators and library media specialists
(Foote, 2015). To understand the professional roles of school library media specialists,
61

administrators need to know what is required of this position by becoming familiar with
the AASL standards (2007), found in Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School
Library Media Programs (2009a) and Information Power: Building Partnerships for
Learning (1998). These documents define school library programs and the
responsibilities pertaining to this profession, both theoretically and practically (DeGroff,
1997), detailing the manifestation of this position in an ideal school environment. Even
though the scope of the responsibilities is large, the professional roles can be realistically
carried out when supported by a strong relationship between the administrator and the
school library media specialist.
Differences in viewpoints between administrators and school library media
specialists have emerged and will only be resolved by understanding and respecting the
job responsibilities and contributions of each position (Hartzell, 2002a). Research has
established that the most important factor influencing a positive change in contradictory
views relies on relationships (Shannon, 2012; Wong, 2014; Yetter, 1994). Both job
positions in the school setting are challenging and isolated; therefore, to establish the
most effective school program for students and for the five professional roles identified
by the AASL to be fulfilled with fidelity, a collaborative relationship between the school
administrator and school library media specialist is critical (Bishop, 2011).
For the professional roles of school library media specialists to be accepted as
valuable in the school, it must first be recognized as such by the administration (Lau,
2002a), which emerges from trusting relationships. Lau’s (2002a) 770 survey responses
regarding the influence that school library media specialists have through their
professional roles, revealed that 66% regarded their principals as very supportive,
followed by 29% as sometimes supportive, and 5% as unsupportive. To achieve
62

supportive relationships, school library media specialists should continuously assess their
professional role presentation, swaying perspectives in their favor by their performance
without relying on professional standards and legislative mandates to be implemented
(Loertscher, 2012). Cooperative relationships between the school library media specialist
and the administrator garner support and positively changes perspectives (Lamb &
Johnson, 2008).
Gregg (2007) conducted a case study with an elementary administrator and school
library media specialist in Missouri, choosing them due to the outstanding reputation of
their program in the state. The administrator and the school library media specialist had a
positive and productive relationship, and the school library media specialist carried out
the professional roles according to state and national guidelines and was viewed as an
expert in this field of education. The interviews, observations, and document
examinations indicated the following (Gregg, 2007):


The principal was knowledgeable about the library media program.



The principal supported the program by scheduling appropriate tasks for the
librarian.



The principal used the librarian as a participant in professional development
and curricular planning.



The principal empowered the librarian in leadership roles.



The principal and librarian were an advocacy team, leading to student
achievement.

Since professional relationships are constantly evolving, any relationship has the
ability to be restructured, affecting a change in perspectives (Wong, 2014). School library
media specialists and administrators need to collaborate to build a positive relationship by
63

establishing common perceptions about the required professional roles to deliver a better
education.
Theoretical Frameworks Regarding Social Organization Concepts
The dynamics of an organization, according to Hoys and Miskel (2013), are
affected by the perceptions, expectations, and generalizations of professional roles, which
impact the functioning of the system. In an organization, communication is necessary to
understand the purpose of each position and to establish a common view of professional
role expectations. Use of common language through dialogue helps ensure that the goals
of all are aligned (Hoys & Miskel, 2013). Communication is a tool that can be used in an
organization to establish social influence and reinforces each person’s value and
contribution.
Organizational conduct is judged based on norms that have been established by
traditional standards (Hoys & Miskel, 2013) through school, district, and state level
administrators; higher education training programs; and professional associations, each
delivering possibly conflicting messages about professional roles of school library media
specialists. School administrators oversee all the functions of the school; therefore, they
have the most influence in the school organization, determining the use of the school
library media specialist (Haycock, 2002) as well as other faculty. In order for school
library media specialists to be highly effective in the school environment, administrators
need to understand their job responsibilities and place them in the professional roles that
lead to fulfilling the school’s mission. Administrators who lack understanding of the
appropriate use of the school library media position can develop awareness by having
effective communication with these personnel (Sokol et al, 2015).
Senge (2006) proposes five integrated disciplines that can transform an
64

organization into an effective educational institution, based on understanding the
contributions of all members. The five disciplines follow (Senge, 2006):


Personal mastery, which aligns perspectives with current realities to achieve
goals.



Mental models, which focus on the thinking and behaviors of members in an
organization.



A shared vision, which is the organization’s purpose that is accepted by each
member.



Individual talents, which are acknowledged and developed through dialogue,
forming team learning in the organization.



Systems thinking, in which problems are identified and solutions discovered
to effect improvement.

As people are encouraged to be engaged in an organization, their capabilities grow
through inquiry, and mutual goals are met by everyone being equally accepted and
respected.
Through administrative guidance, an organization can positively change when
support and acknowledgment is given to all personnel (Senge, 2006). Change can begin
when school library media specialists feel comfortable enough to promote their expertise
to the administration and present solutions that benefit the school. Through their actions,
they influence others’ behaviors and can help create a common approach toward student
learning. As their professional roles become a valuable asset throughout the school, they
will be viewed as contributing faculty members.
Summary
I put forth much effort in locating research related to perspectives on the
65

professional roles of school library media specialists from both administrators and the
school library media specialists themselves. Although there was past research on this
topic, there were many unresolved issues requiring further investigation. Crowley’s
(2011) and Cicchetti’s (2015) research indicated that the main factor in schools having
effective library programs was the administrators’ perception of and attitude toward the
school library media specialist. Positive professional relationships between the
administrator and the school library media specialist are crucial to changing mental
models, which develop from personal experiences, while communication and
collaboration improve stereotypes and biases. School library media specialists have
national standards that justify their professional roles and services, but they must
constantly promote their unique educational expertise.
The studies researched for this literature review recommend that administrators
take advantage of opportunities to build their knowledge about school library media
positions and the school library program (Page, 2014). This knowledge is needed in order
to make informed decisions, to evaluate the professional roles of the school library media
specialist, and to ensure that the library services are embedded in the vision of the school.
The valuable assets of the school library media center will be underutilized if
administrators continue to lack this information. Strategic plans can be formulated to
provide administrators with the relevant knowledge in the area of school library media
that is now a priority (Levitov, 2009). In order for this position to be perceived as
valuable, and not be eliminated, a more definitive understanding of the school library
media specialist’s professional roles needs to be incorporated into administrators’
education requirements and mandated in state policies. School library media specialists
cannot achieve a common school view of their position through advocacy alone.
66

Inconsistency regarding the professional responsibilities of school library media
specialists remains. Before solutions to this issue can be determined, administrators’ and
school library media specialists’ perceptions regarding these practices need to be
identified, compared, and observed in school practices. The professional roles of leader,
teacher, instructional partner, information specialist, and program administrator have an
important part in the school educational program, yet implementation is complicated due
to the conflicting perspectives of administrators and school library media specialists.
Krueger (2015, p. 65) stated that “being a media specialist means different things at
different schools, but their value consistently lies in specific school and administration
needs.” Administrators must become more aware of the educational methodology of
librarianship. School library media specialists must be more proactive leaders, informing
other school personnel about their professional contributions. Kearney (2000, pp. 20-21)
states there is a significant difference in “perceptions of the role of library media
specialist, expectations of the library media specialist, as well as what [has been]
advocated” by the school library media guidelines (AASL, 2009).
States, districts, and schools determine the diverse assignments of the school
library media specialist, using this school resource in conflicting ways based on how
valuable the administration perceives the school library media specialist to be in the
school setting (Harvey, 2009). At all three levels, decisions must be made regarding the
types of services a school library media specialist provides and the support necessary for
achievement must be provided (Gilmore, 1990). To be an integral part of the educational
process, school library media specialists need to make “practice meet promise” (Braxton,
2008, p. 3) by delivering on expectations and services promoted by the librarian
profession.
67

It is clear from the review of literature that school library media specialists have
been given a variety of tasks that demonstrate a misunderstanding of their professional
roles (McCracken, 2000). Identifying the professional roles and responsibilities of a
school library media specialist as a leader, instructional partner, information specialist,
teacher, and program administrator is not enough. Ballard (2009) has shown that
advocacy and being a professional member of the learning community also need to be
integrated in order for administrators to acknowledge the effectiveness of the school
librarian. “The work of the library media specialist is the work of the school, which is to
improve student learning” (Brantley, 2011, p. 26); by fulfilling the five professional roles
of this position, the library media specialist contributes to student success. There remains
a need to clarify and revise the responsibilities of these professional roles and to integrate
them with the expectations of the school. Even in the 21st century, school library media
specialists continue resisting the stereotypical perception of traditional professional roles
(Pascopella, 2002).

68

Chapter 3 – Research Design and Methodology
In this chapter on research design and methodology, I provide details that explain
the procedures used for the research. Within the ten sections, components of the
investigation are described. The design identifies the arrangement of the research and the
justification of the approach chosen to implement. Research questions specify the
participants and the purpose of the inquiry. The population discloses the group, setting,
and sites that are studied. Next, the choice of the sampling group and the appropriate
method used to determine the selection sample is indicated. Descriptions of the data
source, instrumentation, and materials are addressed. The data collection procedures
emphasize how I use the instrumentation throughout the investigation.
My process for screening, analyzing, and interpreting the data include coding and
categorizing to develop themes for collecting the information. A critical part to all
research is the validity and reliability of the instruments, including credibility and
dependability of the application with acknowledgement of the risks and benefits.
Information is also shared about my presence as the researcher and possible biases related
to the investigation. All research is approved as ethical through the mandatory procedures
of the university’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the school district in order to
protect the rights and confidentiality of all participants; this is received prior to beginning
the study.
Research Design
The research design that I selected was a concurrent, qualitative approach using
inquiry with a methodological triangulation of data collection. Specifically, I collected
data simultaneously with various participant groups using several instruments that
enabled thematic analysis. This method focus was related to real-life experiences
69

examined through multiple viewpoints and included the influences forming these beliefs.
By collecting data simultaneously, I gathered the evidence by direct contact with the
participants through questions, observations, and conversations (Fitzpatrick, Sanders, &
Worthen, 2011). Since I was the only researcher and the educational participants were
dispersed among 14 schools, this approach to gathering data was the best option based on
availability and time. These constraints were due to the additional administrative duties
that I had as a supervisor, the time-on-task obligations of the school library media
specialists, and the multiple areas of management that were guided daily by school
administrators. Through the application of qualitative data, I collected the information
and generated an interpretation leading to a better understanding of the topic of study. At
the end of the investigation, I established a conclusion regarding the perspectives of the
professional roles of school library media specialists. The use of multiple investigative
approaches provided results that were perception contributions of the participants.
A qualitative research design was chosen for the purpose of exploring individual
perspectives and gathering general background of the participants. This information was
valuable to me for educational research and presentations. Merging the qualitative data
provided a sufficient approach that enhanced clarification and accuracy (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2010) by allowing me to interpret the findings of the participants’
perspectives and their background experiences to the best of my ability.
Qualitative information was gathered through open-ended and closed
questionnaire items, supported by interviews and observations. Since qualitative data
collection can be laborious, I selected a smaller representation of participants that
provided me with a deeper awareness of the topic (Fitzpatrick et al., 2011). The
interviews and observations allowed me to interact directly with participants. Through
70

inductive reasoning I examined the collected data and subjected it to inductive analysis to
determine the results (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). Closed questions gathered
information on the questionnaire through structured questions, with scaled response
choices for assorted experiences. I generalized the information in a summary format.
Through deductive reasoning I found causes that proven the outcomes (Creswell, 2014).
Qualitative inquiry research was effective due to the questioning and observation
techniques to discover personal perceptions.
The use of qualitative method for investigating perspectives was the best choice
for my investigation, although there were some challenges. This approach allowed me to
ask multi-part questions, gathering various perspectives and their causes, which
strengthened the credibility of the results (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). By using a
qualitative approach, the research questions were answered more comprehensively. The
data collection was inclusive, decreasing limitations (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
An honest admission was as a doctoral student I was inexperienced in this type of
research, yet I was being advised by university faculty who were the experts. The data
collection was extensive, requiring more time for generating deductions.
The participants included elementary principals, assistant principals, and school
library media specialists. The methodological triangulation was formed from the use of
questionnaires, interviews, and observations. The groups of administrators and school
library media specialists received different questionnaires. A smaller representation of
school library media specialists that I selected also participated in pre- and postobservation interviews and observations of classroom practices and documents. The
participant groups and data instruments that were used follows:


Participant Group 1: All elementary principals were asked to participate by
71

completing the questionnaire. Elementary principals completed an online
questionnaire through Google Forms containing open-ended and closed
questioning to provide qualitative information. Data collection was gathered,
the information was analyzed, and the results were determined from the
principals’ group.


Participant Group 2: All elementary assistant principals were asked to
participate by completing the questionnaire. Elementary assistant principals
completed an online questionnaire through Google Forms containing openended and closed questioning to provide qualitative information. Data
collection was gathered, the information was analyzed, and the results were
determined from the assistant principals’ group.



Participant Group 3: All elementary school library media specialists were
asked to participate by completing the questionnaire. Elementary school
library media specialists completed an online questionnaire through Google
Forms containing open-ended and closed questioning to provide qualitative
information. Data collection was gathered, the information was analyzed, and
the results were determined from the school library media specialists’ group.



Participant Group 4: A sample of three elementary school library media
specialists was asked to participate in interviews and observations. The
selected school library media specialists took part in a pre- and postobservation interview and their classroom practices and specific documents
were observed. Data collection was gathered, the information was analyzed,
and the results were determined from the sample school library media
specialists’ group.
72

The questionnaire data from each of the participant groups was analyzed
separately, and then organized and labeled according to identified topics. The interview
and observation data collected from the sample school library media specialist group was
analyzed separately, and then organized and labeled into specific topics. The results from
each group were compared in order to identify similar or diverse perspectives. I discussed
qualitative thematic findings for comprehensive results in chapter four. The results
showed if the data was convergent or divergent. Once data was collected and analyzed,
then the thematic findings were compared between each participant group for an overall
interpretation. This was established by merging the outcomes from the four educational
groups into one general conclusion. My goal was for convergent results which
demonstrated that triangulation had occurred (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
Research Questions
Elementary administrators and school library media specialists were the targeted
participants. The information that I wanted to acquire from these groups were their
perspectives on the professional roles performed by the personnel in the media center.
Along with these personal views, it was also necessary to compare and find evidence of
practices in the media center. Therefore, the following questions were used to direct this
research:


What are the perceptions of elementary administrators regarding the
professional roles of school library media specialists?



What are the perceptions of elementary school library media specialists
regarding their professional roles?



How do the professional roles perceptions of administrators compare to the
professional roles perceptions of the school library media specialists?
73



How do the professional roles perceptions of school library media specialists
compare with their daily practices?

Population and Setting
The setting of this study was a small, rural school district in Maryland. The school
system contained 21 schools with a total student population of approximately 8,700.
From the 21 schools, 14 were at the elementary level with the elementary student
population being approximately 4,400. Among the 14 elementary schools, nine were
labeled Title I schools, receiving federal funding based on a high poverty rate. At the
elementary level, there were 14 principals and eight assistant principals; one assistant
principal was part-time. Each elementary school had a library media specialist; 11 were
full-time instruction in the media center, while three provided half-day instruction.
Sample Selection
Sampling that I selected was based on the participants that provided information
pertaining to the research questions by considering factors such as library science
experience, years at the school site, and certifications. This was crucial for my
investigation because the sampling procedures determined representative statistical
significance (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) that provided meaningful data. No
sampling was used for elementary principals (group 1), assistant principals (group 2), and
school library media specialists (group 3); therefore, all were provided the opportunity to
participate in the research by completing the questionnaire.
For the interviews and observations, I selected three school library media
specialists (group 4) using single-stage, purposeful sampling. As the district supervisor, I
had access to the population and sampling occurred openly. I selected those who I
considered to have significant knowledge in the library science field and who contributed
74

valuable information in regards to the research questions (McMillan and Schumacher,
2010). Due to my past interactions with the population, I chose a sample that contained a
variety of library media personnel representative characteristics, providing information
from different types of schools that were related to the study. This sampling required less
cost and time because I did not have to pay participants and I had access to them as their
supervisor. The participant selections supported my inquiry and I managed the sampling
on my own (McMillan and Schumacher, 2010). Necessary considerations for sampling
reflected the population, and still provided rich data, which included the following:


Number of years as a school library media specialist.



Number of years teaching at the same school site.



Student population in the school.



Full-time school library media specialist position.



Number of administrators.



Schools with a special attribute (performance awards, federal funding,
primary programs, intervention support, etc.).

The sample size of three, representing the school library media specialists, was a
realistic generalization of the population of school library media specialists in the district
(McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). This number represented approximately 20% of the
targeted population. Being a solo researcher with limited experience, this size was
challenging, yet manageable. The sample showed equitable representation of the 14
school library media specialists. This sample size also supported the purpose of the
research investigation and was practical for the qualitative collection strategies. The
information collected provided a variety of evidence pertaining to the research questions
that was based on each participants’ personal viewpoints. Purposeful sampling used for
75

selecting the three representatives of the school library media specialists was determined
on accessibility and specific attributes (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
Data Sources (Instruments and Materials)
After examining research similar to this topic, and saturating the information for
the literature review, I did not locate any instruments that were applicable to the targeted
questions. Therefore, I had to create an administrative questionnaire, a school library
media specialist questionnaire, and pre- and post-observation interview questions for the
sample of school library media specialists. After revising these questions, a pilot study
was conducted with one assistant principal and one school library media specialist. Both
provided consent to participate.
The questionnaires, pre- and post-observation interviews, and observations
collected data that was associated with the research questions. From a pilot study, minor
adjustments were made in the areas of questionnaire formatting and approximate time for
completing the questionnaire. Audio recordings of the pre- and post-observation
interviews were used to develop transcripts. The pilot interviews allowed me to practice
nonjudgmental posture, strengthen listening skills, increase awareness of verbal and
nonverbal messages, and verify correct interpretations of answers to alleviate any
miscommunication (Fitzpatrick et al., 2011). From the pilot interview experience, I
refined some wording to align better with the research questions. For the observation, I
created a template to record times, activities, observed behaviors (what is seen), and
observed conversations (what is heard). The information documented provided real
accounts of the school library media specialists’ practices. Through review of the data, I
determined categories and codes that were organized into themes corresponding with the
AASL’s five professional roles. Also, I reviewed the school library media specialists’
76

daily lesson plans, weekly schedule, state annual report, and portfolio for professional
role indicators. The pilot study verified that these instruments provided valuable
information and supported the intent of the research questions, along with the overall
purpose of the investigation.
Both questionnaires were electronic and written in similar format; although there
were minor differences relating specifically to the school position of administrator or
school library media specialist. I developed each questionnaire to contain 26 items; 10
closed and 16 open-ended questions. There are three sections: (a) general information of
the participant, such as gender and age range, in questions 1-5; (b) educational
background in questions 6-9; and (c) professional role identification in questions 10-26.
The questionnaires focused on qualitative inquiries which aligned with all 26 questions.
The questions were ordered from easy, short answers and then progressed to more
thought-provoking, involved responses. Open-ended questioning produced qualitative
data by exploring deeper perspectives and experiences on the research topic that was
unique to each individual participant (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). Distinctive
differences were identified due to the participants having control over their responses.
Although it was time-consuming for me to examine the data and discover commonalities
by assigning codes, the results were not inferred on a larger population as statistically
significant since it was only relevant to personal educators’ perspectives employed in my
school district (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). Using closed questioning provided me
with demographic data which I was able to categorize and interpret for statistical
significance (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). The inquiries I created for the
questionnaire provided choice options directly relating to my research questions.
The three selected school library media specialists that I chose as purposeful
77

sample representatives participated in pre- and post-observation interviews. I conducted
the interviews individually and face-to-face at the school site. Since anonymity could not
be held; confidentiality was affirmed (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). I received
permission from the participant and the school administrator. The questions I asked were
identical and presented in the same sequence, but follow-up questions varied in order for
me to clarify the responses of the participants. There were 12 semi-structured open
questions for the pre-interview and five semi-structured open questions for the postinterview. I provided a copy of the questions to each school library media specialist prior
to the interview. The interviewee had the opportunity to speak freely, while I ensured that
certain questions were asked that pertained to the topic investigated (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2010). I had a good rapport with the participants from past experiences in
the education field; therefore, relationships had been established. With this foundation
previously existing, the participants needed to feel comfortable giving honest answers by
sharing their true perspectives with me. Yet, the participants could just as likely have
provided statements not reflective of their personal views, but instead state the answers
they believed I expected to be correct since I held the position as their supervisor. A
change from the pilot study was that I took notes to strengthen the data collection as I did
an auditory recording during the pre- and post-observation interviews. Once collected, I
transcribed, examined, categorized, and analyzed the interviews.
Through my observations, practices of the three selected school library media
specialists were examined, along with documents reflecting their professional roles. I
visited the three school sites, over a three-day period, to collect data of the school library
media specialists’ professional roles and responsibilities. The unstructured observations
occurred in their natural environments, the library media centers, without any
78

interference from me (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). The visits were disclosed and
participants knew that a study was being conducted by giving consent to be involved.
Through this approach, I extracted data that revealed real experiences of the participants’
daily habits to better understand their personal perceptions.
Notes were taken using a template on what was seen and heard, and what it
meant, to provide additional information relevant to the research questions. Observations
were continuous and documented chronologically. I examined the data collected to
determine behavior that was important to the investigation (McMillan & Schumacher,
2010). I also observed planbooks, schedules, portfolios, and state annual reports that were
maintained by each of the school library media specialists for accountability purposes.
These official documents provided additional evidence of the professional role
expectations in each school environment. Since the observation group was small, it was
reflective of the district, but cannot be generalized to a larger population. Yet, the data
collected was valuable to the myself, as the supervisor, and the district in which the
investigation took place.
Data Collection Procedures
Data was collected concurrently using the administrators’ and school library
media specialists’ questionnaires. With the school library media sample participants, preand post-observation interviews were consecutively conducted, along with the three-day
observations and a review of specific official documentation. Permission was attained to
perform the investigation from the dissertation committee, the university’s IRB
committee, the district’s Board of Education; including the school administrators and
library media specialists of the selected visitation sites. Once permission was granted, I
followed the established procedures to conduct the investigation.
79

I presented the research purpose and procedures to principals and assistant
principals through personal phone calls. A link containing the consent form and online
questionnaire was emailed to all administrators using Google Forms. I presented the
research purpose and procedures to school library media specialists through personal
phone calls. A link containing the consent form and online questionnaire was emailed to
all school library media specialists using Google Forms.
The three selected school library media specialists were contacted by phone
regarding agreement to participate in the observations, pre- and post-observation
interviews, and documents review. The original three school library media specialists that
were selected agreed to participate. If any school library media specialist did not want to
participate, another would have been chosen from the population as a sample until three
had been attained. I visited each of the three school library media specialists at their
school site over a three-day period to collect data. Data collection began with the preinterview, followed by observations of responsibilities and official documents, and ended
with a post-interview. Interviews were audio recorded and notes were taken.
Observations of the school library media specialists’ practices were documented on a
Google Sheets template that indicated time, observed behavior (what is seen), and
observed conversation (what is heard). The official documents included daily lesson
plans, weekly schedules, portfolios, and state annual reports.
Data collection was completed simultaneous, or slightly staggered, based on the
initial contact with the participants. Once I presented the investigation to the principals,
assistant principals, and school library media specialists, a specific time period for
completing the data collection was determined, and I sent email reminders to request
participation. The school visitations were scheduled to occur during three consecutive
80

days, eight hours each day; therefore, one visitation was completed prior to another
beginning. The data collection extended over a three-month period. Once all data had
been collected, I sent an electronic thank you to all principals, assistant principals, and
school library media specialists choosing to participate and reassured the confidentiality
of the questionnaire submissions.
Data Analysis Procedures
When information collection was completed, qualitative data from each group
was combined for a general interpretation that formed a final conclusion relating to the
research questions. Once the results were explored, perspectives of the professional roles
of school library media specialists were revealed. The qualitative method approach
delivered an accurate representation of the participants that supported the research topic
under study. The procedures for data analysis were as follows:


The principal participants completed their questionnaires and electronically
submitted their responses through Google Forms, allowing me to individually
view the responses in text and chart formats. The results from the principals’
questionnaires were merged and interpreted.



The assistant principal participants completed their questionnaires and
electronically submitted their responses through Google Forms, allowing me
to individually view the responses in text and chart formats. The results from
the assistant principals’ questionnaires were merged and interpreted.



The school library media specialist participants completed their questionnaires
and electronically submitted their responses through Google Forms, allowing
me to individually view the responses in text and chart formats. The results
from the school library media specialists’ questionnaires were merged and
81

interpreted.


Information collected separately from each group also had the ability to be
viewed in Google Sheets to recognize qualitative themes. These themes were
determined as I coded responses that identified behaviors and viewpoints
toward the school library media specialists’ practices. The codes were
combined based on main ideas. The main ideas were labeled in specific
categories as I discovered the recurring themes associated with the
professional roles of school library media specialists. Using a recursive
process (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010), I continuously reviewed the
information to find similar and opposing evidence, relationships, and patterns
that were connected with the themes.



I transcribed the pre- and post-observation interviews from the sample school
library media specialists by using the audio recordings assisted by notes. The
participants reviewed and approved the transcripts, indicating the
documentation was an accurate representation of the interviews. Like the
questionnaire review process, the interview transcripts were examined for
codes and categories constructed on the participants’ responses, leading to
specific themes of the school library media specialists’ professional roles and
responsibilities.

 Observations of the three school library media specialists that I recorded on the
template was reviewed and approved by the participants, indicating the
documentation was an accurate representation of the observations. I then
examined the documented behaviors on the template for codes and categories
of themes following the same procedures as the questionnaires, detailing
82

specific practices of school library media specialists.
 The official documents associated with the three school library media
specialists were examined and specific themes were identified from these
papers using the same thematic approach as the questionnaires. The data was
coded and categorized into themes to reflect the tasks performed by the school
library media specialists.
 The results from the three school library media specialists’ interviews and
observations of practices and documents were merged and interpreted.
 The interpretations of the principals’, assistant principals’, and school library
media specialists’ questionnaires; and the school library media specialists’ preand post-observation interviews and observations were analyzed. Based on this
analysis, final conclusions became evident.
I examined information collected from each participant group to determine if a
convergence or a divergence of the data would emerge during the final analysis. The
qualitative findings were revealed by using content analysis, generating the content into
thematic categories until patterns were identified (Fitzpatrick et al., 2011). A
summarization of the data trends centered on the participants’ educational backgrounds
and experiences (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
After I completed the collection of questionnaires, interviews, and observations, I
disaggregated the information by using both Excel spreadsheets and NVivo, a data
analysis software. Both Excel and NVivo allowed me to upload the questionnaire
answers, interview transcriptions, and the templates used to document my observations.
This provided me a platform in which I developed the coding system and recognized
patterns that were grouped into categories determining the main themes of my
83

investigation. These technological systems provided quick references that I used for the
examination of individual information. I then combined each participant groups’ data for
interpretation through data sorting and matrix coding queries. The outcomes shown
common content which I generated into themes for the qualitative data analysis. Other
data trends were created based on participants’ demographics, educational backgrounds,
and personal experiences. All of the data was reviewed multiple times until consistent
outcomes were identified in order for the results to be reliable. If the conclusions were
similar, then the triangulation of data was successful. This was evident when the data
collection methods were cross-checked and the outcomes revealed recurring patterns.
(McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). If the results were conflicted, more investigative
measures needed to be applied. The data collection from the four participant groups were
combined into one general conclusion that provided answers to the research questions
that were being investigated.
Validity, Reliability, Credibility, and Dependability
Through this study, the rigor of the data collection and assessment made the
qualitative research credible, dependable, valid, and reliable. Evidence of credibility and
dependability in qualitative research was shown with similarity between the observed
experiences and personal views (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). Therefore, I, and those
participating in the investigation, had common interpretations of the experiences of the
participants which supported the results of the study. Strategies used were reflected
through the following (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010):


Multi-method strategies;



Low-inference descriptors;



Mechanically recorded data;
84



Member checking;



Participant review.

Using the triangulation approach, multiple strategies gathered data from various groups
of participants on the same topic, and then the results were examined to produce a
dependable outcome. This increased the accuracy of the outcome once all levels of the
data had been analyzed (Fitzpatrick et al., 2011); combining the results of the
questionnaires, interviews, and observations.
Low-inference descriptors were the accurately recorded observations on the
template, documenting what was seen and heard through detailed descriptions, and were
written in terms the participants understood (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010).
Mechanically recording the pre- and post-observation interviews by audio allowed me to
continuously review the participants’ information and it became a permanent record of
events (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). During the interviews and observations, I asked
additional questions to clarify responses, actions, and documents; this was member
checking for data correctness. Participants reviewed and approved the pre- and postobservation interview transcripts and the behavior recorded on the observation templates
(McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). With the existence of multiple realities, I was aware
that each piece of data reflected individual experiences and social factors (Katz & Kahn,
1978) and was based on trustworthiness to confirm the outcome.
Valuable qualitative research was evident when explanations of experiences were
similar to actual practices (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) using both external and
internal validity. The research I conducted in the participants’ real-world environment
supported external validity (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010), although limited since the
results are not generalizable to other populations. Internal validity was determined on the
85

strength of my research methods used in data collection methods (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2010). To avoid inaccurate results, I was aware of sampling bias in
choosing the participants and the motivation of those chosen to participant (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2010). When using purposeful sampling, I selected participants based on
established criteria, not those with a similar outlook to mine, in order to discover any
differences that impacted relationships between administrators and school library media
specialists. The participants chosen had specific characteristics which could be
generalized with populations containing similar qualities (McMillan & Schumacher,
2010).
The pre- and post-observation interviews with the sample participants allowed me
to get a deeper and clearer understanding of perspectives; the focus remained on the
purpose of the research. By observing the practices of the three school library media
specialists in their school environment, ecological validity was achieved (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2010); limiting the results to similar conditions. Construct validity was
evident because the multiple use of instruments provided various measurements to
increase understanding (Fitzpatrick et al., 2011) of the perspectives of administrators and
school library media specialists toward the professional roles performed by school library
media specialists.
Reliability in the investigation occurred as I delivered consistency in data
collection (Creswell, 2014). The questions used in the questionnaire and during the preand post-observation interviews were standardized. Participants received the exact same
questions, delivered in the same order, providing for easy replication. Again, the
interview transcripts were checked for correctness by the participants. Coding definitions
determined from the questionnaires, interviews, and observations showed minor
86

fluctuations, but remained constant through data comparisons of the professional roles of
school library media specialists. The repetition of question delivery and thematic coding
also ensured reliability.
Roles of Researcher
In this qualitative method study, my role varied with the type of data I was
collecting. During the qualitative collection, I limited interaction with the participants to
correctly record observations and interviews. I critically self-assessed throughout the
investigation for subjectivity (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). I created distance with
the participants to remain objective (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010). The correct roles
that I performed ensured that validity, reliability, credibility, and dependability exist.
I entered school sites for observational data collection, the natural setting where
participants were comfortable and displayed ordinary activity. During the visits, I
remained an outsider and did not become involved in what was being observed. My role
changed to match the proper situation (Katz & Kahn, 1978) when working with
principals, assistant principals, school library media specialists, and the sample school
library media specialist participants. These changes were evident due to the exchanges
necessary to obtain the data. During data collection, I attained deeper levels of each
participant’s experience by asking clarifying questions, listening to the participants,
thinking about what was seen and heard, and then verifying what was documented was
correct. Through the methodological triangulation, I confirmed that the findings were the
reality of the perspectives of administrators and school library media specialists.
Measures of Ethical Protection
With qualitative method research, ethical issues were expected due to involving
people and their personal professional perception of others. This was also identified in the
87

IRB proposal and the school district’s application to conduct research. Protecting the
rights of the participants was my priority. This was most important due to the reliability
of the research and the respectability I wanted to maintain as the researcher from the
university and school district that I represented. There needed to be a trusting relationship
between the participants and myself; therefore, anticipated issues were addressed in the
design planning phase. This qualitative method study respected ethical situations by
doing the following:


Prior to implementing research, my dissertation chair and I completed the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Extramural Research training
course “Protecting Human Research Participants;” submitted the university’s
IRB proposal; and gained permission from the Board of Education to conduct
research in the school district.



To begin the study, I shared the purpose of the investigation with participants;
gave participants the choice to contribute in the research; and acquired signed
consent from participants.



As data was collected, I respected the school environment; assured equal
treatment among all participants; established honesty and trustworthiness with
participants; and respected confidentiality.



While analyzing data, I uncovered multiple perspectives; shared conclusions
for clarification; and concealed identifiable information.



Through reporting, I was honest sharing results; followed APA procedures
and copyright laws; and promised to provide the results to the participants
once approved by the university.

Ethical protection encouraged the subjects to participate honestly. Anytime during the
88

investigation participants had the authority to withdraw the information they contributed
to the study. Once the university reviews the study and approves the research for
publication; the results will be shared with all participants.
Summary
The concurrent, qualitative method approach investigating the perceptions of
elementary administrators and school library media specialists regarding professional
roles of school library media specialists adhered to respectable practices, observed all
established policies, and followed the intended procedures and expectations. The
investigation used a qualitative research method that delivered a richer understanding of
the topic. The results retrieved from each participant group through the data collection
instruments were individually analyzed and then combined to generate final results
directed toward the specific research questions. I showed professionalism as a
representative of the university and as an investigator collecting information in the school
district. The outcome will guide administrators and school library media specialists to
improve relationships among school personnel and extend knowledge about professional
roles and responsibilities that impact overall school performance.

89

Chapter 4 – Findings
The purpose of this study is to discover and compare the perceptions of
elementary administrators and school library media specialists regarding the professional
roles of school library media specialists. Administrators and school library media
specialists are viewed as collaborators (Forcht, 2011), educating each other in their
specialized professional areas to benefit students and the school environment. Therefore,
this research provides information that each of these educators can use to have active
conversations, producing a mutual interpretation of the professional roles of the school
library media specialist. The expectation I had from this research was for the participants
to reflect on these perceptions and assess if their current practices were the most effective
use of the school library media specialist’s position. The school district can evaluate the
investigative data as an established baseline of information in order to develop a more
highly effective library media program.
I conducted inquiry using methodological triangulation through the
implementation of a concurrent, qualitative method research design. The data collection
was completed simultaneously with four participant groups. I created questionnaire,
interview, and observation instruments that provided thematic analysis. The multimethod strategies allowed me to gather data on the same concept, while combining the
outcomes increased the accuracy of my analysis leading to more reliable conclusions.
General conclusions from these findings identified data that was convergent, determining
that triangulation had been achieved. The conclusions were similar; therefore, the
triangulation of data was successful.
The data that is reported represents the perspectives of administrators and school
library media specialists. This information is associated with each participant’s real-life
90

experiences and has been examined through multiple lenses. The qualitative findings
were revealed through the examination of the data, and then categorized as themes
emerged. The findings relating to the participants’ educational backgrounds and
experiences were indicated using summarizing trends identified in the data. After I
gathered the information with the various instruments, I used both Excel spreadsheets and
NVivo software to structure the data into an organized format that was analyzed to
determine findings. This analysis established a platform I referenced for coding and
categorization, leading to the main themes discovered through my investigation.
I continuously reviewed the data until the outcomes were consistent for reliable
results and recurring patterns were identified. First, I examined the data from each of the
four participant groups. Then the principals (group 1) and assistant principals (group 2)
groups were merged and reviewed together, followed by the school library media
specialists (group 3) and sample school library media specialists (group 4) groups.
Finally, the thematic findings from the combined administration group and the combined
school library media specialist group were further compared using the identified themes
to generate concluding results that provided answers to the research questions. Five
common themes of instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and
time became evident regardless of the data collection instrument implemented and the
participant group investigated. These parallel themes were supported with various
examples and references from each of the participant groups.
This chapter presents the findings from the four participant groups in relation to
the research questions. I provide descriptions of the participants, including general
information and educational background. Data findings reveal the perceptions of
administrators regarding school library media specialists’ professional roles and
91

perceptions of school library media specialists regarding the performance of their
professional roles. Further results entail a comparison of the administrators’ and school
library media specialists’ perceptions. A summary reiterates the overall findings that
answered the research questions.
General Information and Educational Background
The selected educators provided meaningful data that was pertinent to the
investigation. Principals (group 1), assistant principals (group 2), and school library
media specialists (group 3) required no sampling, and all were requested to
participate in the research by completing a questionnaire. The sample school library
media specialists (group 4) was a subgroup chosen from the participating school library
media specialists (group 3), using single-stage purposeful sampling, for accessibility and
definitive attributes. The sample size equitably represented the school library media
specialists (group 3). Each group’s contributions supported the purpose of the research
investigation. The information collected provided evidence relating to the research that
was based on each participant’s personal viewpoints.
I received a positive response to my initial participation inquiry resulting in 14/14
(100%) principals, 7/8 (88%) assistant principals, 14/14 (100%) school library media
specialists, and 3/3 (100%) sample school library media specialists; an overall 97%
participation rate. I included the sample school library media specialists’ (group 4)
general information and educational background in the data representing these personnel
since the sample school library media specialists (group 4) comprised a subgroup from
the school library media specialists (group 3). All participants were employed at the
elementary level, with each school consisting of grades prekindergarten through fifth
grade. The general information for each participant group included gender, age range,
92

position title, years of experience in this position, and school enrollment. The educational
background for each participant group listed degrees and certifications, resource
personnel courses, professional development opportunities, and a knowledge rating of
school library media specialists’ professional roles.
Participant groups 1 and 2 (principals and assistant principals). The 21
administrators comprised eight (38%) males and 13 (62%) females, all holding a fulltime administrator position at an elementary school. In the three age-range groups, there
were three administrators (14%) aged 30-37 years, 10 (48%) aged 40-49 years, and eight
(38%) 50 years or above. I divided years of experience in administration into four groups,
with five individuals (23.8%) having 0-5 years, two (9.5%) having 6-10 years, nine
(42.9%) having 11-15 years, and five (23.8%) having over 15 years of experience. The
average size of the elementary schools over which these administrators had responsibility
varied: nine (42.8%) had 201-300 students, six (28.6%) had 301-400 students, and six
(28.6%) had 401 or above.
The administrators had varied educational backgrounds that met the state
guidelines, including bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees with various
certifications. At the bachelor level, degrees earned were 12 (57%) early childhood and
elementary, five (24%) prekindergarten through middle school, two (9%) general studies,
and one (5%) each in instrumental music education and science. At the master level, three
administrators had multiple degrees. Overall, 19 (90%) received master’s degrees in
administration and supervision, with one each in the areas of special education,
curriculum and instruction, reading, elementary education, and counseling. At the
doctorate level, one (7%) administrator earned this degree in educational leadership for a
changing population. Other administrator certified areas listed were special education,
93

National Board, reading, and an associate’s degree in media and university studies.
Administrators supervise school library media specialists; therefore, data was
gathered regarding coursework preparation of this resource personnel position. Of the 21
administrators, 15 (71%) had no training in managing school library media specialists,
while four (19%) had one course, one (5%) had two courses, and one (5%) had three or
more courses. Professional development would provide another opportunity for training.
Twelve (57%) administrators received no training, while nine (43%) were provided
professional development regarding resource personnel professional roles, such as school
library media specialists. The administrators, based on their background and work
experience, rated themselves as somewhat knowledgeable (23.8%), knowledgeable
(66.7%), and very knowledgeable (9.5%) about the professional roles of school library
media specialist positions.
Participant groups 3 and 4 (school library media specialists and sample
school library media specialists). The 14 school library media specialists included one
(7%) male and 13 (93%) females. The age groups for the school library media specialists
was one (7%) aged 29 years and below, one (7%) aged 30-39 years, five (36%) aged 4049 years, and seven (50%) aged 50 years or above. Of this group, three (21%) held parttime and 11 (79%) had full-time school library media specialist positions at an
elementary school. The three part-time school library media specialists also instructed
prekindergarten classes during the other half of their work day. Years of experience as
school library media specialists fell into four groups: one (7.1%) with 0-5 years, four
(28.6%) with 6-10 years, five (35.7%) with 11-15 years, and four (28.6%) with over 15
years of experience. The average size of the elementary schools in which these school
library media specialists were employed varied from six (43%) having 201-300 students,
94

five (36%) with 301-400 students, and three (21%) with student enrollment of 401 or
above.
The school library media specialists had various educational degrees, 13 of them
meeting the state guidelines in library media, and one in the process of taking classes that
were required for certification. At the bachelor level, four (29%) degrees were in
elementary education only, three (21%) in early childhood and elementary education, two
(14%) in elementary and middle school education, four (29%) in English secondary
education, and one (7%) in library science. Thirteen of the school library media
specialists (93%) had master’s degrees. Overall, five (38.46%) received a master’s in
curriculum and instruction, three (23.08%) in general education, two (15.38%) in library
science, and one each (23.08%) in the areas of mass communications, library and
information science, and cross-curriculum. Other school library media specialist
educational areas listed were associate’s degrees in media and library science, with
certifications in technology and as a reading specialist.
The school library media specialist position is a specialized area; therefore, data
was gathered regarding coursework preparation for this resource personnel position. The
school library media specialists had great variation in their educational backgrounds.
Some school library media specialists graduated from a university with a major in library
science and directly entered an educational career, while others began as classroom
teachers and furthered their academic education in the library science field. Of the 14
school library media specialists, one (7%) had no training in library media, one (7%) had
one course, and 12 (86%) had three or more courses. Professional development
opportunities are offered each year in the district in this study. The school library media
specialists reported that one (7%) attended one to three trainings, one (7%) went to four
95

to six, and the majority of 12 (86%) attended seven or more. The school library media
specialists rated their knowledge about the library science field based on their
background and work experience. Overall, they self-identified as somewhat
knowledgeable (7%), knowledgeable (29%), and very knowledge (64%) about their
positions.
Perceptions of Administrators Regarding the Professional Roles of School Library
Media Specialists
I organized the administration participants into two groups: the 14 elementary
principals comprised group 1, and the seven elementary assistant principals comprised
group 2. The participants in these groups revealed their personal perspectives on the
professional roles of school library media specialists from the administrative viewpoint.
First, I examined the data for each individual participant, then for each group, and finally
for both groups combined to determine the final outcomes associated with administrators.
These administrators’ results are reported using the identified recurring themes associated
with the perspectives of the administrators on the professional roles of school library
media specialists: instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time.
Instructional resource (administrators’ perceptions). Principals assigned the
responsibilities of the school library media specialists, who were also supervised by the
assistant principals. Many tasks involved supporting the school instructionally. The
administrators saw the school library media specialists primarily as teachers, information
specialists, and instructional partners. Administrators viewed school library media
specialists as teachers who implemented instructional sessions centered on weekly media
lessons for prekindergarten through fifth grade, along with reading promotion and
intervention as needed. The school library media specialists planned and implemented
96

instruction, including assessments used to evaluate student performance.
School library media specialists conducted additional instruction in the areas of
research and technology including digital literacy lessons, the introduction of software
programs and their use, and hands-on activities in makerspace centers that involved
curriculum connections through creativity and inquiry. Administrators at three schools
had school library media specialists lead weekly technology lessons that involved use of
software programs and equipment. The technology lessons were conducted in
collaboration with classroom teachers in order for the skills to be extended into the
classrooms. Grade levels that received technology lessons varied from all grade levels to
intermediate grades only.
Educational positions at all elementary schools have been integrated as the district
enrollment decreased. Administrators used the school library media specialist as the
acceleration and enrichment teacher to provide weekly lessons to qualifying students in
the intermediate grades because the school system did not have a personnel position for
gifted and talented. Administrators expected school library media specialists to develop
real-world investigations for these targeted students that required product creativity and
presentations before an audience. These personnel served as part-time school library
media specialists and part-time prekindergarten teachers in three schools. This resulted in
the school library media specialists having the additional job of planning and instructing
for the prekindergarten program, which limited time to fulfill the instructional duties
required in the media center.
Administrators believed that teacher collaboration had a positive impact on
instruction, if scheduling allowed. Integration of the grade-level content into library
media lessons was attempted through team meetings and cooperative planning and
97

teaching. If the opportunity was available, school library media specialists consulted with
teachers and assisted them with designing thematic units. Principal eight (P8) stated:
The media specialist in the school makes a strong connection to the classroom
curriculum. She meets with teachers and plans lessons to meet her standards, as
well as enhance grade level curriculum. She is a team player and is always willing
to go above and beyond to build students' interest in the school library and
reading.
Administrators acknowledged that through collaboration instruction becomes more
genuine for the students when educators integrate curriculum, connecting learning
between contents with engaging activities.
Restrictions eliminated. Administrators would assign more instructional
professional roles to the school library media specialists, especially in the area of
technology, if restrictions could be eliminated. The responsibility of technology
coordinator would be expanded with the integration of school-wide technology learning
projects through modeling and teaching strategies. School library media specialists would
have increased face-to-face time for media, acceleration and enrichment, digital literacy,
and technology classes. It was even suggested by principal one (P1) that the library
would be renovated to reflect a technology classroom, if there were no limitations.
School library media specialist would be required to remain up to date on media and
technology trends. Students would have additional library classes that assisted
specifically with writing and research projects using technology support.
Principals of schools that lacked separate technology classes expressed that this
would be the first change provided to intermediate grades if there were no limitations.
Assistant principal one (AP1) stated, “I would assign the media teacher with technology
98

instruction that includes students using books and technology resources to be problem
solvers, both by building and creating solutions.” Administrators shared the importance
of students knowing how to word process and manipulate various types of hardware
because they live in a technological world. In addition, administrators would have lessons
designed for parents delivered by the school library media specialists in the areas of
digital literacy, technology resources, and reading to increase their understanding of 21st
century skills.
Both classroom teachers and school library media specialists would focus on
information literacy and makerspaces that centered on the curricular content through
partnering encouraged by administrators. The school library media specialists would have
conferenced with teachers to create up-to-date classroom libraries. Principal two (P2) felt
that without the current restrictions, both of these personnel positions would have
“benefited having the media specialist as an instructional partner and team teacher to
enhance what is taught in the classroom relating to standards, assessments utilizing
Universal Design for Learning (UDL), and the Gradual Release of Responsibility (GRR)
model.” This would support the district instructional initiatives as skills and knowledge
would be shared leading to improved student learning experiences through educational
partnerships.
Benefits. The administrators’ viewpoints showed that the professional services
provided by the school library media specialists benefited their schools by having a
significant impact instructionally. School library media specialists not only taught
specific skills, but also provided connection and support within and among various
contents, allowing students to gain a more global perspective on learning. The school
library media specialists provided opportunities for students to learn meaningful real99

world skills and expanded students’ knowledge of literature through story elements and
critical vocabulary. School library media specialists supported, enriched, and taught
necessary information and technological skills. Some administrators praised the gifted
and talented investigative units designed by the school library media specialists, which
provided challenging real-world learning. The administrators view school library media
specialists as instructional leaders, not only inside the media center but throughout the
school as sound research was conducted and numerous opportunities to build a love of
literature were promoted. Although limited, collaboration with classroom teachers was
worthwhile for enhancing students’ learning. Administrators felt that the school library
media specialists seamlessly delivered content curricula and library skills integration; this
was observed in the administrators’ completed evaluations of school library media
specialists.
Effectiveness. The administrators identified responsibilities associated with the
school library media specialists’ instructional areas. School library media specialists were
excellent in the professional role of information specialist as they met teachers’ requests
for digital or print materials for instruction. “Our students get a very well-rounded
experience working with the various media available to them. They are not just taught
how to find a good book, but how to retrieve information in various ways” stated
principal ten (P10). Administrators indicated that school library media specialists
accessed websites and modeled locating accurate, reliable information. Resources were
readily available to enhance student learning. School library media specialists shared
their expert knowledge about digital literacy which addressed information issues for
students and staff to increase awareness.
The school library media specialist became a co-teacher and introduced topics
100

into the classroom or extended the classroom learning as an instructional partner. This led
to the development of instructional teams engaged in intensive discussions related to
curricular and learning needs, resulting in technological and pedagogical support. AP1
participated in team meetings in which the school library media specialist asked teachers
for their curricular units and willingly found resources that supported their instruction.
Administrators encouraged teachers to regard the school library media specialist as a
resource, as well as an instructional partner. One administrator with a large school
population was challenged to equitably distribute instructional time to classroom teachers
requesting additional co-teaching with school library media specialists for technology
lessons because the teachers were learning as much as the students.
The administrators claimed that the school library media specialists’ work as
teachers enhanced the instructional program of the school by designing authentic,
content-based tasks for students. They taught current technology skills and digital
citizenship, while modeling these areas for classroom teachers. Principal six (P6)
requested lessons that were interdisciplinary, in place of mini-lessons and book
exchanges. This principal also supported centers and projects that provided students with
real-world learning opportunities and the skills students needed for academic success in
the classroom.
The administrators referenced one negative in the area of professional
development. Administrators felt that there should be required training for school library
media specialists in order for them to remain current with curricular skills and
technological skills. Through administrators’ observations, school library media
specialists skills were not keeping up with new developments as they worked with all
students and staff. School library media specialists needed to remain familiar with grade
101

level curricula to gain an understanding of expectations and to integrate their own literacy
and technology standards into lessons. Administrators observed media lessons that were
supportive of classroom instruction, yet lacked the 21st century skills necessary in current
learning contexts such as student collaboration projects, speaking and listening
presentations, digital classroom use, and choices in delivery of assignments.
Administrators’ experiences. Administrators shared experiences that influenced
their perceptions regarding the professional roles of school library media specialists.
Principal four (P4) provided an example of reading promotion. This principal had worked
with many school library media specialists, but one in particular had a mission to
promote reading in all aspects of assigned responsibilities. This school library media
specialist played an important role in leveling books school-wide, developed incentive
programs, shared resources, and inquired about assisting with reading growth in
classrooms. The interaction that P4 had with this particular school library media
specialist set a precedent that continues with all other media personnel.
Assistant principal six’s (AP6) experience centered on resources to improve
learning. Whenever assistant principal six (AP6) entered the media center or computer
lab, the depth of student learning was impressive due to the skills that the students had
developed with the school library media specialist. The school library media specialist
arranged for an author to visit as a guest speaker. The author provided useful information
to guide students’ writing in the classroom. It was evident that teachers found the
presentation beneficial because they were observed applying the information in their
lessons. This is an example of how appropriate resources can be utilized to improve
student learning.
Relationships (administrators’ perceptions). Administrators noted that the
102

professional roles performed by the school library media specialists were constructive in
building relationships, maintaining a culture of learning, and leadership because they
worked directly with the entire school community. As school library media specialists
performed various duties they provided an opportunity to extend relationships in different
settings, which included lunch, recess, arrival, and dismissal, along with morning
announcements presented through video or closed-circuit television. They served on
various school action committees as chairperson or member, such as the School
Improvement, Partnership, and Instructional Consultation teams. One principal also had
the school library media specialist be the editor of the newsletter, which was distributed
throughout the school community.
School library media specialists needed good working relationships in order to
implement their professional duties. Administrators affirmed that when school library
media specialists displayed positive attitudes and enthusiasm for learning, relationships
strengthened, and they were more accepted in the school community as equal
instructional partners. Administrators witnessed school library media specialists visiting
classrooms to collect books, which allowed morning interactions with students and staff.
At one location, the school library media specialist organized community guest speakers
for after-school events with students and parents as the audience. Those school library
media specialists who created positive relationships in the school community went above
and beyond to lead, support, and be an available resource to students, teachers, and
families.
Effectiveness. Administrators believed that school library media specialists held a
central position within the school framework because they are the only professionals in
the building who consistently interact with students and staff over multiple years. This
103

makes school library media specialists valuable to the school community for providing
information about procedures, programs, and the well-being of children, both
instructionally and non-instructionally. Administrators referred to the media center as the
hub of the school, where students are engaged academically and socially. They
considered that the location of the library establishes a common ground that serves all
students, staff, and families, regardless of background. The administrators also expressed
that leadership roles enhance relationships in the school community. As school library
media specialists promote activities and the library program, they demonstrate how the
media center supports school goals. All of the professional roles allow the school library
media specialist to support the entire school population through unique, individualized
relationships. In the opinion of administrators, school library media specialists maintain
an overall positive learning culture with both students and staff.
Administrators also referenced some negative concerns regarding professional
relationships connected with the school library media specialist position. Administrators
interacted with other school faculty who viewed the library personnel as not useful in the
school which affected relationships. These faculty members were not knowledgeable
about the various responsibilities assigned to the school library media specialists.
Therefore, the administrators insisted that it was important for school library media
specialists to perform their responsibilities effectively in order for others to perceive their
professional roles as essential. Those school library media specialists who promoted their
professional roles received support from classroom teachers because it established a
common understanding due to their different function in the school community. Time
management and administrative decisions are other areas that have an undesirable impact
on relationships. P2 stated:
104

Administrators do not always allow the media specialist to fully engage in all
five of the professional roles, which causes a decrease in the effectiveness of the
program. Decisions are also made outside of the school building that deeply
effects how a media specialist can perform his or her roles.
Misperceptions were caused to develop among educators towards the library personnel
due to unawareness of school library media practices, limitations in performing these
practices, and administrative directives that weaken relationship opportunities.
Administrators and school library media specialists created essential relationships
first through interaction and dialogue which was necessary in understanding various
views toward the professional roles of school library media specialists. This was achieved
through conferences and observations, both formally and informally. A majority of eight
(38%) administrators met weekly with their school library media specialists, while seven
(33%) met monthly. The other six (29%) administrators met as needed, formally each
grading period, or not at all. Administrators’ understanding of the school library media
specialist position was critical in order for this educator to be an effective contributor in
the school.
Administrators’ experiences. Administrators shared experiences that influenced
relationships through a school-community connection, school visits, and observations. P8
worked collaboratively with the school library media specialist to develop common
expectations of how this position fits into the school community. Informal discussions
took place during bi-weekly or monthly meetings that identified library media concerns
and needs, and the school library media specialist’s passion for the position was reflected
in daily actions. A trusting relationship was developed that led to the school library media
specialist being willing to implement new programs or activities that aided the students
105

and families. The staff at principal 14’s (P14) school respected the school library media
specialist’s practices and recognized this person’s expertise by asking for resource
availability on certain topics. “My experiences with media specialists have been very
positive, and their role has been very broad and beneficial to the school,” stated principal
11 (P11), “They have been critical in building a love for reading and for implementing
technology in a greater capacity.” Administrators’ interactions with various school media
specialists formed their personal perceptions of this position.
Administrators also witnessed relationships between school library media
specialists, students, and educators through visits to other elementary libraries. Principal
nine (P9) watched the school library media specialist teach a lesson to a group of students
that supported the classroom content and shared that it was obvious that the school library
media specialist planned the lesson with the classroom teacher because the classroom
lesson was supported and the students’ engagement level was high. A negative situation
reported by P6 was an ineffective professional relationship between the school library
media specialist and a classroom teacher. The school library media specialist was the lead
instructor implementing the lesson, while the classroom teacher performed as an
instructional assistant. Stronger academic relationships were needed between the
classroom and media center educators for development of the lessons to add value to
student learning and to implement collaborative planning for lesson delivery.
Role priorities (administrators’ perceptions). The American Association of
School Librarians and the Maryland State Department of Education identified the five
main professional roles of school library media specialists as information specialist,
instructional partner, leader, program administrator, and teacher. The administrators
ranked these professional roles in order of importance. Principals’ and assistant
106

principals’ priorities are reported separately due to the variation in perspectives.
Principals’ highest priorities. Of the principals, 8/14 (57%) chose teacher as the
highest professional role priority, followed by 5/14 (36%) selecting instructional partner,
and 1/14 (7%) information specialist as the most important professional role. This is

Principal Respondents

represented in Figure 1.
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Teacher Instructional Information
Partner
Specialist
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 1. Principals’ highest priority of professional roles. This figure illustrates the
principals’ perceptions of the most important professional role practiced by school library
media specialists.
The principals selected the professional role of teacher as the most important
because, in their view, students need to be taught skills related to library science from a
trained professional. They felt that the school library media specialist plays a crucial role
in promoting and enhancing reading ability and teaching students how to select resources
that are reliable and appropriate to assignments. The principals knew that, along with
supporting the curriculum, promoting literacy development, and fostering lifelong
reading habits, library instruction covers a wide range of research skills and technology
standards. Principal 13 (P13) shared that direct instruction delivered by the school library
media specialist “allows students to utilize the many facets of the library and to recognize
the potential in gaining information when accessing, evaluating, and using information
107

from multiple sources to apply new knowledge.” The principals’ first priority was always
the students. The media function that most directly impacts students is teaching, and the
other professional responsibilities are delivered through best practices by a person who
has the ability to teach others.
Instructional partner was ranked the second most important professional role by
the principals. The school library media specialist plays an integral part in programs and
curriculum as a partner with the teachers and students through coordinated learning.
Students make connections to their leaning through related resources. P8 stated:
It is important for the library media specialist to have the ability to be an
instructional partner, to form a collaboration team with grade level classroom
teachers. I feel being a partner reflects relevance to the library media program.
The library is viewed by students and staff as a continuation of classroom
activities and objectives.
School library media specialists partnering with classroom teachers supported students’
instructional needs.
Information specialist was ranked as the third most important professional role by
the principals. School library media specialists carry out the broad role of information
specialist, which enhances teacher knowledge and student learning. As perceived by P2,
the other professional responsibilities of school library media specialists were linked to
that of information specialist, thus making this professional role the priority. The school
library media specialists’ expertise in sharing relevant information benefited all students
and staff.
Assistant principals’ highest priorities. Of the assistant principals, 4/7 (57.1%)
chose teacher as the highest professional role priority, followed by one 1/7 (14.3%)
108

assistant principal each choosing information specialist, instructional partner, and leader
as the most important professional role. This is represented in Figure 2.

Assistant Principal
Respondents

4
3
2
1
0
Teacher Instructional Information Leader
Partner
Specialist
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 2. Assistant principals’ highest priority of professional roles. This figure
illustrates the assistant principals’ perceptions of the most important professional role
practiced by school library media specialists.
Assistant principals considered the professional role of teacher to be the most
important because student learning was the first priority in their buildings. “I believe that
the media specialists' most important role is teaching and working with the students.
They also present and teach information to their colleagues and the students' families,”
stated AP4. To achieve a 21st century media center, assistant principals declared that the
main responsibility of school library media specialists was to deliver instruction for
information literacy, digital citizenship, content curricula, and proper use of the media
center.
Assistant principals equally ranked information specialist, instructional partner,
and leader second as the most important professional roles. AP1 chose information
specialist because the school library media specialist should be current on media and
technology trends in order to appropriately instruct students and prepare them for the
109

ever-changing future. Instructional partner was selected by assistant principal two (AP2)
due to the impact this professional role has on the school as a whole. AP2 believed that
school library media specialists who partner with teachers to support, enrich, and coteach lessons contribute effectively to school improvement. The professional role of
leader was selected by AP6 because the school library media specialist “must have an
active role with school improvement and student assessment…up-to-date with the
changes in the 21st century media program…effectively communicate their knowledge of
current practices to others in the school community.”
Principals’ lowest priorities. For the least important professional role, 8/14
(57.14%) principals chose program administrator, with 3/14 (42.86%) choosing
information specialist and leader. This is represented in Figure 3.

Principal Respondents

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Program
Leader
Information
Administrator
Specialist
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 3. Principals’ lowest priority of professional roles. This figure illustrates the
principals’ perceptions of the least important professional role practiced by school library
media specialists.
The principals reiterated that all the professional roles were important but felt that
program administrator had the least impact on students’ daily instruction. This
responsibility involves managerial types of tasks. Some principals thought that this
professional role isolated school library media specialists, while the other professional
110

roles connected them to the school community by providing value to its educational
mission. P11 chose program administrator because the organization of the media center
could be managed by an instructional assistant or a parent volunteer once a routine was
established.
Principals equally ranked information specialist and leader as the second least
important professional roles. They stated that information was readily available to all, and
a school library media specialist should be the guide, not the provider, of information.
The principals view information specialist as an extension of the other professional roles,
supporting the implementation of all professional roles through different forms of media
and a plethora of topics. The principals claimed that leadership is not a requirement for
the position of school library media specialist, although confidence is crucial when
carrying out their other professional roles. Overall, principals felt that if a school library
media specialist was not a leader, the responsibilities of the other professional roles
would still be accomplished, impacting student growth, which in turn would build
leadership abilities.
Assistant principals’ lowest priorities. For the least important professional role,
4/7 (57.14%) assistant principals chose program administrator, and 3/7 (43.86%) chose
leader. This is represented in Figure 4.

111

Assistant Principal Respondents

4
3
2
1
0
Program
Leader
Administrator
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 4. Assistant principals’ lowest priority of professional roles. This figure illustrates
the assistant principals’ perceptions of the least important professional role practiced by
school library media specialists.
Although program administrator requires effective management skills important
for maintaining the library, it involves non-instructional behind-the-scenes tasks. AP1
thought that this professional role could also be fulfilled by other specialists in the school.
Working with people was more important than overseeing a media center, and in the
opinion of AP4, program administrator was less about people interaction. These assistant
principals admitted that it was difficult to rank the professional roles but felt program
administrator had the least impact on student learning, with its focus on managerial tasks.
Leader was ranked as the second least important professional role by other
assistant principals. These assistant principals did not feel that leadership should be
considered a role because school library media specialists expressed leadership in all
other professional roles. Leadership abilities are evident through the use of best practices
and multiple learning strategies, collaborative planning and content connections,
budgeting and allocation of current resources, and the modeling and integration of current
technology. Assistant principals implied that there were different levels of leadership and
112

that each school library media specialist displayed leadership capabilities based on their
confidence level.
Restrictions eliminated. Administrators stressed that library management was a
necessary responsibility, although they deemed program administrator to be the least
important professional role. The administrators concluded that circulation usage reflected
a connection to resources and curricular support. Administrators anticipated school
library media specialists would coordinate more programs, including additional reading
incentive initiatives and robotics leagues, if budgetary and personnel restrictions were
eliminated. Hiring assistants for managerial tasks would extend the school library media
specialist’s professional role of program administrator. School library media specialists
organize the media center, purchase and circulate resources, create routines for inventory,
and record budget outlays, which result in access to current materials – all of which are
expectations of administrators. Library management would incorporate additional
resource exchanges, reading occurrences, and in-depth exposure to various genres and
technologies with additional resources. This would allow more opportunities for handson experiences with various formats of information.
Effectiveness. The administrators identified responsibilities associated with the
five professional roles that were valuable. The school library media specialist maintains
the media center, along with all aspects of technology, and provides knowledgeable
assistance to the administration. These professional roles make the school library media
specialist well-rounded and increase the strength of the media program, establishing the
library as “a central part of the school day due to the professional roles that the school
library media specialist displays,” as P8 stated. The school library media specialists’
responsibilities were a school priority which was why the administrators recognized the
113

library as the center of the school.
One assistant principal mentioned the school library media specialist’s
exceptional program administration, especially management of the acceleration and
enrichment program in spite of lacking certification in gifted and talented education.
“The investigative units are developed based on students’ interest and then students
determine the direction the project takes. The school library media specialist facilitates,
establishes boundaries, and provides resources while the students take control of their
own learning,” stated AP1. The school library media specialists also raised funds to
increase their library budget by hosting book fairs and received donations from
community businesses. School library media specialists had permission to organize
fundraising events that allowed them to manage spending without district directives,
although it was not viewed by the assistant principals as an assigned responsibility. The
assistant principals allowed school library media specialists to coordinate book fairs to
raise reading awareness and funding for additional resources. As for the program
administrator role, assistant principals understood that library management conducted by
school library media specialists was not allocated a scheduled time period in the school
day, yet they built a media collection that was unique to each school and acquired
materials for student and teacher learning and enjoyment.
Administrators experienced a positive impact on student achievement,
instructional partnerships, and the school culture from school library media specialists
with expertise in implementing all five responsibilities. According to P11:
All of the roles are beneficial to the overall success of a school. If the five
responsibilities are implemented fully…reading proficiency will increase,
research opportunities will occur, technology will be utilized more effectively,
114

beneficial programs will have oversight and direction, and teachers will have a
resource and an instructional partnership with the media specialist.
All five professional roles make for a very effective school library media specialist and
library program, enhancing the overall instructional program through communication,
collaboration, decision-making, management, and planning when implemented in a
balanced way.
The administrators also mentioned negatives associated with the implementation
of the professional roles in the area of library management. They understood that school
library media specialists hold a very powerful position. If school library media
specialists’ focus is dominated by library management, then the school library media
specialists decreased the opportunities for instruction, collaboration, and student and staff
support. P13 had reservations about the work involved in program administration yet
realized that it had to be done, “but the managerial tasks took time away from working
with students and teachers…the tasks of shelving books and book inventory as negative.”
Administrators were concerned with the integration of an appropriate balance of all
responsibilities. They often witnessed school library media specialists encumbered with
administrative duties, which did not allow them to be effective in working with students
and teachers. P1 indicated that if the school library media specialist were proficient in
handling these five professional roles, not just library management, then the needs of the
students and staff would be met; but the proficiency of professional role practices was not
consistent among all elementary schools.
Influences on principals’ perceptions. Various educational situations influenced
how the principals viewed the professional roles of school library media specialists,
which affected the priority placed on each responsibility. The 14 principals indicated the
115

following areas, listed in order of having the most influence on their perceptions: (1)
formal evaluations; (2) peers/mentors; (3) professional resources; (4) student/teacher
experiences; (5) professional development; and (6) educational courses. Other areas
principals mentioned that influenced perspectives were working with school library
media specialists in different schools and informal evaluations/conferences. This is

Influences on Perspectives

represented in Figure 5.

Informal Evaluations/Conferences
Working in Multiple Schools
Educational Courses
Professional Development
Student/Teacher Experiences
Professional Resources
Peers/Mentors
Formal Evaluations
0

2

4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Principals

Figure 5. Influences on principals’ perceptions. This figure demonstrates experiences that
influenced how principals perceived practices of school library media specialists.
Influences on assistant principals’ perceptions. Like the principals, there were
various educational situations that were influential on how the assistant principals viewed
school library media specialists’ professional roles which ultimately determined the
priority placed on each responsibility. The seven assistant principals indicated the
following areas, listed in order of having the most influence on their perceptions: (1)
peers/mentors; (2) student/teacher experiences; (3) evaluation process/conferences and
professional resources; and (4) professional development. Another area an assistant
principal listed was having worked in multiple schools. The integration of these areas
developed personal perspectives that affected how assistant principals viewed and used
school library media specialists in their schools. This is represented in Figure 6.
116

Influences on Perspectives

Worked in Multiple Schools
Professional Resources
Evaluation Process/Conferences
Student/Teacher Experiences
Peers/Mentors
0

1
2
3
4
5
6
Number of Assistant Principals

Figure 6. Influences on assistant principals’ perceptions. This figure demonstrates
experiences that influenced how assistant principals perceived practices of school library
media specialists.
Skill sets (administrators’ perceptions). Administrators recognized the widerange of skills of school library media specialists and used these skills for school
improvement. As leaders, many school library media specialists are coordinators of
school-related activities, sharing their skills throughout the school community. As
technology coordinators, they are knowledgeable about digital resources and equipment,
and the administrators saw their tasks as sharing this knowledge and assisting library
users. They felt school library media specialists should be able to provide technology
support, monitor the computer lab, submit technology repair requests, and inventory
equipment.
Some administrators also had school library media specialists who opted to be
program coordinators of book fairs, which raise funds for material purchases. As
accelerated and enrichment teachers, they planned a showcase where students had the
opportunity to share their projects with multiple audiences. Other tasks that
administrators assigned school library media specialists were webpage design, attendance
rewards, reading logs, and liaising: with the university for author visits, with public
117

libraries for boys’ reading programs, and with area businesses for book drives.
Additionally, administrators described the school library media specialists as resource
providers and presenters. Resources for students, staff, and parents are recommended for
learning support and growth. The school library media specialist presented information
centered on instructional and technology resources at weekly faculty meetings and during
professional development days.
Benefits. The school library media specialists benefited the school through their
skills with technology and resource management from the administrators’ viewpoint.
School library media specialists teach students technological skills, with an emphasis on
word processing skills that build each year and are incorporated into their classrooms.
Principal five (P5) considered the school library media specialist to be a technology
leader, “having priceless skills that help students and staff, as well as parents, in
identifying appropriate websites and resources.” Staff, students, and parents were
informed about new ideas, technical skills, and equipment use. School library media
specialists had the knowledge and organization of resources that were of great interest to
students and were supportive of the current curricula. Resources covered a range of topics
and were consistently provided as instructional materials for classroom use.
School library media specialists had multiple skill sets that made them key
instructional leaders and valuable members of the school community. Administrators
appreciated the current resources available to students, preparing them to be college- and
career-ready and improving lessons with more meaningful information. Administrators
observed that material selections were appropriate to students’ reading levels, which also
supported classroom instruction. The acceleration and enrichment students presented
their project to one assistant principal, sharing a product they had researched and created
118

through the use of the library resources and databases that were introduced by the school
library media specialists.
Effectiveness. School library media specialists displayed skills that affected the
administrators’ perspectives in identifying the effectiveness of the professional roles
practiced. Information specialist and teacher were selected equally by principals as the
most effective professional roles due to school library media specialists’ exposure to new
technology, current and appropriate resource availability, literature knowledge, and grade
level strategies. Information specialist alone was selected as the strongest role by the
assistant principals. This choice was based on the school library media specialists’
modeling new technologies and resources, sharing expertise in age-appropriate literature,
discovering current and various resources, and enhancing lessons with technology
integration. As second most effective role, instructional partner was selected by
principals for the importance of team planning and grade level curriculum support, while
teacher was selected by assistant principals since self-reflection was evident during
conferences and in planning documentation to meet and set student learning goals. As
third most effective role, principals chose program administrator due to the library
management routines of budgeting, inventorying, and circulating materials. Assistant
principals chose instructional partner because school library media specialists
communicated with teachers about curriculum and enhanced topics in the regular
classrooms, as much as time allowed. Lastly, one principal selected leader because the
school library media specialist was always willing to do more and discovered solutions to
problems without relying on administrative directives.
The majority of principals was oppositional and listed the role of leader as one of
the weakest professional roles. Their reasons included a lack of technology knowledge,
119

unwillingness to adjust from a traditional to a 21st century setting, and a lack of
assertiveness when working with colleagues. Next, teacher and program administrator
were selected equally by principals based on the development of lessons that were not
engaging to students and the omission of student learning assessment. Also, principals
stressed that school library media specialists needed to improve time management in
order to decrease incomplete tasks and to create a functional and structured library.
Lastly, principals listed instructional partner, although the reason was not the fault of the
school library media specialists. Being part-time school library media specialists limited
their participation as instructional partners. Information specialist was not regarded by
any principal as a weakness, and two principals believed there were not any weaknesses
associated with the discharge of the professional roles at their schools.
The majority of assistant principals selected the professional role of teacher again,
but indicated it to be a weak area. This was based on inconsistent alignment of lessons
with state standards and not differentiating instruction for students with special needs.
Some assistant principals also acknowledge evidence of weakness in each of the other
professional roles of information specialist, instructional partner, leader, and program
administrator. Information specialist was selected because of limited technology
knowledge. Due to time restrictions, instructional partner was an issue. Commenting on
leadership, one assistant principal said that the school library media specialist never
promoted the position or the program, and program administrator was chosen because the
school library media specialist focused too much on library management while not giving
instructional areas priority.
Principals’ opinions of professional role improvements. Principals examined the
school library media specialists’ professional roles and determined which skills needed
120

the most improvement due to the expectation that the Maryland College- and CareerReady standards are to be implemented. Instructional partner was chosen by 10/14
(71.4%) principals, followed by teacher and information specialist, each chosen by 2/14
(14.3%) principals. This is represented in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Principals’ opinions of professional role improvements. This figure reveals
principals’ perceptions of school library media specialists’ practices that need improved.
Instructional partner was identified as the skill needed in the most improvement
by principals because the standards’ framework had been recently established, and there
was a learning curve for implementing the Maryland College- and Career-Ready model
among educators. P11 said, “Partnering with the classroom teacher by creating a
connection between the library and content area would integrate and implement the
standards in a greater, deeper capacity.” Principals with part-time school library media
specialists understood that this limitation affected their ability to become instructional
partners due to time constraints from dual jobs. School library media specialists’
collaboration with classroom teachers who were engaged with the standards and had a
common understanding of the expectations for students assisted the development of
instructional partnerships. P6 stated, “It would benefit student learning in our school if
the media specialist became an instructional partner in more ways than providing teachers
121

with resources that support their curriculum.” Principals claimed that collaboration can
continuously be improved in the area of partnering with fellow educators to enhance and
enrich the learning process for students.
Principals ranked the practices of the professional roles of information specialist
and teacher equally as needing skill improvement. According to some principals, their
school library media specialists had not received training or were uncomfortable with
new electronic resources assigned to the school, causing technology to be vastly
underutilized. This limited the resources that were available through the school library
media specialists to use in collaborations with teachers and to support student learning.
Other principal concerns led to additional comments regarding teaching reading.
Principals agreed that being a reading teacher was challenging, yet reading knowledge
can be a very powerful asset in the library for designing lessons that are appropriate and
guiding students to books that are on their instructional level. Teaching, whether content
or technology-driven, must be continuously improved due to the constant resource
changes.
Often, principals relied on school library media specialists to instruct them in the
area of technology; therefore, they wanted these personnel to have specific skills. These
skills included research investigations, database use, and a familiarity with trustworthy
resources, as well as being comfortable modeling and providing professional
development on the use of equipment and technology. Many principals named
makerspaces as a new area that increased interest levels and changed the view of the
library to a resource center for learning and inquiring. Students developed a greater desire
to investigate, experiment, and create. P1 saw minor benefits of technology used and
implied that the school library media specialist was lacking the necessary skills to be an
122

influence in the school, centering only on literature and book exchange. With the school
library media specialist focus not being on 21st century skills, administrators observed
that incorporating makerspaces or working as a curriculum partner was not initiated,
which led to a lack of interest from both the students and the faculty.
Assistant principals’ opinions of professional role improvements. Assistant
principals reviewed the school library media specialists’ professional roles and
determined which skills needed the most improvement to implement the Maryland
College- and Career-Ready learning expectations. Instructional partner was chosen by 4/7
(57.1%) assistant principals, 2/7 (28.6%) indicated leader, and one 1/7 (14.3%) selected
information specialist. This is represented in Figure 8.

Figure 8. Assistant principals’ opinions of professional role improvements. This figure
reveals assistant principals’ perceptions of school library media specialists’ practices that
need improved.
Instructional partner was identified as the professional role needing the most
improvement by assistant principals since rigorous strategies and resources were
necessary to support the standards resulting in meaningful and authentic learning
opportunities for students. Teachers’ collaboration opportunities with school library
media specialists provide mentoring and educational dialogue, improving their skills as
educators, just as students learn from peers. “Library media specialist should not be
123

isolated,” stated assistant principal seven (AP7). “They should be included as part of the
team of teachers in the school all working to enhance the academic performance of
students.” Assistant principals were concerned that teachers were not using the school
library media specialists to their fullest potential because opportunities for improvement
were lost.
Assistant principals agreed that it was more difficult to demonstrate leadership
roles while meeting the expectations of the other professional roles, depending on the
experience level of the school library media specialist. AP3 worked with school library
media specialists who were accomplished leaders in the building, while others focused
primarily on teaching responsibilities and were not comfortable taking on additional
leadership roles. Along the same lines, assistant principals recognized the challenge of
being an expert information specialist because the informational technology needs
continued to evolve.
Qualifications. In administrators’ opinions, a variety of skills was a necessary
qualification for school library media specialists to fulfill their professional
responsibilities. In order to be an expert in the library field, school library media
specialists need to obtain degrees and certifications. Administrators expected educated
personnel to serve in the position of school library media specialist, those that had earned
a library media certification at any level. They viewed a knowledgeable school library
media specialist as a person with a teaching degree and, in addition, a certification in
library science. They preferred a school library media specialist with an English/language
arts background or classroom teaching experience with knowledge of effective
instructional strategies, the ability to assess students’ needs, an understanding of current
standards, and instructional delivery skills appropriate for all grade levels.
124

Administrators agreed that being a curricular leader was essential, due to working
with all grade levels and content areas. To be an instructional resource, administrators
believed that knowledge of literature and a love of reading was a must. They expected
school library media specialists to research authors and titles and generate lists that
encouraged students’ reading interests at all levels. Therefore, this educational position
required a background in reading instruction and the desire to teach reading strategies by
learning best practices and effective approaches.
Administrators emphasized the need for resource awareness. Other educational
areas that administrators viewed as fulfilling the responsibilities of this position
effectively were a concentration in reading and continuous coursework in technology to
understand the changing trends. AP4 stressed that it was important that school library
media specialists be provided with “professional development on technology on a regular
basis because it is constantly changing and the other teachers often look to them for
assistance.” They wanted the school library media specialist to be knowledgeable about
print and digital resources and to be comfortable with technology in order to create
opportunities for students to use makerspaces to build and explore other ways of thinking.
“The media specialist at my school is very limited in the area of technology information.
When asked to teach technology classes for students, the media specialist…would not
feel comfortable,” shared AP1. This assistant principal observed the school library media
specialist and discovered that skills to instruct in the area of technology were lacking;
therefore, technology classes and makerspace centers were removed from the media
center and implemented by individual classroom teachers. Technology awareness was
also a factor considered by administrators when designating technology periods for
students.
125

Administrators recognized library management as a necessary qualification. The
administrators’ perception of what this management involved was wide-ranging due to
the various tasks associated with the media center organization. First, administrators
viewed library management similarly to classroom management, which only integrates
areas such as room arrangement and safety. Other administrators defined library
management as any task a school library media specialist performs in overseeing the
routines of the media center. This included researching book reviews in order to purchase
quality literature in a variety of forms, along with meeting school-wide demands, from
technology repair to inventory. School library media specialists were considered effective
if they managed their time and resources while responding to patrons’ requests for
multiple services. Administrators maintained that this accomplishment indicated a good
understanding of a media center’s operations.
Administrators also identified another qualification that was a necessity for school
library media specialists which was being a flexible organizer. To illustrate this,
administrators described a person who completes tasks efficiently. If a school library
media specialist was not proficient in time management, then certain professional roles
would dominate while others had the potential of not being fulfilled. Being flexible
allows the school library media specialist to move among the required responsibilities by
multitasking, while being organized enables the tasks to be completed professionally in a
timely manner. P10 mentioned that the school library media specialist wore so many hats,
yet remained very flexible in approaches to teaching, making this person a valued
resource in the school environment. Administrators implied that flexibility and
organization needed to be integrated in order for professional roles to be effective.
As administrators reviewed the school library media specialist position,
126

interpersonal skills were identified as a qualification critical to fulfilling the professional
roles. According to the administrators, the ability to work positively with colleagues and
relate to children of all ages is essential to building relationships. Administrators felt
strongly about teamwork because it reflected the purpose of the media center, which was
viewed as the hub of the school. For collaboration to be effective, school library media
specialists need to work in conjunction with others using communication and decisionmaking skills. Administrators also expected school library media specialists to carry out
their professional roles with enthusiasm and be approachable by those who requested
assistance.
In the administrators’ opinion, school library media specialists need to have the
ability to make informed educational decisions, not only in the area of library science, but
also within each grade level for learning strategies and lesson development
Administrators maintained that school library media specialists must be engaged in the
learning process by knowing the individual needs of the students and the learning goals
set by the classroom teachers. Principals also implied that a good work ethic was shown
by not always choosing the easiest and quickest way, but by persevering through
situations that seem challenging. Media center isolation was prohibited by the
administrators, and they expected the school library media specialist to display an
energetic attitude. The principals reiterated that interpersonal skills would help students
feel comfortable visiting and using the library, regarding it as a location where everyone
was accepted.
Administrators’ experiences. Administrators perceptions were affected by
situations that centered on the skills and abilities practiced by the school library media
specialist. P5’s experience centered on coordinating programs: “I am blessed to have a
127

media specialist who is hard-working, not afraid to attempt anything new, is always open
to ideas, and challenges teachers to think out of the box.” From personal experience, P2
understood the professional roles of the school library media specialist, advocating for
the position at the district level and publicizing the educational skills of this certified
educator. P11 had experienced a personnel reduction from a full- to a part-time school
library media specialist and acknowledged that integrating the skill sets was limited due
to fulfilling other job requirements.
Through observations, P7 determined that school library media specialists did not
possess all the skills to be effective due to changes in the curriculum. Those school
library media specialists unwilling to keep up with current practices remained focused on
more traditional approaches to media delivery. Conversely, P13 collaborated with the
school library media specialist and changed the face of the media center from a
traditional to a 21st century informational space. They researched changes happening
across the nation and transformed the media center to reflect more critical thinking and
inquiry learning by using the makerspace concept. The environment changed to become
more inviting and risk-free as the media center developed a more up-to-date look with
current technology and materials. Principal 12 (P12) also added that, along with creating
a more modern library environment, the school library media specialist at the school
participated in training that supported lesson alignment with student learning outcomes in
the classroom.
Assistant principal five (AP5) worked with school library media specialists who
had various experience levels. The successful fulfillment of all five professional roles
depended upon the comfort level of the individual, as well as his or her own areas of
interest, organizational abilities, and management skills. For those with more experience,
128

the school library media specialist was a leader in the building in all of these professional
roles. However, for less experienced school library media specialists, the focus was on
teacher preparation, with more tasks being gradually added as they became comfortable
with the school culture, the students' needs, and their job as a school library media
specialist.
Time (administrators’ perceptions). Administrators repeatedly mentioned the
challenge of availability of time. Principals acknowledged that there was never enough
time to devote to the various professional roles of this position with all of the educational
requirements in the school system. Therefore, other staff often viewed school library
media specialists as not doing enough to address the demands of the job. Administrators
from schools that had limited time for teachers and the school library media specialist to
collaborate shared this perception.
Administrators understood the challenge of balancing time and planning for the
fulfillment of these professional roles because of the fixed schedule that was required at
the elementary level. It was evident that the use of fixed scheduling did not accommodate
set periods for school library media specialists to specifically function as instructional
partners and program administrators. These tasks were accomplished when there were
openings and a school library media specialist who was sufficiently versatile was
required. Fixed schedules limited opportunities to collaborate with other teachers as an
instructional partner and were unworkable for part-time school library media specialists.
P11 explained:
Having a media specialist only half-time is difficult. The media specialist is
spread too thin and must prioritize which roles can be given the most attention. As
a result, some of the roles are unable to be given adequate attention, especially
129

maintaining the library and its materials.
Restrictions eliminated. Administrators unanimously agreed that the factor of
time was an issue due to class numbers, limited staff, district requirements, and needs of
students with multiple professional roles to be performed and demands of students and
staff to be met. If restrictions were eliminated, administrators who employed part-time
school library media specialists stressed that it would be beneficial to return this position
to full-time in order to increase time devoted to enriching student learning and
technology learning opportunities. To support this, P8 shared that students having more
instructional time in the library would be valuable because, currently, just as an activity
was getting to the application stage, the time constraints caused the activity to end.
Schedules. Instructional classes initiated the design and established the
arrangement, generating the overall schedule at each elementary school. Administrators
allocated blocks of time for seven levels of classes, with three periods for intermediate
acceleration and enrichment classes. Each class period was assigned 40-50 minutes, with
an equal amount of time allotted for all classes to visit the media center. Teaching
responsibilities were inserted first into the schedule, and then the other educational
functions were added in order of priority specific to the school’s goals.
The needs of the school took precedent, with time allotments focused on
instructional classes with school library media specialists. “Decisions were made on
scheduling based on the school focus for the year,” indicated AP1, “allowing for
directives to focus on the school vision and mission.” Students were prioritized by
maximizing face-to-face instruction with library personnel. Administrators tried to be
creative by developing a schedule that affected student learning the most and presented
the longest class periods for school library media specialists to instruct skills, model
130

technology, introduce resources, and provide opportunities for book selection and inquiry
centers.
Once the academic classes were in place, appropriate planning for lesson
development and media duties were generated. Scheduling periods for school library
media specialists to complete managerial tasks was important in order to keep the media
center organized with current materials and to increase circulation. Time for library
maintenance was limited with school library media specialists instructing multiple
classes. Administrators concurred that non-instructional responsibilities were placed last
in the schedule, resulting in the potential for a media center that was not structured and
had limited resources available.
The school library media specialists were utilized as a resource to generate
common grade level planning periods because media classes usually coincided with team
planning in the schedule. Administrators continuously revised the schedule until
academic instructional periods accounted for most of the time, with library management
committed to the remaining time slots. The school library media specialist and the
classroom teacher collaboration, if it took place at all, was irregular. Administrators tried
to accommodate all requests but prioritized the skills most necessary to the students while
creating the school schedule. It was difficult for administrators to allocate the time
needed for the school library media specialists to successfully carry out all five of their
professional roles effectively, regardless of the approach.
Administrators’ Summary
Administrators’ perceptions of the professional roles of school library media
specialists were shared through the themes of instructional resource, relationships, role
priorities, skill sets, and time. Teaching was the most significant in the school
131

environment, although administrators felt that all the professional roles had an
educational impact. The professional role of program administrator was viewed less
important due to the managerial tasks it encompasses but was recognized as necessary to
maintain an operational library, possibly maintainable by volunteers. Information
specialist was necessary but was not equally carried out among the schools due to the
varying knowledge levels of school library media specialists. Instructional partner
opportunities were minimal because they provided student instruction during the time
that classroom teachers were participating in common planning periods; this was
significant for administrators who also used this time to personally lead team meetings.
Administrators provided opportunities for school library media specialists to be leaders
and to build relationships, and each took to this leadership role according to his or her
comfort level. Administrators used the multiple skill sets of school library media
specialists to implement various programs and coordinate events. Administrators
determined the schedule of school library media specialists, devoting the majority of the
school day to instructional time with students to support academic growth.
Perceptions of School Library Media Specialists Regarding Their Professional Roles
I also organized the school library media specialists into two groups. The fourteen
elementary school library media specialists comprised group 3 which participated by
completing questionnaires only and the three elementary sample school library media
specialists comprised group 4 which in additional to completing questionnaires, also
provided information through observations of practices and documents, along with preand post-observation interviews. Each of these groups revealed their own perspectives on
the professional roles they performed in this position based on their personal experiences.
I first examined the data for each individual participant, then for separate whole groups,
132

and finally for both whole groups combined to determine the final results associated with
school library media specialists. The school library media specialists’ findings identified
recurring themes associated with their perspectives on their professional roles:
instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time.
Instructional resource (school library media specialists’ perceptions). School
library media specialists carried out the responsibilities assigned to them by school
administrators; many tasks involved instruction. These professional roles of teacher,
information specialist, and instructional partner were important to school library media
specialists.
Teachers. The data showed that school library media specialists viewed
themselves as teachers, implementing instruction through media classes once a week for
grades prekindergarten through fifth grade. All school library media specialists had the
additional role of gifted and talented teacher. For the accelerated and enrichment
program, they provided student-directed research projects through various informational
lessons to identified students in the third, fourth, and fifth grades once a week. Three of
the school library media specialists had a third role as part-time prekindergarten teacher.
This occurred due to low student population and budget limitations. Some school library
media specialists taught an additional enrichment lesson centering on various topics,
while others included separate technology classes during which students used technology
to complete projects and presented research findings through a guided discovery method.
As teachers, school library media specialists continued to gain a stronger
curricular knowledge by becoming familiar with the College- and Career-Ready
Standards at every grade level and content area. Sample school library media specialist 1
(SSLMS1) wanted to be seen as a teacher in order to be held in the same regard as other
133

educators in the school. SSLMS1 felt that to be viewed as a teacher was important and
never wanted to be thought of as someone who just sits and puts books back on the
shelves. SSLMS1 thought the administrator also saw the position as a teaching position
without understanding all the other responsibilities that came with it because there was no
time to plan with other educators.
Sample school library media specialist two (SSLMS2) stated that the position was
first and foremost as a teacher and made that a first priority when carrying out any of the
professional roles. SSLMS2 felt that instruction accounted for 90% of the day and that
teachers valued the school library media specialist as a team teacher. SSLMS2 assisted
classroom teachers with skills that needed to be integrated into their lessons. Other
educators also perceived SSLMS2 as an effective teacher who assisted them with their
student learning objectives and lesson plans. Along with supporting, promoting, and
improving student achievement, SSLMS2 taught the students a variety of strategies for
learning. SSLMS2 actively involved students in the learning process, acting as a
facilitator, which allowed students to collaborate, investigate, and gain knowledge in both
technology and media. Just like a classroom teacher, SSLMS2 was required to produce
evidence of incorporating lesson criteria using Universal Design for Learning, Collegeand Career-Ready Standards and the Gradual Release of Responsibility model.
“I’m perceived on an equal level as a classroom teacher, and I’m glad about that,”
stated sample school library media specialist three (SSLMS3). To emphasize reading,
SSLMS3 promoted various genres, informational texts, book talks, and intervention and
acceleration strategies. SSLMS3 identified the teacher professional role as accounting for
70% of the school day. According to SSLMS3, it was the most important because it was
the best use of time for student growth.
134

Information specialists. School library media specialists integrated digital
literacy lessons into library instruction that were delivered consistently throughout the
county. One school library media specialist expanded on the students’ technology lessons
by teaching parent involvement groups about the importance of using safe websites with
their children as well as teaching at a family technology day, inviting parents to attend a
technology class with their child. Parents were given a presentation on online resources
as a useful tool for parental guidance of digital citizenship.
Known for technology support, SSLMS3 coached teachers on implementing
various instructional tools. SSLMS3 created a strong, enthusiastic, highly interactive
community of readers and used Edmodo to create online book groups that allowed
students to give and receive advice about book selection. Also, SSLMS3 modeled Skype
by conducting brief virtual author visits that enabled students to learn interesting details
about the authors’ books and their work as writers. If SSLMS3 lacked knowledge about
an area of interest, community guest speakers were located to share their information for
activities such as acceleration and enrichment projects and robotics.
SSLMS1 facilitated independent learning and research with students through a
variety of resources, modeling use of technology in a safe and ethical manner. The
faculty was enthusiastic about the students’ abilities to research productively using the
district databases. Exposure to multiple resources was essential to building interest.
SSLMS2 enhanced collaboration with classroom teachers by putting useful materials in
their hands through collection development in the library, school presentations, and
useful technology skill lessons for students. SSLMS2 stated, “I am the information
specialist with students. They come to me to research and use the professional websites
that I teach.” The teachers also requested SSLMS2 as an information specialist for
135

promoting online subscriptions and appropriate websites that are safe for the students.
Makerspace centers were recently added to most school libraries to enable
students to have a hands-on experience with building circuits, developing code,
programming robots, and creating structures, along with other high-interest and teamrelated activities. Some school library media specialists incorporated makerspace sessions
as a separate class time, while others made them part of the media period in conjunction
with book exchange. As an information specialist, school library media specialists
extended classroom content and increased technology knowledge by the additions of
makerspace areas, which made the library a much more active and exciting place for
students, faculty, and also themselves. SSLMS1 increased the makerspace initiative
outside scheduled media classes for students to have more exposure to the centers and a
better use of the materials. This was also successful in that teachers borrowed makerspace
centers to use inside their classrooms.
Instructional partner. School library media specialists made class connections
through support of lesson development and resources as instructional partners. They did
not want to be seen only as support persons. To them, this position of instructional
partner was more than being a teacher or a resource person. School library media
specialists believed they provided more extensive resources to the school community
than did individual classrooms teachers and other specialized resource teaching areas,
such as music, physical education, and art. School library media specialists felt that their
positions allowed them to be aware of student learning in the classroom, providing more
instructional support than before due to new district and state initiatives, evaluation
criteria, and assessments.
When collaborating with teachers, SSLMS1 took a deliberate approach and made
136

weekly contacts in one way or another to offer the resources in the media center. This
was to support the teachers by providing research guidance in media classes that related
to classroom units. Many teachers requested these resources, but very few partnered for
common instruction. SSLMS1 wanted to share the message that the library was available
for different learning opportunities, not just for media classes. SSLMS2 felt valued and
an integral part of increasing students’ learning because she took the responsibility to
reevaluate practices. “It’s been challenging for me to say what more can I do, what can I
do better to get the students to the next level,” said SSLMS2. The professional roles had
changed, having a higher level of expectations when the faculty used a team approach to
increase student achievement. SSLMS2 initiated collaborations with peers by giving
technology instruction that integrated the classroom and media curriculum.
“I think having the Maryland library standards connected to College- and CareerReady standards allows me to see a better connection in the classroom with skills they are
working on there and how I can support it,” expressed SSLMS3. Instruction was
coordinated with English/language arts lessons, supplementing classroom instruction
with fiction and nonfiction reading experiences. As school library media specialists
facilitated technology use, students effectively conducted research and communicated
understanding. Individual and small-group training in various teaching strategies and
instructional technology tools improved student achievement. Collaboration improved
with classroom teachers to prepare their students for online assessments and for college
and careers in general. SSLMS3 indicated that this position required “more time working
with teachers on research project ideas, and in the primary grades, specific reading skills
and strategies. I’ve collaborated in the past, but I just think the evidence for me is greater
now.”
137

Restrictions eliminated. School library media specialists indicated professional
roles that are more instructional should be the focus if budget restrictions could be
eliminated. Increased time for media, acceleration and enrichment, digital literacy, and
technology classes were suggestions. School library media specialists would meet the
required standards at a slower pace while getting much deeper into the content with more
or extended class periods. New technology would be introduced, including current
applications to enhance lessons. A group of lessons could be written that aligned with the
school library media curriculum and supported the Maryland College- and Career-Ready
Standards. School library media specialists would focus through collaboration first on
what was being taught in the classroom and second on educating the parent community.
Reinforcement of classroom content curricula through co-teaching would allow students
a seamless transition between the classroom and media environments, actively
connecting learning. School library media specialist eight (SLMS8) explained that
“educating the parent community and working as a collaborative bridge builder on the
importance of reading and the challenges today with social media is a must.”
Benefits. School library media specialists contribute important information to
other educators in the school community by extending classroom learning into a
specialized setting, which cannot be accomplished by other part-time resource teachers in
art, music, and physical education. This collaborative position is extremely valuable
because the school library media specialist uses technology protocols that are more
adaptable, and teachers apply the learning to classroom projects. Reading is also an
important part of student learning, especially influencing attitudes that lead students to
become lifelong readers. The school library media specialists viewed themselves as the
heart of the school, helping students improve their reading and writing skills so that they
138

can apply them to their own interests, problem-solving, and needs.
School library media specialists encourage life-long learning practices by
teaching skills that support the academic program in multiple literacies, STEM, social
interaction, and technology. “The librarian also has opportunities to read books and host
discussions about behavioral, moral, and ethical dilemmas, as well as coping strategies
that the classroom teacher may be unable to manage or may not have time to handle,”
suggested school library media specialist seven (SLMS7). The school library media
specialists created a positive learning environment and fostered a relationship with
students, making them eager to come to the library to create, imagine, and explore in
makerspaces. These instructional connections were important to bridge the gap as the
students entered the next grade level.
Effectiveness. The school library media specialists identified responsibilities
associated with their instructional areas that allowed them to be more valuable through
the services they provided. School library media specialists found and offered resources
to students that helped them find answers to their questions as information specialists.
They assisted teachers with materials that broadened their lessons and increased
engagement. When they saw students working in teams at makerspaces, building
confidence and collaborating in problem-solving, they realized that adjusting the library
to include these centers had been vital. School library media specialist four (SLMS4)
stated:
Some of the best parts of being a school library media specialist: (1) finding great
books, video clips, and amazing facts about a wide variety of subjects and sharing
them with students; (2) helping teachers; (3) finding creative ways to teach
informational skills and help grow readers and thinkers.
139

Instructional partnerships were a definite advantage when having multiple
educators focused on students’ growth. Interactions with the students, faculty, and
administration were expressed as the most positive part of the school library media
specialists’ jobs. They felt they were able to extend student learning in a meaningful way
while building partnerships throughout the school community. “When students can see
the link between the classroom and the media center, the outcome is stronger and their
learning more authentic. I like teaching that way and appreciate when the opportunity
presents itself,” declared school library media specialist five (SLMS5). She continued to
reflect on teaching:
As a teacher, this is where I find the most rewards and see my positive influences.
Watching students acquire new skills and learn to love books and reading as well
as become life-long learners is the best part of my job.
School library media specialists as teachers make a difference in students’ education by
helping them become continuous learners and to be independent library users as they go
on to college and careers.
School library media specialists mentioned only one negative associated with
teaching which involved grading assignments. Some school library media specialists
thought that report card grades for primary classes were not helpful. “I am not completely
convinced that giving grades in primary classes for library and technology is helpful,”
suggested SLMS4. Because many primary students were visiting a library for the first
time, they were introduced to the media center and started building skills to use at the
intermediate level. School library media specialists were required to use the online
grading system to evaluate student performance, which they felt was unfair to the
students, but allowed them to be viewed equally as classroom teachers. Students came to
140

the media center for nine visits each grading period, unless library classes were canceled.
School library media specialists reviewed skills from previous lessons with primary
classes to refresh their knowledge since there was a week in between each visit.
Providing academic grades at the primary level felt inappropriate to school library media
specialists due to the age-level and the merely weekly instruction.
Relationships (school library media specialists’ perceptions). The school
library media specialists also carried out responsibilities assigned by the administrators
that broadened relationships with students and classroom teachers through school-wide
interactions as part of the school personnel. School library media specialists extensively
discussed being at the hub of the school, based on the location of the media center and the
professional roles the administration expected them to undertake. One school library
media specialist referred to relationships as necessary for a school library media
specialists’ survival. This school library media specialist believed that working with
others was a strong requirement that had to be in place first to be able to transition among
all the professional roles successfully.
School library media specialists insisted that their media program reached
students in a variety of ways. Even non-instructional duties helped build relationships
with students as they interacted with them outside the library. Such obligations included
office, lunch, recess, arrival, and dismissal, along with morning announcements, which
they directed with students on closed-circuit television or digitally through Google
Hangouts. They served as chairperson or members on school action committees such as
the School Improvement, Partnership, Emergency, Positive Behavior Instructional
Support, and Instructional Consultation teams. One school library media specialist was a
representative on the school’s Parent-Teacher Organization, while another was the editor
141

of the newsletter, a communication tool for the school community.
Students visited the library only once a week, which limited communication;
therefore, tasks outside the library allowed for relationships to grow. SSLMS1 believed:
Additional responsibilities can be a negative in that they do pull me away from
some more traditional library roles. They also allow me to develop good personal
relationships with the students and also with the staff because they see that I am
trying to make things easier for them too.
Those working in small schools teamed with the principal and helped with tasks that were
usually assigned to assistant principals. SSLMS1 stated that “we have common
understandings because our school is small and everyone has to take on different roles.
Because of our small faculty I don’t have the luxury of just being a media specialist.”
Leadership. The school library media specialists indicated that their leadership
positions provided a platform to increase interactions with others when coordinating
events and programs. School library media specialists realized that the principals had a
different perspective on their responsibilities when fulfilling jobs beyond the professional
roles. Taking on leadership roles outside the media center allowed the school library
media specialists to have challenges in different areas and still be part of the whole
school. Being chairperson of various committees and Parent-Teacher Advisory liaison
positioned SSLMS1 as a leader, forging connections with other educators and families,
along with partnerships throughout the district. Relationships were most important at the
beginning of the year for SSLMS1 because they established the morale for the entire
year. As the library representative in these leadership roles, SSLMS1 used these
opportunities to publicize all the media center had to offer to make sure it remained
relevant with the school’s initiatives.
142

SSLMS2 was referred to as a leader at the school due to the display of motivation
in implementing the newest ideas into the curriculum and promoting the library program
in all areas of the school. SSLMS2 preached the love of reading and was a presence in the
classrooms, wanting to be viewed as an equal by the teachers and respected as an
educator by the students. SSLMS2 had an action plan of presenting at every faculty
meeting, sharing flyers about the happenings at the library, and inviting faculty in for
special occasions in order to develop relationships. SSLMS3 felt that actions spoke
louder than words and approached leadership through modeling. SSLM3 attended
conferences and enrolled in courses, acquiring knowledge that led to coordinating
afterschool programs and partnering with technology businesses. This was how
SSLMS3’s leadership contributed to the school. Every school library media specialist
mentioned the importance of leadership impacting relationships, but each displayed it in
different ways.
Restrictions eliminated. Part-time school library media specialists indicated that
additional non-instructional areas would include assisting with various duties in order to
be viewed as a team player among the other faculty members, if budgetary and time
restrictions could be eliminated. School library media specialists wanted to attend team
meetings with teachers and principals to participate in discussions on the implementation
of strategies and skills to improve their own personal learning. SLMS7 desired to “attend
team meetings to have a formal opportunity to meet and plan with teachers, to fully
implement the best projects and continue to align our goals and create projects that would
complement the curriculum.” School library media specialists wanted to be members of
more committees. This would provide them with experiences outside the media center,
allowing them a whole-school perspective.
143

Benefits. Relationships built through their professional roles benefited the school
community, based on school library media specialists’ input. They modeled technology
topics and reading strategies for teachers and parents who assisted with homework and
online safety. The school library media specialists all agreed that their positions were
irreplaceable because they had the most knowledge of the home-school community.
SLMS8 affirmed, “Most importantly, I feel in my professional role that I have made an
impact on the home-school community…through my relationship with the students and
their families…through community staff development in Internet safety and on the
importance of reading.” They knew every student in the school and had working
relationships with them for over a seven-year period. SSLMS2 declared:
I have developed good rapport with these students…and they have a special
relationship with me. I am definitely the one constant for them. I use that
understanding of students to help out classroom teachers. There is not another
teacher in the school that works with every student for seven years in support of
multiple literacies.
The school library media specialist was used by the administrator as the teacherin-charge and assigned non-instructional duties supportive of the school community that
most assistant principals perform at one location. School library media specialists
conferred with others not only about instructional needs but also about the whole wellbeing of the students, which included behavior and health needs. Participating in schoolwide initiatives provided the school library media specialists with a voice in decisions
that were effective in increasing parental attendance at events, such as book fairs, STEM
activities, and family literacy nights.
Effectiveness. The school library media specialists mentioned the misperceptions
144

of some of their professional roles. They had interactions with faculty that saw them as
planning-time providers instead of as instructional partners who strengthened their own
instruction with their students. SLMS14 declared:
The perception of the role of a resource teacher (one who provides planning
time) is still there. Having other specialists in the building (guidance counselor,
math specialist, reading specialist) has helped improve the perception that the
day-to-day responsibilities of classroom teachers are superior.
School library media specialists need to have personal relationships with colleagues to
increase library use and support the media program, but building relationships requires
the participation of the classroom teacher as well.
Relationships between administrators and school library media specialists were
strained when directives interfered with fulfillment of their professional roles. SLMS7
explained that “the only part of being a library media specialist that I find taxing is when
orders and directives are passed down from higher-ups that waste time and energy and
have absolutely no benefit for children.” This was echoed by SLMS4:
There are responsibilities I find make a less positive impact, especially
considering the time involved in doing these. I might point out that valuable time
is lost when I have to create a portfolio to prove I am doing my job professionally.
School library media specialists found they were overwhelmed by demands, without the
support or buy-in of others to assist with problem-solving or task completion. When they
tried to introduce change, it was often met with resistance.
School library media specialists knew that effective relationships developed
through interaction and continuous dialogue; therefore, observations and conferences
presented other opportunities to enhance relationships. School library media specialists
145

thought that a successful library media program resulted from the administrators taking
time to converse about the professional roles. SSLMS1 shared that the principal brought
guests to visit the media center, drawing attention to the activities in the library. SSLS3
agreed that the administrator had become much more active, visiting the library and
engaging in positive discussions about the professional roles of the school library media
specialist. If relationships were positive, then the school library media specialists felt
supported. This was evident when principals recognized the time needed to complete
requested tasks, especially responsibilities outside the media center. SSLMS2 was
financially supported by being included in the budget for a reading incentive program.
SSLMS3 praised the continuous dialogue: “…my principal is complimentary of what I
am doing and asks questions to try to determine what my purpose is. It is always in a
supportive role without being critical.”
It was through these formal or informal discussions that the professional roles of
school library media specialists were clarified. SLMS4 indicated that discussions
occurred “when problems arise or advice is requested; also in small group meetings if
appropriate. My principal is available and supportive, and we also conference as part of
the evaluation process.” An equal number of school library media specialists said they
met with administrators weekly, 5/14 (36%), and as needed, 5/14 (36%), while 2/14
(14%) indicated they met at other intervals, such as bi-weekly or once each grading
period. Some stated there was no interaction, with 2/14 (14%) saying that they never met
at all.
School library media specialists’ experiences. School library media specialists
shared experiences that exemplified how perceptions, administrative support, and schoolcommunity connections affected their relationships. In the area of perceptions, school
146

library media specialist three (SLMS3) revealed that an administrator stated that the
library schedule had to be filled with classes to show others that the school library media
specialist was being utilized. When students were not in the room, it looked as though the
school library media specialist was not working. This showed that the administrator was
unaware of the responsibilities associated with the other professional roles. In an opposite
experience, SLMS10 had a principal who supported the library work, and his display of
respect had a positive influence on other staff members' attitudes about the professional
roles of teacher, instructional partner, and school leader. Having an administrator who
was fully supportive of this position and worked in collaboration with the school library
media specialist was essential for the library program to be effective. SLMS14 attested:
I have had great administrator support over the years…who have all contributed
in one way or the other to move our library program forward. I had a principal
who thought ‘out of the box’ and encouraged me to branch out in new ways. That
was life-changing…I tried to build on it to this day.
Experiences in the school community contributed to relationships being built. By
offering professional development for teachers and families, along with providing
educational materials, school library media specialist 13 (SLMS13) effectively led and
educated the school community, ultimately making it an academically focused and safer
environment for students. The importance of the professional roles became evident
whenever students applied the skills learned in the media center to other parts of life.
SLMS8 remarked:
One reflection I immediately thought of was a parent in a graduate course. Her
son was a student of mine and he helped his mother create a story board on a
trailer through iMovie. He added the summary of the book, sound effects, music,
147

live video, and pictures. I taught these lessons in tech and library classes and he
used it to aid and assist his mother to complete a graduate level final project. It
was an awesome accomplishment for me to see.
Role priorities (school library media specialists’ perceptions). The school
library media specialists reflected on their professional roles and how certain
responsibilities were unbalanced. The administrators’, teachers’, and students’ needs, not
the desires of the school library media specialists, determined which professional role
needed to be implemented. When other professional roles dominated the time, SSLMS1
asserted that “it is just taken for granted that the other tasks will get completed.” The
American Association of School Librarians and the Maryland State Department of
Education identified the five main professional roles of school library media specialists as
information specialist, instructional partner, leader, program administrator, and teacher.
The school library media specialists ranked these professional roles in order of
importance.
School library media specialists’ highest priority professional roles. As the most
important professional role, 10/14 (71.43%) school library media specialists chose
teacher, followed by 3/14 (21.43%) information specialist, and finally 1/14 (7.14%)
instructional partner. This is represented in Figure 9.

148

School Library Media Specialist
Respondents

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Teacher

Information Instructional
Specialist
Partner
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 9. School library media specialists’ highest priority of professional roles. This
figure illustrates the school library media specialists’ perceptions of the most important
professional role practiced.
School library media specialists identified the professional role of teacher as the
highest priority because this task had the greatest direct impact on students. Following a
fixed schedule, teaching classes accounted for the majority of the day in the media center;
therefore, the professional role of teacher led the other professional roles with library,
information, and literature lessons. School library media specialists are experts in
delivering media-enriched lessons, while also supporting classroom instruction meeting
the required standards with their library science backgrounds. SLMS5 believed:
First and foremost, I am a teacher with all of the responsibilities that come with it.
I am responsible for making sure students learn and grow as individuals.
Everything else I do as part of my job supports my goal to help students reach
their goals.
All school library media specialists had an instructional objective to build a love
of reading in each student. This started with an identification of interests and access to
appropriate materials. School library media specialists declared that once students
149

became involved in their reading material, they understood that reading provided a
variety of learning opportunities, whether it pertained to a related experience, retrieved
facts, or strengthened skills. SLMS8 attested:
The highest priority to me is a teacher…meet the needs of individual learners,
challenge students to think, integrate every subject matter through literature, allow
students to create and explore and feel good about themselves. I have the
opportunity to know each child for consecutive years and build a rapport with the
students…follow their growth. This is very valuable in understanding how each
child learns.
The school library media specialist works in an education system at the elementary level;
therefore, the professional role of teacher was an expectation of their employment and
their evaluation criteria reflected this job responsibility.
Information specialist was ranked as the second most important professional role,
followed by instructional partner. School library media specialist 12 (SLMS12) pointed
out that “while other roles are very important, I think this responsibility is most important
because library media specialists should be knowledgeable in the field of information in
order to best assist students and staff with educational and instructional needs.” School
library media specialists were responsible for placing various media formats into the
hands of the students and to provide materials for the faculty. To incorporate information
literacy into all instruction, school library media specialists and classroom teachers cotaught when possible; therefore, instructional partner was the priority professional role of
school library media specialist nine (SLMS9).
School library media specialists’ lowest priority professional roles. For the least
important professional role, 6/14 (43%) school library media specialists chose leader,
150

with the next being 5/14 (36%) for program administrator, followed by 2/14 (14%) for
information specialist and 1/14 (7%) for instructional partner. This is represented in

School Library Media Specialist
Respondents

Figure 10
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Leader

Program Information Instructional
Adminstrator Specialist
Partner
Professional Role Priorities

Figure 10. School library media specialists’ lowest priority of professional roles. This
figure illustrates the school library media specialists’ perceptions of the least important
professional role practiced.
School library media specialists indicated that the leadership role was not crucial.
School library media specialist one (SLMS1) shared that she preferred being a behindthe-scenes person, helping the administration as needed. Additionally, school library
media specialist two (SLMS2) spent the least amount of time in a leadership role, leaving
that professional role to be fulfilled by the principal or supervisor. Leadership tasks serve
to make the other professional roles effective. As they managed their responsibilities, the
school library media specialists viewed themselves as leaders-by-doing more than by a
label.
Other school library media specialists felt that the program administrator
professional role had the least impact due to there being no specific allotted time to fulfill
it because it did not directly impact students. This professional role was carried out
151

whenever the school library media specialists were not serving the school community
directly. SSLMS1 revealed that managerial tasks were only accomplished in between the
other responsibilities, although they were still required to be completed. SSLMS2
confessed, “As a program administrator, it is on my own time. I am referencing book
reviews and ordering beyond the school day, tracking budgets…or it would not be
accomplished.” This was a dedication not seen by administrators or other educators, one
that provided them with resources to improve school performance. The professional role
of program administrator was often viewed negatively as a non-instructional task by
those outside the library media profession, yet the school library media specialists
expressed that its responsibilities include the traditional tasks that structure the media
center, and without it in place, there would be chaos. Effective library management
allows the media center to function, meeting the needs of all users.
Being a program administrator required school library media specialists to
organize the library by circulating resources and tracking spending. As library managers,
they built the collection of resources by ordering current and weeding outdated materials
to keep the interest of library users and make the environment functional to meet all
needs. They also participated in fundraising to increase their library budget, along with
assisting in supporting other school-focused programs. The responsibilities connected
with this professional role were managerial jobs that required time, but were easily
delayed when other professional tasks needed to be completed.
Information specialist and instructional partner were ranked next in the order of
least important professional roles. The school library media specialists who ranked
information specialist last discovered its responsibilities were also found within the other
professional roles. SLMS14 said that “there is a fine line between the professional roles
152

of information specialist and instructional partner, [the fixed] schedule does not lend
itself to team teaching, [an integration of] the roles of information specialist and
instructional partner [is practiced].” One part-time school library media specialist was
concerned about the absence of teacher collaboration based on her experience as a
prekindergarten teacher, leading to the selection of instructional partner.
Restrictions eliminated. School library media specialists believed that the most
misunderstood professional role was that of a program administrator. Therefore, the
school library media specialist’s professional role of program administrator would be
able to be practiced in order to maintain an operational media center if budgetary and
time restrictions were eliminated. Time to fulfill this professional role was often limited
due to instructional priorities; therefore, they felt it was given short attention. School
library media specialists would incorporate additional maintenance of reading materials
based on student interest to increase library visitation and circulation. This would entail
open library opportunities before and after school.
Effectiveness. School library media specialists identified positive responsibilities
associated with the five professional roles. As program administrators, school library
media specialists had the opportunity to share what the media center can do for families,
as well as students and teachers. Maintaining the collection allowed them to work with
students and teachers to find materials supportive of interests and curricula. They were
able to help facilitate student-interest projects that benefited the neighboring
communities. Overall, school library media specialists recognized that the professional
roles overlapped and, in conjunction, supported each other. Each responsibility, when
executed professionally, had a positive impact on students and staff.
School library media specialists associated a negative with the implementation of
153

the professional roles in regard to being a school-wide support system. School library
media specialists shared that planning for lessons at a variety of grade levels and
following the guidelines of the district and state became overwhelming. It was
challenging to balance meeting the needs of the faculty and the library program; often,
the school library media specialists sacrificed their planning period to support the school
community.
Influences on school library media specialists’ perceptions. There were various
educational situations that influenced how the school library media specialists viewed
professional roles, which affected the priority placed on each responsibility. The 14
school library media specialists indicated the following items, listed in order of having
the most influence on their perceptions: (1) student/teacher experiences; (2) professional
resources and professional development; (3) peers/mentors; (4) formal evaluation
process/conferences; (5) educational courses; and (6) blogs/articles. Other concerns
school library media specialists listed that influenced their perspectives were working in a
climate where job security was an issue and student and parent feedback. This is
represented in Figure 11.

154

Influences on Perspectives

Student/Parent Feedback
Job Security
Blogs/Articles
Educational Courses
Formal Evaluations/Conferences
Peers/Mentors
Professional Development
Professional Resources
Student/Teacher Experiences
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14
Number of Library Media Specialists

Figure 11. Influences on school library media specialists’ perceptions. This figure
demonstrates experiences that influenced how school library media specialists perceived
practices.
School library media specialists’ experiences. School library media specialists
shared experiences that influenced their perceptions regarding the professional roles of
school library media specialists. The experience that her professional role performance
was appreciated, SLMS1 reaffirmed:
It became necessary for me to be out of the media center for several weeks. My
substitute was a recent media graduate [taking the] initiative to teach lessons
using a different style and materials... I was welcomed back with an appreciation
of my media structure. Therefore, I believe that my focus on providing
information and materials to the students and the teachers must be working.
For non-tenured elementary school library media specialists, the initial experiences
opened their eyes to the numerous responsibilities assigned to the position. Having
teaching backgrounds, they were unaware of the number of organizational activities that
were involved and how the professional roles needed to blend together for performance
to be effective.
Skill sets (school library media specialists’ perceptions). The school library
155

media specialists were used to implement various school-related activities, instructional
and non-instructional, because they possessed a wide range of skills. Most school library
media specialists indicated that they were the technology coordinators, having both
hardware and software knowledge. This required monitoring the webpage, problemsolving technology issues, maintaining all school computers, assisting teachers with
technology needs, and managing the computer labs. They were also the liaisons with the
district Information Technology Department for entering technology repair and purchase
requests.
School library media specialists also coordinated school-specific programs. As
accelerated and enrichment teachers, they partnered with the community to design
investigative projects for gifted and talented intermediate students. Other areas in which
the school library media specialists directed activities were webpage design, attendance
and behavior incentives, school-wide reading events, and school inventorying.
Additionally, school library media specialists provided resources and presented
equipment and database accessibility. School library media specialists ordered requested
materials to provide the best resources to support the content curricula after inquiring
about the staff’s needs. SLMS7 shared, “I collaborate with the teachers during technology
[lessons], not only planning, but actually instructing and guiding the students as they
research and complete their projects,” making the position valuable. The school library
media specialists modeled and shared their knowledge with others during scheduled
professional development on media topics such as online databases, the circulation
system, public library partnerships, and digital safety at the request of administrators.
Restrictions eliminated. School library media specialists could advocate their
skills if allowed flexibility in carrying out their professional roles. School library media
156

specialists expressed that they would coordinate more programs, such as conducting
research involving STEM practices, facilitating book and robotics clubs, and providing
student tutoring and study sessions if budgetary and time restrictions were eliminated.
The responsibility of technology coordinator would be expanded to do grade-level
support, either for specific lessons or for personal staff training. School library media
specialists would facilitate family game nights that centered on a book theme, along with
promotional planning of reading events and author visitations.
Benefits. School library media specialists’ various professional roles benefited the
school with their diverse skills. Technology awareness was essential; therefore, school
library media specialists who attended professional development provided at the district
and state levels reviewed purchases of hardware and software for the school. They
provided support for teachers to make these experiences successful with state
assessments being online. Most benefits listed by school library media specialists were in
the area of resource availability. School library media specialists felt they met the needs
of the students by presenting materials to teachers. They kept the collection evolving with
a multitude of print and online materials and promoted the resources with games, signs,
and announcements. “Doing literature units that teachers do not have time to cover,
locating books for special research topics, accessing websites for appropriateness, and
finding books for struggling readers for them to use in lessons,” are just some supports
that SLMS4 provided to teachers. The programs facilitated by school library media
specialists that were not required but delivered were also beneficial, such as Accelerated
Reader and STEM days, which impacted student growth.
Effectiveness. School library media specialists possessed a variety of skills that
allowed them to provide different services each day. Those who promoted their skills felt
157

that they were valuable and met multiple needs that allowed the school to function. The
school library media specialists indicated some negatives connected with their skills. The
position of the school library media specialist requires constant learning to keep
knowledge current. School library media specialists had to seek training on their own in
order to strengthen areas they viewed as weak if professional development was not
provided by the district. Lack of resource availability also became their problem to solve,
either by locating funding to update technology for the school population or finding the
correct materials for students on their levels.
School library media specialists identified certain professional roles as their
strongest and weakest. Overall, teacher was selected as the strongest professional role
since they interacted with all curricula at every grade level as they developed and
delivered lessons to grades prekindergarten through fifth grade. Second, information
specialist was chosen due to their skill in searching out the best resources that supported
multiple concepts. Third, school library media specialists listed program administrator,
leader, and instructional partner. Program administration included being able to multitask, leader focused on advocating for the media center’s mission as a vital part of the
school environment, and instructional partner involved cross-curricular connections.
The school library media specialists identified information specialist and
instructional partner as their weakest professional roles. As information specialists,
school library media specialists lacked sufficient knowledge of research models and
awareness of technology resources. For instructional partner, the weakness was due to
limited time for fulfilling the requirements for this role adequately. Next, leader was
selected based more on personality than performance. These school library media
specialists enjoyed the title of leader but were hesitant to direct others; they preferred to
158

be coaches rather than leaders. Lastly, some school library media specialists picked
program administrator based on their being non-tenured and only beginning to learn the
requirements of this professional role, along with the expectations of the administration.
School library media specialists’ opinions of professional role improvements.
School library media specialists identified the skills that needed the most improvement to
meet the expectations of the Maryland College- and Career-Ready Standards. The
majority, 9/14 (64.29%), specified instructional partner, followed by information
specialist with 2/14 (14.29%), and one each 1/14 (7.14%) for leader, program
administrator, and teacher. This is represented in Figure 12.

Figure 12. School library media specialists’ opinions of professional role improvements.
This figure reveals school library media specialists’ perceptions of practices that need
improved.
Instructional partner was ranked highest by the school library media specialists
due to the lack of time. It was difficult for them to be instructional partners when teachers
had their planning time while the school library media specialists were instructing their
classes. There was no common planning time to share ideas and collaborate on projects.
Partnering was haphazard, such as when overhearing a discussion in the faculty room
about an instructional unit, brief moments in hallways or in the seconds before the
teacher took the class back to their area. School library media specialist six (SLMS6)
159

stated:
If collaboration is improved, a better experience will be presented to the students
in any subject area. For example, finding resources in the library that supports a
science or social studies topic, providing examples of literature or writing that can
carry over to a classroom activity, and providing ways to create technology
projects that demonstrate not only student knowledge of the topic, but tech skills
that are vital to their future.
Ability to collaborate was stressed as one of the most important skills when a new teacher
was hired, but opportunities to collaborate were given the least time in the elementary
school setting. It would be better if the schedule allowed for teachers and school library
media specialists to thoughtfully plan lessons on research and technology projects that
could be taught together. To be effective in this area, consistency is important.
The instructional partner role was also affected as school library media specialists
were used as stand-alone teachers, independent of classroom teachers, making them
viewed as isolated educators. Classroom teachers had opportunities for team planning
while the school library media specialists were with their students or were discharging a
duty. According to SLMS4:
In fixed-schedule elementary schools, library and technology classes occur during
classroom teacher planning time, but the school library media specialist is left out
of the planning, and the technology lessons have not included the classroom
teacher physically present in the lab…there is room to improve.
This impeded cross-curricular connection and, again, meant that skills were taught in
isolation. In some instances, this occurred because of the lack of willingness of staff
members to ask for or accept a school library media specialist as a partner.
160

School library media specialists voiced the concern that they were not recognized
for their critical role as information specialists since the opportunity to converse about
materials was limited. Again, they felt that more time to share their resources would
better support the instruction provided in the classroom. Also, the digital resources
changed frequently, along with the devices used to enhance learning, which needed to be
constantly updated. Both classroom teachers and school library media specialists desired
to be involved in professional development regarding the latest trends.
The professional roles of leader, program administrator, and teacher were equally
ranked by school library media specialists as needing skill improvement. Because
leadership was not part of the degree program, it was chosen by one school library media
specialist as an area of weakness. Another school library media specialist selected
program administrator because it involved multiple tasks in which efficiency was lacking.
Teaching was chosen by SLMS14:
We come to the library media job from different backgrounds. I do not have a
teaching background, so I had to learn from my colleagues. I also learned how to
deal with having many students, and try to think of the big picture…I can do a
better job teaching, whether it is presenting material in a different way…or having
students work in groups more often. I hope that current library media programs
have more of an emphasis on teaching.
Qualifications. School library media specialists specified the qualifications
needed in order to fulfill their professional responsibilities. In order to be an expert in the
library field, degrees and certifications needed to be gained. Due to their main
professional role as teacher, school library media specialists agreed that having a teaching
degree was most beneficial, although not a requirement. It was difficult to fulfill the
161

professional role of teacher without courses in content curriculum and learning strategies
at the elementary level. “With so much time spent actually working with the students, the
training as a teacher has helped me to better address and meet the needs of the students,”
commented SLMS1.
School library media specialists need teacher skills associated with elementary
students such as content differentiation, student-level communication, and behavior
techniques. School library media specialists need librarian skills regarding circulation and
shelving, purchasing and processing, appropriate materials review, and inventory at the
district and state levels. Also, courses in library science, either towards a certification or
at the master’s level from an accredited institution, are a must. Considering the 21st
century focus, a technology background is vital to be current with resources and devices.
The school library media specialists indicated that they were expected to be lifelong learners by volunteering to attend workshops and professional development
seminars due to changes in instructional initiatives and resource developments in order to
fulfill the tasks of the position. It was the responsibility of the school library media
specialists to educate the faculty on current resources, such as the focus on makerspaces
and technology for the online state assessments. Being hired for this position came with
the expectation of learning about the advances in education, this was the aspect of the job
that excited SSLMS2 who declared:
We always have an iron in the fire. I feel that as a library media specialist, I am
always a continuous learner and that collaborative bridge builder with the
students’ home-school community and the administrators in the building. I feel
that is a role for me. I need to be the continuous learner.
The school library media specialists discussed technology as the resource that received
162

the most attention and the area that required training with the inventions of the 21st
century necessitating new career skills. SSLMS1 was used consistently as a technology
support for teachers who were either uncomfortable with or did not have the knowledge,
which limited the students’ advancement of technology skills. Assuming the title of
technology coordinator was valued by SSLMS2, who spent time with the Information
Technology Department to increase skills needed for trouble shooting and maintenance.
SSLMS3 agreed that this was also a responsibility that was greatly loved, yet most
training was obsolete, which “detracts from my role and my effectiveness, and the
perceived effectiveness. At times teachers will ask me for help…I have to say I will put a
work order in for that rather than fix it. It is inefficient.”
Interpersonal skills were identified as critical to fulfilling the professional roles as
the school library media specialists reviewed the position. Such skills enable school
library media specialists to reach out, inspiring interactions that are constructive and
improve communication, student instruction, and teacher performance. Building
relationships with colleagues was a never-ending process as school library media
specialists promoted their professional roles, which led to a change in perceptions. “But
as colleagues come and go, one must continue to reach all of them and not assume that
they know what a library media program is all about. My colleagues have perceptions
from their own experiences as students,” was the response of school library media
specialist 14 (SLMS14). As the school library media specialists directly interacted with
students, staff, and parents, there were opportunities for positive relationships to be
created. According to school library media specialists, maintaining good relationships
with everyone in the school and making positive connections with students and staff was
required.
163

Being an effective communicator was vital for the school library media specialists
to have working relationships in the school. They were proactive in communicating their
professional roles by remaining knowledgeable about resources and sharing that
knowledge with others. Communication helped grow the library programs, along with
personal improvement as educators, but it had to go both ways. While attending team
meetings, SSLMS3 attempted to communicate the goals of the library, but the teachers
were not interested because it was not immediately relevant to their classroom situation.
As a solution, SSLMS3 used one-on-one communication and shared how the library
program enhanced the content areas. SSLMS3 used the tactic of communicating the value
of the position to meet personal needs.
Overall, the school library media specialists believed they held a valued position.
When administrators asked for their input on school objectives, it gave them the
impression that their contributions enhanced the school. SSLMS3 expressed:
My current administrator values what I do and I think that the way he consults me
about, not just how my time is used, but also how I can help in the school as a
leader shows his respect for the position and the work that I do.
Yet the school library media specialists still questioned if the administrators actually
understood the extent of all their responsibilities. There were some teachers who never
collaborated or had any type of relationship with the sample school library media
specialists, seeming to view them as babysitters of their students during their team
planning.
The school library media specialists recognized management of the library as
necessary qualification in order to fulfill their professional responsibilities. School library
media specialists are to maintain an organized and current media center, while also being
164

able to meet the needs of individual library users. As program administrators, school
library media specialists must keep the media center operational, regardless of the
barriers to performing this task, or it becomes inadequate as a school component and,
thus, expendable.
The school library media specialists needed to become advocates for others to
understand the professional roles and the types of tasks required. The evidence of library
skills and resources circulating throughout the school, not just segregated in the media
center, had to be provided. SSLMS1 argued:
We have to go out of our way…that makes us more valuable. And if we are
valuable to parents and kids, then we become valuable to administrators.
Otherwise they will find reasons to not have us. Go outside the comfort area…see
what the school needs and then try to provide that and how it fits.
The school library media specialists stressed that it was their responsibility to inform the
principal about the various aspects of the job. Education had to come from their school
library media specialist; communicating about how the position could be used and
improved through visits or emails was time well spent in advocating for these personnel.
The school library media specialist must take the initiative to educate others about the job
responsibilities and to instill the mindset that if the library were removed, the school
would not be as effective.
School library media specialists’ experiences. The school library media
specialists shared experiences or situations that influenced their perceptions regarding the
professional roles of school library media specialists. Some examples involved the school
library media specialists’ skill sets. SLMS5’s experience centered on coordinating
programs, she stated:
165

Starting the school-wide reading program in our school has been very rewarding.
I found information about the program and brought it to our school as a possible
yearly activity. We all were able to work together under my committee's guidance
to successfully read a book school-wide four years in a row. The entire school
community enjoys the experience and looks forward to it every year. It gave me
an opportunity to be a leader within the school, but to also connect the media
center directly to the classrooms, and I enjoyed the integrated experience.
The district’s budget limitations had reduced this position in low-population
schools from full- to part-time, although the numerous skill sets were still required of
such personnel. The library should be used as a learning center and a support system to
the curriculum. When school libraries are closed and media specialists do not have time
to collaborate with classroom teachers, the learning experiences suffer. This was a
concern of SLMS6. Concerning the effect of the elimination of staff on instruction,
SLMS2 said:
I didn't realize how much I helped students and staff until I became a half-day
media specialist. Students and teachers want books, help with technology, and
more time in the media center. In just two years, we are seeing a decrease in book
circulation, participation in the reading incentive program, and most importantly a
decline in keyboarding skills, researching skills, and word processing.
Time (school library media specialists’ perceptions). With the variety of
responsibilities, it was difficult for school library media specialists to have the time
needed to complete each area to the best of their abilities; therefore, the professional roles
were unevenly fulfilled. SLMS2 decided that her “time spent with students gets the
priority, then I play catch-up throughout the school year to fulfill my other
166

responsibilities.” School library media specialists tried to find volunteer support with no
funds to hire library assistants. They faced the problem of volunteers not showing up or
quitting after the school library media specialists took the time to explain the shelving
process.
Restrictions eliminated. The school library media specialists identified time as a
barrier to professional role performance with multiple professional roles to be fulfilled
and demands of students and staff to be met. School library media specialists would
request the hiring of library assistants to help with program administration if budget and
time restrictions were eliminated. To support this idea, SLMS4 stated:
An assistant in the library would allow the school library media specialist more
time helping students with books and resources…keeping them focused and on
task. Additionally, clerical tasks could be handled by an assistant, giving more
time to the school library media specialist to focus on professional tasks such as
fixing marc records in the system, locating resources, lesson planning,
promotional planning, working with students, or visiting classrooms.
Schedules. The school library media specialists singled out scheduling and time
conflicts as impediments to the effective fulfillment of their professional roles. They
understood that administrators had a school-wide view and a good understanding of what
works best for the students, and that students were the first priority, followed by the
needs of the staff. With accountability a factor, administrators conducted student data
analysis, both content and behavior-based, to create a schedule that supported the
identified areas of school improvement. Certain skill sets held by the school library media
specialists determined their assignments. The precedence of instruction guided the
decision-making of the principal. “The administrator wanted as much instruction as
167

possible, although there was awareness for program administration,” admitted SLMS10.
Technology lessons were interwoven with the media classes, while the remainder of the
time focused on lesson planning. There was never adequate time to fulfill the
instructional professional roles to the degree of professionalism they wanted to achieve.
Administrators had to make the best decision for the school, and providing
planning time for classroom teachers was an obvious need to be filled by the school
library media specialists. SSLMS2 and SSLMS3 were often frustrated by not being able
to participate in team meetings because they were instructing while classroom teachers
were planning. Performance of general school duties limited opportunities to partner with
teachers. SLMS9 expressed that the administrator had to make it appear that there was no
“free time” in the media schedule or teachers would question what tasks were being
performed.
Staffing was an issue that school library media specialists believed was
considered by the administration when structuring a schedule, but it varied according to
the personnel assignment and population of a school. Due to the school having a small
population, SSLMS1 was able to carry out professional roles outside the media center,
especially in technology, which was a focused school improvement area. Each year, more
tasks were added, but none were removed. This was due to SSLMS1 being the only fulltime resource teacher in the building and the schedule validated the position.
School Library Media Specialists’ Summary
School library media specialists perceived that they were valued personnel and
had to display interpersonal skills to make connections in the school community.
Although the implementation of professional roles was unbalanced, they understood that
they were primarily instructional leaders. They were concerned that the tasks associated
168

with program administrator were misunderstood and often neglected, which made the
media center seem mismanaged for the students and staff. Opportunities to be
instructional partners were limited and occurred sporadically, but this was unavoidable
with the other school directives taking precedence. School library media specialists had
mixed feelings about the leadership role, with some taking on school responsibilities
above and beyond their resource position and others content to remain in a more
supportive role. Overall, school library media specialists believed they supported the
students and staff as information specialists but were in need of more training to be
current with technology trends.
Comparison of Administrators’ and School Library Media Specialists’ Professional
Role Perceptions
The merging of the data from the principals (group 1) and assistant principals
(group 2) revealed administrative conclusions. The merging of the data from the school
library media specialists (group 3) and the sample school library media specialists (group
4) revealed the conclusions associated with this position. I then continued data analysis
by comparing the administrative groups with the school library media specialist groups.
This level of investigation extended my examination by discovering similarities and
differences that affected educators’ perceptions as indicated in the identified themes of
instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time.
General information and educational background comparison. I identified
similarities as I reviewed the general information and educational backgrounds of the
administrators in comparison with the school library media specialists. All participants
were employed at the elementary level, serving prekindergarten through fifth grade.
Overall, females were the majority of participants (74%) in all groups. The most common
169

period of service in these positions was 11-15 years for both administrators and school
library media specialists. The average population of the schools in which these educators
worked was 201-300.
I found more differences in the general information and educational backgrounds
of the administrators in comparison with the school library media specialists.
Administrators consisted of 60% of the participants, and school library media specialists
represented the remaining 40%. All administrators were full-time employees at the
elementary level, while three of the school library media specialists were in part-time
positions. The majority of administrators were 40-49 years old, while most of the school
library media specialists were in the age range of 50 years or more. Administrators’
educational backgrounds centered on early childhood and elementary education (52%) at
the bachelor level and administrative and supervision (90%) at the master level. The
majority of school library media specialists received bachelor’s degrees, with 29% each
in elementary education and secondary English and with curriculum and instruction
(36%) the focus at the master level. Fifteen (71%) administrators indicated that they did
not receive any coursework regarding the management of these resource personnel, and
most revealed that they had no professional development training. In spite of this
limitation, the administrators rated themselves as being knowledgeable about the
professional roles performed by school library media specialists. Because library science
certification was a prerequisite for being a school library media specialist, 12 (86%) of
these personnel had three or more courses and attended seven or more professional
development trainings; therefore, they rated themselves as being very knowledgeable
overall.
Instructional resource (groups’ perceptions). Each of the participant groups
170

emphasized that the assigned professional roles of teacher, information specialist, and
instructional partner were important due to being instructionally focused. Weekly media
classes for each grade level and intermediate acceleration and enrichment courses were
mandatory. As educational leaders, media skills, research investigations, and crosscurricular connections were the focus. Each school library media specialist delivered
grade-specific digital literacy and citizenship lessons that were consistent countywide.
Teacher collaboration occurred when school library media specialists were able to
establish partnerships with available classroom teachers.
Additional scheduled classes that involved practices of teacher, information
specialist, and instructional partner revealed differences. Some administrators also
designated the school library media specialist as a teacher of rotating enrichment classes
for all grades, which included lessons on projects extended from the classroom. Other
administrators expected school library media specialists to deliver technology lessons to
both students and classroom teachers, providing information on software programs and
equipment that would be revisited during classroom lessons. This was either targeted at
all grades or the focus was on the intermediate level. Those administrators that had parttime school library media specialists did not assign additional instructional classes and
acknowledge there was minimal teacher collaboration due to time limitations. Most
school library media specialists established makerspace centers in their libraries, a
STEM-generated initiative. Some schools had makerspaces that were managed by other
educators in the building based on limited knowledge and comfort levels of the school
library media specialists. Opportunities for school library media specialists to connect
with parental groups on media topics varied from face-to-face meetings to written
communication.
171

The participant groups agreed that more instruction would occur if budgetary and
time restrictions could be eliminated. Extending library classes in order to get more indepth with the lessons and better content connections was a need. School-wide
technology lessons and projects would provide more integration into classroom
instruction through modeling and support. Both administrators and school library media
specialists expressed a desire to deliver digital safety lessons and content support to
parents. Specifically, administrators wanted teachers and school library media specialists
to collaborate on building classroom libraries and common lessons with writing and
research. They requested makerspace use to be transportable into the classroom.
Administrators felt that the acceleration and enrichment classes provided by the school
library media specialists should expand to include primary grades. This change would
identify potentially gifted students at younger ages, minimizing learning gaps in the
future.
The instructional benefits of fulfilling the professional roles were consistently
identified among the groups. All school library media specialists were accepted as
instructional leaders in the school. The participants acknowledged that this position was
the focal point where curricular content, library skills, research approaches, and
technology all integrated through the expertise of the school library media specialist.
School library media specialists instructed students in skills that increased their
knowledge and developed a global perspective towards learning. Administrators also
recognized school library media specialists as the promoters of literature in all formats,
expanding the experience beyond just reading, taking it to a more academic level of
critical thinking, vocabulary awareness, and understanding multiple viewpoints.
Some instructional benefits were recognized by administrators in different ways.
172

Administrators designated the school library media specialists as acceleration and
enrichment teachers, using their skills as information specialists to guide investigative
units focused on solving real-world problems. Administrators also felt that collaboration,
although restricted, still helped further school improvement. School library media
specialists and administrators highlighted the technology skills instruction, which was
vital for career- and college-readiness. The only participant group that mentioned the
importance of building lifelong learning in students was the school library media
specialists, providing students with skills that would be used in college or a variety of
careers.
Both administrators and school library media specialists identified
interdisciplinary teaching and the availability of a variety of resources as instructional
assets. Impacting student learning by seamlessly transitioning from one content area to
another due to the integration of skills was evident by administrators in the media center.
School library media specialists provided current and accurate print and digital resources
to support these content topics. Administrators felt that media lessons used real-world
applications in a variety of content areas, and the school library media specialists
employed an inquiry approach in this instruction at both student and teacher levels. Yet
they shared that school library media specialists were lacking professional development
in content topics, which would be essential for maintaining their level of knowledge
about research and technology.
Relationships (groups’ perceptions). Relationships were mentioned by each
participant group because the media center is considered the hub of the school. School
library media specialists extended interactions outside the media center with students,
faculty, and parents by performing duties, serving on committees, and coordinating
173

parent activities were ways of being effective. Strong relationships were critical in order
for school library media specialists to perform their professional roles, which are centered
on serving others. Because school library media specialists worked each year with the
entire faculty and every student over a seven-year period, opportunities were available to
continue to strengthen and increase connections with library users. The groups agreed
that without an educational connection, the professional roles would not be effective.
Teachers would not seek the expertise of the school library media specialist, negatively
impacting student learning.
The principals’ group felt that leadership allowed the school library media
specialists to build relationships because they were serving in another capacity. This
eliminated isolation in the media center, altering perceptions of other educators who were
not familiar with the responsibilities associated with this position. Assistant principals felt
leadership as an identified role was unnecessary because it was incorporated in the other
professional roles. School library media specialists agreed with the principals that
leadership positions allowed them to become part of the whole school and were most
important at the beginning of the school year when relationships are initiated.
Being the center of the school and having consistent contact with others in the
school community made the participants realize the value of the school library media
specialist position. The media center was a location where engagement was both
academic and social. Administrators shared that school library media specialists excelled
in developing a positive learning environment. They expected all educators’ practices to
be highly effective and shared that when school library media specialists promoted their
position, which required relationship building, other educators in the school were more
accepting of their professional roles. Administrators shared that some teachers acted as if
174

there were a hierarchy among educators, and the school library media specialists were not
as important since they did not understand their functions. Similarly, school library media
specialists believed other educators viewed their position as more of a support than as an
equal educator due to the professional roles they integrated, which affected relationships.
Administrators and school library media specialists used continuous dialogue that
developed relationships and clarified perspectives. Conferences and observations
between the school library media specialists and administrators enabled discussions about
practices and expectations. Most of the participants from each group indicated that
weekly meetings were held, while others indicated that they met monthly or as needed. A
few administrators and school library media specialists admitted there was no contact.
Without interaction between administrators and school library media specialists, the
importance of this position remained misunderstood and its practices misinterpreted.
Role priorities (groups’ perceptions). Library instruction involved an
interdisciplinary approach to education that was the expectation of 21st century learning.
When all five professional roles were implemented in the school with consistency, the
groups indicated, student achievement improved, instructional partnerships succeeded,
and the school population remained focused on the school goals.
The participants prioritized the professional roles based on their perspectives.
Both groups selected teacher as the highest priority because this task focused on student
learning, a key responsibility of library science professionals. School library media
specialists’ evaluation expectations were centered on the teaching role which was the
purpose of being hired as an educator in an elementary school. The lowest professional
role priority indicated by the administrators’ group was program administrator because it
did not directly increase student learning or improve teacher instruction, thus making it
175

an isolated responsibility in the school. School library media specialists chose leader
because this professional role was displayed through their other professional role
practices, not necessary as a professional role to be enacted individually.
Program administration was mentioned by the participants as making the media
center operational and productive, although not a high priority. The atmosphere of the
library and the availability of resources needed to be inviting to users and made it a
comfortable learning environment. In another view, administrators did not want this
professional role to control the other tasks, limiting the instructional side of the job. An
appropriate balance of all the professional roles was recommended by the administrators,
but school library media specialists were realistic, sharing that it was impossible to
implement these responsibilities equally.
There was no agreement among the groups when selecting situations that
influenced perceptions regarding the professional roles. The principals selected formal
evaluations because the indicators focused on the school library media specialist’s
position and all it encompassed. Assistant principals identified peers/mentors due to
learning from their principals how to build expertise in administration. School library
media specialists chose student/teacher experiences because these contacts were at the
center of all professional role requirements. These influential differences that were
identified among these educators were areas each relied upon to enhance their
understanding of professional role practices that represented the library media position.
Skill sets (groups’ perceptions). School library media specialists are
instructional leaders, using various skills to benefit the school. Administrators valued the
school library media specialists as coordinators because their range of skills could be
used to assist in the implementation of school and district initiatives. They relied on these
176

personnel to be the technology managers. In the area of resources, especially technology,
the participants viewed digital skills as necessary. If qualified, school library media
specialists as technology leaders were invaluable to the school for their technology and
equipment integration skills. In such cases, resources were always available for
classrooms or the school library media specialists budgeted for future purchases. School
library media specialists noted that they voluntarily purchased programs that required
additional coordination in order to boost student growth.
The school library media specialists’ skill sets knowledge and adaptability
affected the perceptions of the administrators. Administrators believed that the strongest
professional role displayed by school library media specialists was information specialist
because of resource awareness and availability. Principals viewed teacher as an equally
strong professional role, which the school library media specialists did as well because
they had curricular content knowledge and delivered lessons at every grade level. There
was no consistency when identifying the weakest professional role. Principals selected
leader for reasons such as the school library media specialist being a new hire learning
the professional role expectations or those personnel unable to be a technology mentor
which is a necessary skill of this school position. Assistant principals indicated the
professional role of teacher due to the school library media specialist instructing in a
more traditional way instead of following a more 21st century model. In contrast, school
library media specialists identified instructional partner for inadequate time to carry out
this role and information specialist due to a lack of current knowledge of resources.
The majority of the participants selected the professional role of instructional
partner as needing the most improvement. This was identified due to the time conflicts,
the lack of common planning, and the rigorous expectations of the Maryland College177

and Career-Ready Standards for student achievement. Other professional roles were also
selected but in various orders by each group. Information specialist was the only other
common professional role chosen by the principals, assistant principals, and school
library media specialists as an area of need. Information specialist was chosen by
principals because they felt that school library media specialists required more resource
training. It was selected by assistant principals due to the challenge library media
specialists face in having to be experts in a continuously changing area. Finally, school
library media specialists identified information specialist because of their limited
opportunities to promote materials to support instruction.
Some qualifications of serving in a library media position were commonly agreed
upon by the administrator and school library media specialist groups. They indicated that
being certified in library science and having a teaching degree was important for
overseeing the media center and instructing at the elementary level. With such a wide
variety of responsibilities, especially in technology, constant learning was required, but
training was lacking for library media specialists to be effective in carrying out the
assigned tasks. Library management was also identified by both groups as a necessary
skill needing improvement. This professional role was crucial for a library to function,
but it occurred sporadically, as did instructional partner opportunities.
Only principals indicated that a necessary qualification for an instructional
resource in the media center was knowledge in reading, including literature awareness
and learning strategies. They felt these were essential in order to instill a love of reading
in the students by generating selections based on interest and academic levels.
Administrators also listed other stipulations of the library personnel as being a flexible
organizer with the ability to instruct skills and manage media simultaneously, along with
178

the ability to multitask to perform the other professional role responsibilities with
efficiency. In addition, school library media specialists listed interpersonal, relationshipbuilding, communication, and advocacy skills as qualities to be an effective in the school
community. All of these qualities concern connections with others and creating
opportunities to share the professional roles associated with their profession.
Time (groups’ perceptions). There was unanimous agreement in both participant
groups that there was insufficient time for fulfilling all professional roles effectively.
Fixed schedules did not allow for consistent collaboration with teachers, locating
supportive materials for curricular units, or periods to review and purchase resources.
Principals felt that the time shortfall impacted the perceptions of other educators in the
school, making the school library media specialists look unable to complete their
professional roles to the best of their abilities. All administrators thought that it also
influenced the ability to be flexible with organization, completing tasks in a timely
manner while filling the requests from students and faculty. As the schedule was created,
blocks of time for instruction took priority, leaving a few scattered openings to be used
for program administration. This time was never enough to maintain an efficient, userfriendly media center, according to the school library media specialists. School library
media specialists knew they were placed in the schedule for instructional and noninstructional purposes, and they would carry out their professional roles or additional
duties to assist the operation of the school in order to make their position essential.
Groups’ Comparison Summary
Commonalities and differences between the groups were evident among the
themes of instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time.
Instruction was the priority in the schools, with school library media specialists providing
179

media classes, along with support through resources, professional development, and as
instructional partners, when available. All participants would like to extend library
classes to include a more interdisciplinary approach to learning, with a school-wide focus
on technology integration. With the media center being viewed as the hub of the school,
school library media specialists were not isolated and expected to have relationships with
all students and staff. The role of program administrator was not highly valued by
administrators, who thought this task could be completed by others, while school library
media specialists indicated that leadership was integrated into the other professional
roles, being accomplished subtly. The skills that the school library media specialists
brought to the school were appreciated, though improvement was needed in the area of
technology. The time shortage was viewed as negative, affecting openings for
instructional partnerships and limiting deeper learning occurrences.
Comparison of School Library Media Specialists’ Perceptions and Daily Practices
As part of my study, I compared the perceptions of school library media
specialists and their daily practice in their professional roles. Their personal perceptions
were associated through questionnaires, interviews, and observations for evidence that
supported similar or opposing views. These comparisons were organized according to the
recurring themes associated with perspectives of the professional roles of school library
media specialists in the areas of instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill
sets, and time.
Instructional resource (daily practices). School library media specialists
considered themselves instructional leaders due to the number of classes assigned by the
administration and the faculty support they provided as teachers, information specialists,
and instructional partners. The perception was supported by their portfolios and weekly
180

planning documentation. They were required to maintain a portfolio documenting
evidence of meeting evaluation criteria. These portfolios were part of the districtdetermined evaluation process which contained 2/4 domains specific to school library
media instruction. Domain one centered on instructional planning and preparation, and
domain three focused on delivery of instruction and service. Based on the portfolios that I
examined, domain one artifacts and documents, such as lesson plans and materials,
indicated 57% teacher-related activities, 22% connected to information specialist, and 6%
associated with performing as an instructional partner. Domain three artifacts and
documents, such as student assessments and projects, disclosed 48% teacher activities,
15% related to information specialist, and 7% related to instructional partner. In my
review of weekly planning documentation, the samples I saw also indicated that school
library media specialists devoted the majority of their time (56%) to practicing the
professional roles of teacher, with minimal activity as an information specialist (6%) and
instructional partner (4%). Each of these professional roles was instructionally focused
and evident in daily practices performed by school library media specialists.
Instructional practices that I observed centered on media classes and acceleration
and enrichment research. Depending on each school’s schedule, technology lessons were
delivered individually or co-taught, with the school library media specialist being the lead
teacher. I only saw minimal evidence of instructional partnerships, usually occurring
during irregular classroom visitations, in between classes, in conversations before or after
school, and even in the faculty room over lunch. Often this contact was initiated by the
school library media specialist and was unplanned. The information specialist role was
often integrated with teaching and instructional partnerships through coaching, parent
communication, and materials delivery. Makerspaces provoked curiosity and created
181

engagement with classroom teachers as they visited to observe students and discuss
content-related centers with school library media specialists. Each of these encounters
showed that other teachers in the school respected this position and considered the school
library media specialist an equal educator.
Relationships (daily practices). School library media specialists agreed that
interpersonal skills were necessary to build relationships, both inside and outside the
media center, in order to fulfill any professional roles. Based on the sample school library
media specialists’ schedules, 27% of their time was labeled as “other.” This category
included duties, committees, and coordinated activities, which allowed the school library
media specialists to interact in areas not designated to their library work. This also
correlated with their sample of weekly plans having 31% allotted to “other.”
Relationships were referred to specifically in portfolio documentation of domain
two, the library media learning environment, which concerned maintaining a respectful
and supportive relationship. The sample school library media specialists provided
examples such as creating an atmosphere of acceptance through positive contacts during
duties and photo books for non-English students. They focused on emotional and
intellectual safety with small group practice, praise notes, and digital safety activities.
Confidentiality was ensured by using student identification numbers for overdue notices
and a library system username and password.
Relationship-building was also witnessed during my visits to the schools. While
instruction was delivered by the school library media specialists, students and faculty
continuously visited to request materials or use the computer lab. School library media
specialists oversaw the organization of reading and behavior incentive programs, working
with parental volunteers and instructional assistants. As they completed duties outside the
182

library, they interacted with students, staff, and parents, greeting them by name and
conducting conversations about personal interests. School library media specialists
participated in school-focused endeavors by mentoring other teachers through student
interventions and publicizing library and school-related events as they served on
committees. At these times, leadership by the school library media specialist was evident.
School library media specialists must establish and maintain relationships within
the school and work cooperatively in professional communities, according to the school
district’s evaluation area of domain four relating to professional responsibilities. That
they did so was obvious in artifacts of sessions with teachers about student-related
matters through the Instructional Consultation and Positive Behavior Instructional
Support teams. They involved families and community in the instructional program with
media center flyers and letters. Communication of students’ progress was accomplished
by using the online grading system, which parents could view in real-time. The school
library media specialists collaborated with others in exchanges of ideas and constructive
feedback through discussion boards like Edmodo and Google Hangouts, and participated
in professional learning networks through book studies and state conference
presentations.
Role priorities (daily practices). School library media specialists revealed that
the highest professional role priority was teacher and the lowest was leader through the
questionnaire. The sample school library media specialists were asked what percentage of
time was spent in carrying out the professional roles on the state annual report. All three
selected the professional role of teacher as requiring the most time, and leader as one of
the least:


SSLMS1: Teacher 35%, Leader 10%
183



SSLMS2: Teacher 60%, Leader 5%



SSLMS3: Teacher 60%, Leader 5%

Although having instructional significance, the professional role of instructional partner
was not selected due to the limited time available to participate in team planning and coteaching, and opportunities often occurred spontaneously. The practices of professional
roles were dependent on the administration scheduling guidelines, which established
whether collaboration with teachers was permitted or school library media specialists
were given additional classes. When asked how often they engaged in planning
instructional units with teachers, SSLMS1 selected two to three times a month, SSLMS2
less than once per month, and SSLMS3 once per week. Opportunities to teach students
cooperatively with teachers also varied, with SSLMS1 and SSLMS3 doing so less than
once per month and SSLMS2 more than once a week. Based on the data collected
through the instruments, each professional role had value, yet the daily practice was
unbalanced.
School library media specialists were observed instructing fixed classes the
majority of the day, which they had indicated as their highest priority. This resulted in
limited time for planning, completing managerial tasks, gathering materials, and
connecting with other educators. Although teaching dominated, school library media
specialists tried to fulfill the other professional roles as best as they could with the limited
time available. Often when school library media specialists were preparing for the day,
organizing the library for the next class, or completing their ending routines, interruptions
occurred, and they redirected their focus to meet the needs of others. Leadership, the
lowest priority, was seldom seen by other educators but was witnessed when the
administrators sought their expertise on school-related initiatives, required their services
184

to manage the office, and requested them to be present at an after-school event because
their technological skills were needed. The school library media specialists shaped their
library services, ranging from materials purchased to demonstrations of equipment,
through interactions and feedback. To serve the needs and interests of library users, they
adjusted their instructional lessons when a teacher requested more support on legitimate
sites and placed an order when a student had difficulty locating books for a research
topic. From these examples, it is evident why school library media specialists indicated
that student/teacher experiences greatly influenced their perspectives.
Each sample school library media specialist indicated professional role areas of
improvement and later reflected whether these were accomplished for their portfolio
goals. SSLMS1 set personal goals for the professional roles of leader and program
administrator, and SSLMS2 also selected program administrator, since these were the
least evident in practice and needed to be better implemented. SSLMS3 chose teacher,
knowing that this professional role would control the schedule. Yet at the end of the year,
when the sample school library media specialists reflected on their goals, the teacher
professional role dominated their daily practices, with very little change in the
implementation of the other responsibilities they had targeted as improvement goals.
Skill sets (daily practices). During my observations of the sample school library
media specialists, their wide range of skills was apparent. All professional roles were
witnessed, as was the use of their skills. Some of the professional roles, such as teacher
and information specialist, were carried out with planning and organization while others,
such as instructional partner, leader, and program administrator, were carried out
unplanned and based on availability. Teacher and program administrator were observed
the most, and the school library media specialists were efficient at lesson delivery and the
185

maintenance of their media center. Instruction occurred during 40- to 50-minute time
periods, while program administration was accomplished whenever time allowed, such as
the 2-3 minutes between classes or before and after school. Information specialist and
instructional partner were often combined as the school library media specialists
conferred with classroom teachers while providing them with resources or repairing
equipment. Leader was mostly apparent in activities outside the media center, such as
when covering the office for the administrator or visiting a classroom for a technology
demonstration.
In the sample school library media specialists’ portfolios, the school district’s
evaluation document indicated that domain two, library media learning environment, and
domain four, professional responsibilities, entailed the skills of all the professional roles.
Along with the instructional abilities, these included skills of maintaining efficient
management of the media center, engaging in professional growth activities, and being
current on library media services. Development of procedures for organization,
circulation of materials and equipment, participation in school and district initiatives,
library management, professional development, and assessment of the library media
program were indicators. They were required to provide documentation of how they
fulfilled these expectations. Such documentation could include technology inventories,
collection development purchases, media center learning areas, and class time routines.
Evidence of professional role fulfillment included artifacts of school library media
specialists leading after-school events, budget spreadsheets, online database usage
accounts, pictures of makerspace projects, and media presentation agendas.
School library media specialists were observed using their skills as technology
coordinators as they escorted the district technology repair representative throughout the
186

school, identifying equipment issues and concerns. As liaisons for their schools, they
were also contacting the Board of Education about a webpage announcement regarding
school events and responded to an online grading question from the faculty. School
library media specialists shared their knowledge about the individualized courses and
training they scheduled to amend their weak areas, such as leadership and digital support,
in order to better serve the school community. These examples illustrate the
qualifications they indicated of needing to be life-long learners, technology-savvy, and
communicators.
Time (daily practices). The schedule created by administrators that school
library media specialists followed was fixed for instructional periods with minimal
flexible time to complete the duties of the other professional roles for which they were
evaluated. According to the sample school library media specialists’ daily outlines, 57%
of the schedule was devoted to instructional responsibilities, while 43% was for noninstructional tasks. This indicated the number of assignments for each professional role,
not the time allotted to carrying out the responsibilities. Overall, there was not enough
time in the schedule to fulfill all the professional roles competently, leaving some tasks
incomplete or not fulfilled as professionally as the school library media specialists
preferred.
Combining the data from the three-day observations of the sample school library
specialists revealed a difference between the numbers of occurrences versus the amount
of time spent fulfilling the professional roles. Program administrator had the most
incidents at 42%, followed by teacher at 32%. Yet the time expenditure showed a
significant difference, with teaching accounting for 56% of the time and program
administration only for 21%. Therefore, sample school library media specialists were
187

instructional leaders, fulfilling the professional role of teacher for the majority of time in
their daily practices. Program administration was completed in between other
professional responsibilities whenever a window of time could be found.
School library media specialists put others’ needs first in their daily practices.
They sacrificed their planning and management periods to assist fellow teachers in
equipment set-up and to meet with small groups who had not completed their research. A
few worked with volunteers to assist with circulation, programs, and book processing but
still oversaw the process for accuracy. No matter the professional role, serving the school
community determined what task took precedence.
Daily Practices Summary
Interviews and observations of practices and documents identified themes of
instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time. Teacher-related
activities encompassed multiple skills and were the most practiced when observed.
Interpersonal skills and communication were incorporated into the tasks of various
professional roles to extend relationships. Leader was the area least practiced by the
school library media specialists, but it was evident in their coordination of events and
committee participation. Implementing professional roles required both structure and
flexibility, which was determined by administrative assignments. Although the
observations, schedules, and lesson plans revealed multiple occurrences of program
administration, the time to complete these tasks was limited, with the professional role of
teaching requiring the most time, based on all documentation and performance. Each
professional role was valuable; however, some dominated and a few were combined to
fulfill all the responsibilities.

188

Summary
The themes of instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and
time recurred throughout the data provided by all the participant groups with each
instrument: the online questionnaire, interviews, and observations of both practices and
documents. The groups acknowledged that the school library media specialists were best
used for student learning and teacher support; therefore, the professional roles of teacher,
information specialist, and instructional partner were the most significant. Teacher was
allotted extensive time and attention, while information specialist was integrated with
instructing, and instructional partner depended on availability. The responsibilities of
program administrator and leader were subordinate to the other tasks.
The perceptions of the administrative group indicate that they considered the
school library media specialist a valued instructional position that was the center of the
school due to connecting with all students and staff. The administrators felt that each of
the professional roles was necessary, but considered school library media specialists to be
most effective instructionally by focusing their skills on supporting student learning.
Professional role practices are controlled by the allotments established by administrative
assignments in the fixed schedule.
The school library media specialist group expected their instructional professional
roles to have dominance due to their placement in an elementary educational
environment. This was evident in their daily practices as they served the entire school
community, building connections to meet the school’s goals. With their wide range of
knowledge, they moved flexibly between tasks to carry out the professional
responsibilities required for each situation. The school library media specialists managed
their time to accomplish the tasks for which they were evaluated.
189

Elementary administrators and school library media specialists revealed their
perceptions about the professional roles of school library media specialists. I compared
the perceptions of the participant groups. I discovered a common purpose among these
educators, which was to use these personnel instructionally to support the school, district,
and state goals of student achievement and also to maintain the function of the school.
Therefore, each administrator used school library media specialists in various ways to
meet their school goals of improving academics, building relationships among the school
community, and developing a safer learning environment. School library media
specialists understood their assignments were determined by the administration, and they
fulfilled their tasks based on the administrators’ expectations, not on their personal views
of job requirements. The information I gathered from this research revealed
commonalities and differences of views that are ideal discussion topics to continue
strengthening the library media program through continuous reflection and evaluation of
professional role practices.

190

Chapter 5 – Conclusion
As in the past, attitudes toward school library media specialists and their practices
remain diverse and conflicting (Ewbank & Moreillan, 2007; Lea, 2013). The American
Association of School Librarians and American Library Association have identified
professional roles (AASL, 2009a) that actively promote the use of school library media
specialists. The professional roles of information specialist, instructional partner, leader,
program administrator, and teacher can be an asset to the school’s learning goals. Studies
have shown that administrators have the authority to determine the use of school library
media positions in a school setting (Krueger, 2015; Nelson, 2014; Shannon, 2009). Yet,
they have limited knowledge about the actions required to carry out these professional
roles; therefore, they were unclear about the school library media specialists professional
role expectations (Drake, 2007; McCracken, 2000). Additional studies have confirmed
that school library media specialists are highly qualified and are required to administer a
library media program that meets set expectations but perceive that they cannot fulfill
these professional roles adequately (Ewbank & Moreillon, 2007; McCracken, 2000).
There remains a constant struggle between administrators and school library media
specialists (Church, 2007; Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Kaplan, 2006) because of the
obscurity of these tasks. Therefore, it was important to conduct this study to determine
the perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists and compare
the viewpoints of administrators and school library media specialists in order to improve
school learning communities.
This chapter reviews and summarizes the investigation. An overview of the data
collection and analysis is given. Conclusions are shared based on the research questions
explored with references to previous research studies discussed in the literature review.
191

The outcome of the methodological triangulation used as the research process is
described. The theoretical framework of social organization concepts that supports the
research approach is provided. Implications for best use of data to improve practices are
addressed. Recommendations are made for future applications and inquiries. A summary
provides a conclusion of the research investigation.
Data Collection Overview
Using a qualitative method approach to research, I gathered information that
generated an interpretation leading to a better understanding of the views of
administrators and school library media specialists on the professional roles of school
library media specialists. The data related to real-life experiences of administrators and
school library media specialists, which were examined through various approaches and
included the influences forming their beliefs. Each participant provided information,
including educational background, identification of professional roles, and personal
perspectives on school library media specialists’ practices. The use of multiple
investigative approaches provided results that were representative of the perceptions of
the participants.
The questionnaire results from the principals and assistant principals were
analyzed separately for each group and then merged to represent the administrators as a
whole. The results from the school library media specialists’ questionnaires and sample
school library media specialists’ interviews and observations were likewise analyzed in
separate groups, then merged to represent school library media specialists as a whole.
The administrators and school library media specialists’ responses were compared to find
similarities and differences in perspectives and reasons for these attitudes. Information
collected from each group was studied to identify views toward the school library media
192

specialists’ practices. The main ideas were coded according to the recurring themes of
instructional resource, relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time that were
associated with the professional roles of school library media specialists. Using a
recursive process, the data collected was continuously examined to find evidence,
relationships, and patterns that were connected with these themes.
Conclusions
The conclusions are reflective of the research questions and are based on the data
collected from administrators and school library media specialists. This information
contributes to the research field by providing knowledge of perspectives on library media
practices, which can lead to improving the educational contributions of school library
media specialists. The results of the data analysis show outcomes that are supportive of
the results of previous researchers. The conclusions are presented in order of
administrators’ perceptions of the professional roles of school library media specialists,
school library media specialists’ perceptions of their professional roles, a comparison of
administrators and school library media specialists’ perceptions, and a comparison of
school library media specialists’ perceptions and daily practices.
Perceptions of Administrators Regarding the Professional Roles of School Library
Media Specialists
The administrator participants provided background information on their
education and personal attributes associated with their perceptions. These perceptions
were unique to each individual based on prior experiences. The administrators’
perceptions were formed by their contacts with school library media specialists.
Uncovering these perceptions was necessary to determine the personal views of school
library media professional role practices.
193

The administrators in this study supervised and evaluated school library media
specialists. Multiple studies (Church, 2008; Kaplan, 2006; Oberg, 2006) reveal that
administrators do not understand the school library media specialist position because of
personal and professional experiences and insufficient training, which supports the results
of my study. The data I collected indicated that, overall, 71% of administrators had no
coursework in managing school library media specialists, and 57% received no
professional development associated with these personnel. Without such education,
administrators continued to remain unaware of the professional roles, preventing school
library media specialists from contributing to academic achievement to the best of their
abilities (McCracken, 2001).
In spite of the high percentage indicating limited educational backgrounds
regarding school library media specialists, administrators in this study still rated
themselves as knowledgeable about this educational resource, considering themselves
strategic in the task assignments to enable them to contribute to the vision and mission of
the school. In contrast to the administrators’ ratings, Roys and Brown (2004) indicated
that when administrators have no comprehension of this position, then school library
media specialists cannot perform at a highly effective level. The administrators shared
through the questionnaire that school library media specialists must continue learning to
remain current in the educational and library science fields, yet they never recognized
their own need to continue being educated on the responsibilities of this personnel. Past
research revealed that administrators receiving coursework acquired training that
recognized the importance of this professional position (Church, 2007; Forcht, 2011) and
that these administrators were better prepared to make informed decisions regarding
library personnel and the operations of the media center (Shannon, 2012).
194

The administrators in my study expected school library media specialists to be
teachers, instructional partners, and information specialists. Like the administrators in
Shannon’s study (2009), the administrators agreed that the teacher and information
specialist roles were necessary; however, they chose program administrator over
instructional partner due to professional role expectations. Although the administrators in
my study indicated that it would be beneficial for school library media specialists to do
more instruction, they required them to fulfill other responsibilities such as monitoring
obligations, organizing committees, and coordinating activities to assist in overall school
operations. Hartzell (1997) found that school library media specialists were often used as
a support service, being assigned jobs based on administrative needs. In my study, the
administrators believed that the duties they required of school library media specialists
affected whether these personnel were viewed as equal educators in the school
community. This aligned with Francis & Lance’s (2011) findings that respectable
administrators were the primary source that steered perceptions of school library media
specialists and, as leaders of the school, promoted the program and removed barriers to
professional role practices.
My research discovered various factors that influenced the administrators’
perceptions. For the principals, formal evaluations guided their views on the professional
roles performed by the school library media specialist. Since school library media
specialists were assigned various responsibilities, the formal evaluation guidelines were
referenced by administrators for professional practices. Evidence of indicator practices
listed in these guidelines increased the administrators’ awareness and ultimately
determined their perception of the effectiveness of the school library media specialists’
practices. The assistant principals felt that peers/mentors had the most influence on the
195

development of their perceptions of the school library media specialist position. As the
assistant principals aspired to become lead administrators, they valued the guidance of
their principals. Therefore, the principals had the potential to affect the perceptions of the
assistant principals by sharing their personal experiences and approaches toward school
library media specialists. This resulted in the principals’ perceptions affecting the
assistant principals, who had the potential to become future leaders, determining the
placement of school library media specialists in the school setting. The influence of
formal evaluations and peers/mentors on administrators’ perceptions did not support
previous research. Past studies indicated that administrators were most influenced by
their own personal experiences, which determined their professional role knowledge of
school library media specialist professionals (Church, 2007; Hartzel, 2002s; Lau, 2002b;
Lea, 2013; Sandford, 2013).
Fisher and Schroeder (2015) found that administrators held school library media
specialists in high regard when they saw professional roles connected with leadership,
advocacy, professional development, and school initiatives. This was common with
participants in my investigation as these experiences contributed to their views of school
library media specialists as well. The administrators noticed school library media
specialists who were active in school activities, such as leading professional
development, partnering with community organizations, promoting reading events, and
providing resources to improve content areas. They recalled instances of advocacy
initiated by school library media specialists that developed a leadership image of this
position, which also supported the findings of Brantley (2011).
McCracken’s (2001) study indicated that administrators recognized that school
library media specialists needed to display an energized attitude. The administrators in
196

my study reiterated that the school library media specialists’ interpersonal skills made
library users feel accepted and they perceived these personnel to be hospitable.
Interpersonal connections caused the administrators to value the school library media
specialists. Through their relationships, these personnel educated others about their
professional roles, which administrators believed was their responsibility, and developed
their identity in the school community as contributors and partners in student learning.
This belief supports Scott’s (1987) study, as well as Hansen’s (2012) and Church’s
(2007) research, emphasizing the importance of school library media specialists
informing administrators, and other colleagues, about their practices even though they
were not the authority figures. Similarly, the administrators in my study felt that, due to
having a different function in the school community, school library media specialists who
promoted their professional roles received support from classroom teachers. Once these
roles were made evident, administrators often witnessed the school library media
specialist becoming a reliable resource for students and staff.
Olsen and Meyer (1996) recognized that administrators who did not visit the
library could not promote library media standards. It was discovered in my study that
open communication impacted the administrative perspectives of those who frequently
conferred with and observed the school library media specialist. This explained the
expectations of practices through clarification and constructive feedback. Through these
conversations, the administrators understood that school library media specialists had
various levels of knowledge, along with personal interests, which increased their own
comprehension about the five professional roles. They then used this knowledge to assign
tasks based on the school library media specialists’ strengths. As seen in Levitov’s (2009)
and Page’s (2014) studies, most administrators used communication as a tool to clarify
197

responsibilities and professional role capacities, trying their best to make sure that school
library media specialists’ practices were performed in the correct context, as indicated by
Harvey (2008b).
In regard to the fulfillment of professional roles, Edwards (1989) found that
administrators believed that school library media specialists spent 27% of their day
teaching, with the majority of their time being devoted to program administration. This
differed from my results, in which administrators indicated that teacher (57%) was
perceived as the priority professional role and accounted for the majority of the
responsibilities assigned in the daily schedule. The administrators expected school library
media specialists to be teachers because instructing was the main purpose of this position
in the educational setting, with student learning being the goal. In my study, both
principals and assistant principals shared that instructional partner (28%) and information
specialist (10%) were also high priorities since knowledge of all grade-level curriculum
and expert knowledge of current and relevant information was vital. Also opposing
Edwards’s (1989) research outcomes, my study showed that 57% of administrators
indicated that the professional role of program administrator was the least important,
viewing this responsibility as necessary but not central to the vision and mission of their
schools. The administrators did not even specifically identify this professional role in the
daily schedule.
Although the program administrator responsibility maintained the media center
organization, the administrators in this study believed this professional role isolated the
school library media specialist, while the other professional roles contributed
educationally to the environment. Program administration includes library management,
which the administrators associated with classroom management. This revealed that the
198

administrators were unfamiliar with library management responsibilities. Leader (27%)
was also listed as a low priority by both types of administrators, who believed that
successful leadership integrated into the other professional roles was dependent on the
personality and confidence of the school library media specialist. Gavigan and Lance’s
(2015) results, in contrast to mine, showed that leader was considered the most essential
school library media specialist professional role by administrators.
Administrators acknowledged that the skill sets of school library media specialists
were vast, and the administrators in my study believed that school library media
specialists used these skills to support the school. Therefore, the administrators’
perceptions of these skills determined the flexibility of professional role implementation.
Based on the administrators’ experiences, they commonly viewed information specialist
as the strongest professional role due to the school library media specialists’ skill in
navigating the every-changing fields of technology and resource formats. The principals
chose leader as the weakest professional role due to limited demonstrations of database
and equipment use. Although technology was available these opinions showed that
school library media specialists’ technology knowledge to support learning was
insufficient. They also observed that the transition from a traditional to a 21st century
media center environment was a slow process. The assistant principals regarded teacher
as the weakest role because they observed inconsistent alignment of lesson objectives
with current College- and Career-Ready Standards. Boyers (2015) addressed this area,
indicating that a change must occur in students’ approaches to learning in order for them
to become proficient in the research skills needed for a successful college experience. To
meet these national requirements, both types of administrators in my study declared,
instructional partner was the professional role in most need of improvement; however,
199

the fixed schedule created by the administration made collaboration between school
library media specialists and other educators unmanageable because it omitted a common
planning time.
Even though there were barriers to practices, school library media specialists were
still evaluated on their fulfillment of these tasks. In this study, the administrators revealed
that they assigned tasks to school library media specialists that met the district
requirements and the overall instructional needs of the school. Based on the district’s
emphasis on intentional planning through the Gradual Release of Responsibility and
Universal Design for Learning models, most schedules were created to support team
planning for classroom teachers only during the time that school library media specialists
provided instruction to their students. Although the administrators acknowledged that
school library media specialists would have been beneficial during this common planning
period since they could provide student learning information and had personal
relationships with all students, other staff was not available to be with the students during
the common planning period. Because of these barriers, the administrators perceived that
their school library media specialists had multiple responsibilities and fulfilled the
professional roles as much as the schedule permitted.
Perceptions of School Library Media Specialists Regarding Their Professional Roles
The school library media specialist participants provided educational and personal
backgrounds that contributed to forming their perceptions. These perceptions, based on
prior experiences and present situations in a school environment, were unique to each
individual. Revealing these perceptions was necessary to determine a common view of
school library media professional role practices.
Regarding the various educational pathways to serving in this position, the data
200

indicated that 93% of school library media specialists received educational coursework
and professional development in library science; therefore, they rated themselves as very
knowledgeable about this educational area. The school library media specialists agreed
that they needed to continue their learning to remain current in their practices, an
expectation of all educators. This is supported by Powell’s (2013) investigation, which
emphasized that school library media specialists required continuous professional
development to remain experts in the field of library science.
School library media specialists participating in this study identified certain
influences on their perceptions about their practices. They felt that, overall,
student/teacher experiences affected their views on their professional roles and the
expectations of others concerning how they served the school. These experiences ranged
from their personal interactions as students when visiting the media center to the way the
teachers in their own schools used the library. For some, these perceptions became more
distinctive as they became teachers themselves, using these resource personnel to
improve and support their classroom instruction. Others, directly from library schools,
wanted their expertise to be capable of meeting the needs of all users in the media center.
Regardless of their pathways to becoming school library media specialists, student and
teacher experiences affected their views and made them reflect on their practices as
valuable contributors to the school community.
As the school library media specialists shared their outlooks, it verified that the
professional roles they carried out had instructional significance. This was an area placed
as a high value on instruction in Roy and Brown’s (2004) study and emphasized in my
research. The school library media specialists who participated in my study were
educational leaders and valuable assets to interdisciplinary content approaches. Some
201

school library media specialists were considered the schools’ technology experts,
changing the environment to reflect 21st century classrooms with real-world
investigations, makerspace centers, and digital content. The skills and strategies
promoted through the media center were increased at each grade level and incorporated
as much as possible into the classroom lessons through content units and literature
experiences developed by these personnel.
Serving at the elementary level, the school library media specialists believed that
they contributed to the instructional aspects of schools’ visions and missions as teachers,
instructional partners, and information specialists. They recognized that fulfillment of
these professional roles was an evaluation requirement, yet their fulfillment was restricted
due to availability, especially in the area of instructional partnerships. Managing duties,
committee memberships, and coordinating events and activities comprised tasks outside
their professional role requirements. Ehler-Hansen (2014) found that activism by school
library media specialists was necessary to change perceptions of this position and to be
viewed as agents of change in the school. In my study, the school library media
specialists thought these outside tasks allowed others to see them in a different light and
also contributed to the value of their position. They felt that these additional
responsibilities positively affected the perspectives of others as they integrated on a more
personal level into the school community, even though it limited time to carry out their
professional roles.
As school library media specialists were assimilated into the school community,
they emphasized that relationships were necessary in order to be active in the school
environment. This was also observed by Cooper and Bray (2011) and Loertscher (2012),
who identified supportive relationships as essential and influential on perspectives
202

through active practices since others might be unaware of standards and directives
associated with library media. Interpersonal skills influenced the image of program
services, as stated by Wittig (2014). The school library media specialists in my study felt
that relationships with others needed to be established for the professional roles to be
carried out successfully, but they acknowledged that the administrators’ respect for this
position affected other educators’ reactions, as well. This supports Haycock’s (2003)
claim that opportunities provided by school library media specialists develop through the
administrators’ respect for and acknowledgment of this position as an educational
service.
Although the school library media specialists in my study understood that
interaction with others was imperative, having contact consistently with students and staff
was attainable only if scheduling permitted and other responsibilities did not take
precedence. Such flexibility was determined by the administration through scheduling
and the assignment of additional responsibilities. As previously indicated, time was a
concern when carrying out the duties of the professional roles to meet the learning needs
of students and instructional needs of educators, along with the additional tasks that were
administratively assigned. The school library media specialists were resigned to
accepting that it was unrealistic to fulfill each of their professional roles adequately
because there was never enough time with fixed scheduling. Instruction was the priority
and the other professional duties were practiced during the in-between moments.
To avoid the impression of being underutilized, the school library media
specialists thought administrators filled the schedule allowing for more instruction, but
eliminating the other professional responsibilities, resulting in a media center that was
outdated, isolated, and unavailable. They believed that administrators who packed the
203

schedule to avoid open library times were not knowledgeable about the other professional
responsibilities that were required to maintain a functioning media center. This supports
McGhee & Jansen (2010), who noted that administrators need to be aware of the
appropriate responsibilities of school library media specialists and not assign vague tasks
to complete a schedule. Due to fixed scheduling that accommodated grade-level
planning, there was insufficient time to fulfill the five professional roles to the degree that
school library media specialists perceived as acceptable. This correlates with the findings
of Church (2011) and McCracken (2000) that school library media specialists’ practices
could not be completed to the best of their abilities without mandates in place and
removal of irrelevant task assignments.
The school library media specialists shared experiences that influenced the way
their professional roles were accepted. Those school library media specialists who were
former classroom teachers were unprepared for the multitasking needed to complete the
professional role responsibilities and how these responsibilities combined to effectively
serve others. When implementing school-wide programs, they could show their
leadership skills as educators. It provided the opportunity for the school library media
specialists to directly connect the media center with the classroom experience. The school
library media specialists believed that they portrayed themselves as academic facilitators
to the school community, developing students’ skills to be applicable in all content areas,
resulting in future college and career readiness. This was addressed in the study
conducted by Barack (2014), which verified that positive college experiences for students
resulted from prior literacy instruction throughout grade school.
Edwards (1989) confirmed that school library media specialists believed they
spent the majority of their day (48%) teaching and needed more time for program
204

administration. This supports my results. The school library media specialist participants
continually stated that teacher (71.43%) was perceived as the strongest and most
important professional role needed to meet the expectations of the College- and CareerReady Standards, and instruction accounted for the majority of their practices. Impacting
student learning to develop contributing future citizens was evident with the amount of
instructional time assigned to these personnel. The school library media specialists in this
study felt that the professional role of teacher was the strongest due to their curricular
knowledge. They consistently delivered instruction to all grades, working with the same
students for multiple years. Although school library media specialists also agreed that
information specialist (21.43%) and instructional partner (7.14%) were supportive of
academics since these responsibilities assisted learning, they rated these the weakest
professional roles. Information specialist was identified as weak due to their unfamiliarity
with research models and limited knowledge of digital materials. For instructional
partner, they needed more time for collaboration with other educators in order to meet
district and state requirements.
Leader was identified as the least important role by 43% of school library media
specialists, followed closely by program administrator (36%). School library media
specialists perceived leadership to be supportive of the other responsibilities, and some
were uncomfortable being in this position but were willing to contribute and assist to
meet established goals. Martin (2013) had contrasting evidence pointing to leadership
roles as vital for all practices, but agreed that leadership was difficult to implement, and
deGroot and Branch’s (2011) research found that not having leadership skills was
detrimental due to administrators not including school library media specialists in
decision-making. In the area of program administration, the school library media
205

specialists in my study acknowledged that this was accomplished whenever an opening
became available to complete managerial tasks since it was not placed in the schedule.
School library media specialists felt that other educators believed that the professional
role of program administrator to be redundant. Without time allotted for program
administration, the media center would not be operational for school users.
The school library media specialist participants believed that having strong, specific skills
influenced the perceptions of others and determined how they were accepted in the
school. To serve in this position, school library media specialists’ skill sets must be
various and adaptable. They believed that the responsibility for technology would
continue to become more dominant as equipment and online tools were required for
instruction, assignments, and assessments. From management to presentations, school
library media specialists were requested to coordinate programs, chair committees, and
assume multiple tasks that ranged from general duties to office coverage. They were
called upon to deliver professional development individually at the school level and
collaboratively at the district level. School library media specialists had to be selfdirecting, locating necessary training to maintain skills and discovering funding sources
for material purchases. As the only school library media specialist in a school setting,
they felt it was overwhelming to plan for every grade level as a teacher, maintain
awareness of resources as an information specialist, and fulfill the demands of program
administrator and instructional partner. The similar skill areas of leadership, professional
development, advocacy, and school-wide initiatives engagement were identified in Fisher
and Schroeder’s (2015) study as 21st century professional role practices.

206

Comparison of Administrators’ and School Library Media Specialists’ Professional
Role Perceptions
Comparing the education and personal attributes of the administrator and school
library media specialist participants revealed similarities and differences in their
perspectives. Related to educational background, previous investigations showed that
administrators used school library media personnel and services based on their
knowledge of this position which would only improve through college certification
programs, staff development, educational literature and collaborative relationships
(Alexander, Smith, & Carey, 2003; Harvey, 2008b; Kaplan, 2006; Page, 2014). The
outcomes of my study support the need for improvement in these same areas.
The administrators (71%) had limited educational background related to
supervising school library media specialists but rated themselves knowledgeable on
overseeing these personnel, while the school library media specialists (86%) received
considerable training due to the certification requirements and rated themselves very
knowledgeable. Although only 5% of the administrators had certification in library
science areas, they assigned the tasks and evaluated the practices of the school library
media specialists, which affected their value to the school and their overall necessity to
the district. It was acknowledged by all groups that school library media specialists need
to be continuous learners not only to remain current in library science but also to assist
the administrators in the operation of the school. No suggestions were listed regarding
administrators expanding their knowledge about the school library media specialist
position. This outcome aligned with Gregg’s (2007) results, showing that, although both
types of educators completed classes in curricular areas, there was a large difference with
those who had completed coursework and training regarding the school library media
207

specialist position as they managed school library media specialists more effectively.
Foote (2015) showed that different perspectives were formed from many factors,
which affected the interactions between administrators and school library media
specialists. As the participants in my study listed certain elements that influenced their
perceptions throughout their careers, differences between the groups became apparent.
Evaluations were an important task conducted by administrators to assess personnel and
determine their value to the educational community; therefore, formal evaluations were
selected by the principals as having the most influence on their perceptions. The
principals shared that the indicators they observed the school library media specialists
practicing guided their judgments during the evaluation process. Peers/mentors were
identified by assistant principals as having the most influence on their views toward
school library media specialists. As they were learning to become school leaders, they
relied on principals’ mentorships to direct them in the best use of these personnel and to
model how to correctly assess the responsibilities of this resource position. According to
the school library media specialists, student/teacher experiences had the most influence.
It was through the interactions with library users that they executed their professional
roles, and they reflected on instruction and services in order to adjust their practices.
With the participants being employed at educational institutions, the professional
roles that were instructionally focused were viewed as the priorities by all the groups.
The practices of teacher, information specialist, and instructional partner were
acknowledged by the participants because of the classes the school library media
specialists taught, cross-curricular connections, and collaborations when feasible. The
school library media specialists agreed with the administrators that their positions were
unique and they were needed to assist with a variety of tasks to maintain the operations of
208

the school, both instructional and non-instructional.
As indicated by the majority of participants, teacher (63%) was perceived as the
most important professional role due to the instructional focus. However, when selecting
the least important professional role, the majority of administrators selected program
administration because they believed this could be accomplished by assistants and
volunteers, while school library media specialists chose leader based on this being
displayed through their actions in carrying out the other roles. It was recognized by all
that when the five professional roles were implemented with consistency and services
were combined, then this position aligned with the school’s goals and became an
effective resource in school improvement.
The research of Berggren (2014) likewise found that administrators and school
library media specialists regarded the school library media specialist as an educational
leader. In my study, the school library media specialist was placed in an instructional
leader position by the administration. It was through this position that content was
integrated with research skills and technology, and literature application became relevant.
The administrators valued the gifted and talented research units and the technology
support, while school library media specialists emphasized their instructional impact on
developing students into life-long learners. All participants stated that school library
media specialists were instructional resources, yet viewed how this was evident in
different ways. The administrators felt that lessons using inquiry approaches with
literature awareness and reading strategies had real-world applications, although they felt
that more professional development was needed in research and technology. The school
library media specialists viewed their strengths as providing current and accurate
resources that supported the curricula and agreed that continuing education in research
209

and technology was necessary, but claimed that the opportunities provided were very
limited.
My study showed that the expertise of school library media specialists was noted
by all participants as a necessary component in the success of the school. They
acknowledged the multiple sets of skills a school library media specialist needed to
possess, which included knowledge of all instructional grade levels, with the additional
areas of library management. The contributions of these personnel benefited the school,
not only through academics, but also by overseeing the operation of the media center.
The majority of participants recognized that school library media specialists assisted with
the implementation of school and district initiatives and were leaders in integrating and
modeling the latest technologies. Each group mentioned that the educational background
of teacher and library science was essential at the elementary level to develop students’
abilities in the areas of content, research, and resources, as well as their level of comfort
in the media center. They also agreed that this was an educational position that required
constant training in order to remain effective in fulfilling the professional roles. The skill
sets shared by my participants reflected the 21st century professional roles most often
referred to in the research of Fisher & Schroeder (2015).
The participants had varying views on which professional roles they considered to
be competently or ineffectively carried out. The majority of administrators viewed
information specialist as the most capably practiced professional role due to school
library media specialists being the central personnel for classroom support and their
awareness of resources and material accessibility. The school library media specialists
felt that teacher was their strongest professional role due to the amount of time they spent
delivering instruction. There was no commonality among the groups regarding the
210

weakest professional role. The principals shared various reasons for choosing leader
based on their individual school situations, such as the school library media specialist
being a new hire, having limited technology knowledge, or not having the desire to be a
leader. Teacher was chosen as the weakest practice by the assistant principals, even
though this accounted for the bulk of school library media specialists’ time. They
believed that, with the new standards for rigorous instruction and the 21st century
approach to learning, the school library media specialists were experiencing a steep
learning curve and needed to abandon traditional library routines. Lastly, half of the
school library media specialists chose the professional role of instructional partner as
weakest due to lack of opportunity, while the remainder of the school library media
specialists selected information specialist because they needed more awareness of
continuously changing resources.
Although researchers established that perceptions can differ between
administrators and school library media specialists, they have recognized that the most
important factor is collaborative relationships to build common approaches toward
professional practices (Bishop, 2011; Shannon, 2012; Wong, 2014; Yetter, 1994). It was
mentioned by my research participants that school library media specialists were
regarded as the hub of the school. This required building strong relationships through the
practices of professional roles in order to serve others. The school library media
specialists were in a position to initiate interactions with faculty and students consistently
throughout the elementary years. The participants also believed that the effectiveness of
the professional roles was based on relationships with library users. If the school library
media specialists’ services were not impacting instruction, and students and staff not
requesting assistance, then this position would not be valued or considered necessary.
211

Harvey (2008a) supported advancing librarianship by designating school library media
specialists as education leaders with responsibility for instructional delivery and
collaboration, making it incumbent on school library media specialists to take the
initiative to promote their professional roles. In my study, both school library media
specialists and principals agreed that leadership was one of the professional roles that
could be used in promoting this position, enabling them to educate others about their
responsibilities. Conversely, the assistant principals did not feel that leadership was
necessary and that relationships could be encouraged in the other professional roles
through actions and open communication.
Another area that was universally agreed upon by the participant groups in my
research was the lack of time to fulfill all the professional roles sufficiently. There was
minimal flexibility in the schedule, and collaborating with classroom teachers, locating
supporting materials, or reviewing resources to purchase occurred sporadically. Isolation
was repeatedly mentioned by administrators as a negative aspect of this position and they
expected school library media specialists to overcome this by being accessible to other
educators. The groups in my study emphasized that instructional partner was the practice
needing the most improvement because of the time constraints of the fixed schedule,
which placed media classes in the same periods as classroom team planning times.
Although, because of time restrictions, school library media specialists
multitasked to meet their responsibilities, the administrators in my study revealed that
other educators interpreted this position as having fewer duties since they were unaware
of the library media specialists’ practices. The participants agreed that more instructional
tasks would be beneficial but this would be a challenge to implement in all schools due to
scheduling and the variety of tasks performed by school library media specialists. The
212

administrators stated that school library media specialists must be flexible with
organization, agreeing that they have to multitask, but must be efficient with time
management to meet the needs of library users. In regard to the schedule, all participants
acknowledged that it was based on the instructional needs of students and created from a
whole-school perspective; therefore, any decisions about scheduling adjustments
remained in the judgement of the administration.
Comparison of School Library Media Specialists’ Perceptions and Daily Practices
The professional role perceptions of school library media specialists were
reviewed in their daily practices. Their personal feelings, viewpoints, and experiences
were compared with information about their daily practices. Based on the documentary
and observational evidence, school library media specialists were mainly used
instructionally at the elementary school level. Michie & Holton (2005b) found that school
librarian professional roles that focused on instructional areas led to school library media
specialists developing an individual identity that proved that librarianship was an
important educational resource. In my study, the professional role of teacher consumed
the majority of the school library media specialists’ work day. Daily planning indicated
they followed the lesson structure initiated by the district and had the same expectations
as classroom teachers. In a review of their weekly lesson planning, I found that teaching
accounted for 56% of school library media specialists’ documentation. This responsibility
had precise time allotments, which amounted to more than half allotted to the other
professional roles, in comparison The other instructionally focused areas of information
specialist and instructional partner represented only 10% of their designated scheduled
time.
Lau (2002b) asserted that administrators will only learn the value of this position
213

when school library media specialists connect their practices with student learning and
school success. In my study, the school library media specialists’ portfolios included
artifacts and documentation of plans, assessments, projects, and student work samples
relating to lessons they implemented. This evidence specifically supported domains one
and three of the district’s evaluation model; thus, more than half (52%) of their overall
assessed responsibilities were teaching oriented. These tasks included instructional
planning and preparation, along with lesson delivery and services. The other professional
roles that were instructionally focused in these domains consisted of information
specialist at 17% and instructional partner at 8% of these domain practices.
According to my personal observations, the main part of the school library media
specialist’s day was instructional with back-to-back classes involving media lessons,
acceleration and enrichment investigations, and technology instruction. Since the school
library media specialists were constantly conducting classes in the media center,
instructional partnerships were never physically witnessed other than an occasional
conversation requesting materials or technology support. Although the administrators
wanted to avoid the segregation of the school library media specialist, these personnel
were still isolated from the other educators due to the continuous instruction in the media
center. The tasks associated with information specialist became part of the students’
media lessons, which were delivered while the classroom teachers were team planning.
Therefore, the classroom teachers were seldom present to develop any relevant
partnerships, and the opportunity to integrate new resources or strategies into classroom
learning was limited. As evidenced in documents and by observations of their daily
practices, school library media specialists were instructional leaders and contributed to
student learning significantly as teachers, moderately as information specialists, and
214

minimally as instructional partners.
The data demonstrates that the professional roles and other duties assigned by the
administration required interactions in order for tasks to be successful. Positive
relationships were important for all the professional roles carried out in the media center,
such as a teacher, information specialist, instructional partner, leader, and program
administrator. They were also important for tasks performed outside the media center,
such as extracurricular duties, committee memberships, and coordination of activities and
events. Specific tasks that provided relationship opportunities were represented (20%) in
schedules and weekly plans. I observed face-to-face, digital, and phone interactions with
educators, students, parents, community members, business representatives, and district
personnel.
To develop supportive relationships, school library media specialists continuously
assessed their professional role presentation, swaying perspectives in their favor by their
practices, supporting the findings of Loertscher (2012). School library media specialists
are evaluated by the district on whether they sustain relationships that are respective and
supportive, which is specified in domain two, the library media environment, and domain
four, professional responsibilities, of their portfolios. Depending on the school library
media specialists’ relationships with others, the image of the media center as the hub of
the school was established or hindered. Without positive relationships, services were not
sought by library users, eliminating the need for this school educator. Through
examination of the portfolio artifacts and observations of the school library media
specialists’ interactions, it was determined that the school library media specialists
established personal relationships at different levels, connecting with the school
community when able to fulfill the requirements of the professional roles and additional
215

responsibilities in the school environment.
Correlating with school library media specialists’ practices being mostly
instructional, they were seen as teachers, and they indicated that this professional role
was their first priority, resulting in the other professional roles being viewed by others as
inconsequential. The professional role of leader was identified as the lowest priority. Yet,
Ray’s (2012) study indicated that, through active leadership and advocacy, outdated
perceptions can be changed. In my study, leadership was seldom seen in isolation but was
integrated into other professional role practices. It was also noted repeatedly that the task
of instructional partner was essential, and the school library media specialists tried to
initiate this when the opportunity arose, but scheduling conflicts limited collaboration on
instructional units and co-teaching activities. This data was collected through the
instruments of questionnaires, interviews, observations, and review of their annual state
reports.
With instruction identified as their central practice, it was logical that school
library media specialists selected student/teacher experiences as having the most
influence on their perceptions of their professional roles. The extensiveness of such
experiences was evident in my observations and school library media specialists adjusted
their practices to meet the needs of all library users, often sacrificing their planning and
management times to assist others. They altered their instruction to enhance student
learning areas that needed improvement when requested by teachers. As information
specialists, they searched, purchased, and provided resources that students and teachers
could use as reliable materials for extending knowledge. They also modeled and
mentored others in the application of skills for locating relevant resources and supported
the integration of technology to enhance lessons.
216

In the portfolios, program administration was often selected as a personal goal for
improvement, a task that was often neglected since the other responsibilities were
considered more significant. Yet, in reflecting on their personal goals, they concluded
that improvement in this area was not realized due to the emphasis on instructional
requirements. Program administration may have the least impact on instruction, but
without the accomplishment of this task, materials would not be reviewed for purchase,
resources would be mismanaged, and the operation of the library would be in disorder.
This would leave the media center, the hub of the school, a place that would be unusable.
As the documentary evidence of daily practices showed, the professional roles of
teacher, instructional partner, information specialist, leader, and program administrator
were often integrated in order to be fulfilled. Therefore, data in the instructional areas
dominated, while the non-instructional tasks remained vague, supporting research by
Drake (2007). Even though the more instructional professional roles took precedence in
my study, school library media specialists continued to adjust their plans to accommodate
the needs of all library users because, overall, they were educators who provided services
to others in the school. The non-instructional professional roles were performed in short,
scattered intervals. Even though time was limited, school library media specialists strove
to accomplish managerial tasks and be an asset in the school through their abilities and
expertise. In review of the data, it was clear that there was value in each professional role,
but it was also obvious that the implementation of these tasks was uneven, with the
instructional role dominating the school library media specialists’ assignments and noninstructional role responsibilities being met sporadically.
Various skills are essential of school library media specialists at the elementary
level for meeting the requirements the professional roles demand. The school library
217

media specialists’ knowledge of curricula at every grade level was visible as the lessons
they developed connected library instruction to classroom topics and helped build
students’ foundation of skills, both content-specific and in technological applications.
Providing guidance on materials selection and differentiating for reading abilities, while
demonstrating equipment usage and database access, was a common occurrence.
Leadership was apparent as they coordinated events or programs, or, subtly, when they
prepared the school for professional development and acted as the liaison with district
and community personnel regarding educational initiatives and partnerships. As program
administrators, school library media specialists used their managerial abilities to oversee
the operations of the media center, which required purchasing, processing, fundraising,
circulating, and reviewing materials to ensure a selection of valid materials in a variety of
formats.
In addition to the instructional requirements, the district evaluation process
established skill sets that differentiated them from teachers in a classroom setting. School
library media specialists are responsible for the development of a media center that runs
efficiently and has an active learning environment where routines are established.
Shannon (2002) revealed this in her study, and the reality of taking a position as school
library media specialist means being proactive in building awareness about the
professional roles. The school library media specialists in my study had the latest
knowledge about digital information, delivered professional development, and reflected
on the services provided. Constructive decision-making about resources was essential as
they determined which materials to discard and spending on items of long-term use. They
maintained documents on the collection and budgeting process for accountability
purposes. They led fundraisers and after-school clubs, while advocating for their
218

programs by promoting the value of the media center and building relationships through
their availability and support. This evidence of their daily practices supports Hansen’s
(2012) statement that school library media specialists being active and demonstrating
their educational worth is essential for promoting their position to other educators, as
indicated by Forcht, (2011).
In my study, the skills school library media specialists displayed daily in their
practices were broad with tasks ever-changing. These personnel were posed to be
spontaneous, while remaining composed, as various tasks needed to be fulfilled
efficiently and simultaneously. In order to be valuable, school library media specialists
needed to be strong in many skill areas: instructional supporter, information expert,
collaboration initiator, specialized advocate, and organizational administrator who
continuously multitasked to be an effective in-demand professional at the school. EhlerHansen (2014) showed these to be valuable assets that influenced perceptions toward
school library media specialists and through these connections they can make others
aware of the impact of their professional roles.
In the daily practices identified in my study, administrators fixed schedules at the
elementary level with very little flexibility for school library media specialists to fulfill
their professional roles more efficiently. Instruction accounted for the majority of the
schedule, which was provided through media lessons, gifted and talented projects, and
technology skills instruction. The non-instructional tasks were performed throughout the
day and consisted of various duties. The bulk of the time was concentrated on planning
and delivering instruction, followed by reviewing and providing informational support,
and, finally, assigned duties. The short open periods between instruction and duties were
when the school library media specialists attempted to organize the media center for
219

functionality, so that library users would have materials that were organized and
accessible. There was minimal flexibility to carry out the professional roles more
equitably. The schedule was created by the administration, which guided the performance
of tasks by the school library media specialists. The amount of time granted to carry out
each professional role was not controlled by the school library media specialists. They
could only fulfill so many tasks within the allotted time frame; therefore, equity in
professional role practices was not achieved.
Theoretical Framework
In the school organization, educators contributed to the social structure based on
the role they performed as a school library media specialist or administrator. Associated
behaviors were attached to the roles of these individuals (Person, 1993). Administrators
and school library media specialists have personal views based on prior experiences and
training, often leading to conflicts over the appropriateness of professional role practices
(Katz & Kahn, 1978). As the administrators and school library media specialists
interacted, certain attributes developed into member identification. This member
identification can change due to perceptions that are altered by expectations of practices.
In this study, the participants revealed that the school library media specialists
carried out professional roles as instructional leaders, which supported the overall success
of the school (Jensen, 2008; Shannon, 2009). The school library media specialists
contributed to an effective school organizational culture through their relationships with
students and staff, supporting the organizational views of Hoy and Miskel (2013) and
Senge (2006). Hoy and Miskel (2013) emphasized that behavioral expectations become
associated with personnel based on concepts, assumptions, and generalizations. Senge
(2006) acknowledged there is system thinking in an educational organization that
220

develops from the connections among personnel through behavior expectations. These
contributions of organizational effectiveness and learning were the framework of this
study, as the perspectives of administrators and school library media specialists were
investigated to understand the views towards the school library media specialists’
practices.
Organizational effectiveness reviewed by Hoy & Miskel (2013) was relevant in
my study to the administrators’ leadership standpoint. The administration had the
responsibility of assigning instructional tasks to school library media specialists that were
valuable to the school and affected student performance. The administrators believed that
they used their leadership positively by placing school library media specialists in
positions where their strengths were applied to achieve best outcomes, such as leading
professional development, coordinating after-school events, or partnering with
community organizations. The administrators had a school-wide perspective, which
allowed them to establish direction by assigning tasks to those personnel that enhanced
the overall school operation. Therefore, the responsibilities given to the school library
media specialists reflected how they were perceived by the administration.
The Learning Organization Theory formulated by Senge (2006) involves five
disciplines that are relevant to my research topic. These disciplines can be used to
transform personal perspectives and develop a common understanding of school library
media specialists’ practices that have the most impact on school performance. The first
discipline relates to school library media specialists maintaining mastery of skills as they
and administrators identify changes in preparing for 21st century learning. This also
affects whether other educators perceive their position as worthwhile and whether
administrators effectively evaluate their performance. The second discipline concerns
221

mental models established about library positions, which can be reformed by the thinking
and behavior that school library media specialists display, meaning that they must present
themselves as leaders to promote their positions. Related to the third discipline, each
school has a shared vision that school library media specialists must accept, contributing
to the common purpose as educators in the school. According to the fourth discipline, it is
through communication with administrators that school library media specialists promote
their skills and clarify misconceptions about their position. In line with the fifth
discipline, the school library media specialists’ professional roles remain valuable by
implementing system thinking: identifying how their professional roles can be efficiently
carried out, removing barriers that prohibit implementation of role practices, and
continuously reflecting on these practices for improvement.
The school library media specialists and administrators wanted their schools to
continuously improve by using the school library media specialist position for the best
educational outcomes. Based on the results of this study, school library media specialists
and administrators need to examine their perceptions and maintain open communication
to understand each other’s expectations and skills (Hoy & Miskel, 2013). School library
media specialists and administrators can improve the implementation of the professional
role practices of school library media specialists by strengthening school library media
services; such changes must be led by the administration (Senge, 2006). Relationships
were identified as a theme in my study, indicating that the interactions between the
school library media specialists and the administration required shared expectations. A
common view of the school library media specialists’ professional roles will positively
affect the school library program and services, which will improve overall school
performance (Hoy & Miskel, 2013). School library media specialists who are active in
222

their professional roles are perceived as valuable, contributing to a learning system with
skilled services that are necessary for schools to be operational.
Implications
McGhee and Jansen (2010) predicted that school library media specialists’
professional roles would remain inconsistent without mandated educational interventions
that develop common expectations between school library media specialists and
administrators. My study provides further evidence for their prediction and contributes
additional data toward this research topic, indicating perspectives still need of change.
The aim of my study was to improve the overall learning communities in contemporary
schools by ascertaining and comparing the perceptions of school library media specialists
and administrators regarding school library media specialists’ professional roles. As I
share this information with the participating school district, my goal is that the school
library media specialists will fulfill their professional roles effectively, collaboration with
the administrators will increase, and clarity of professional role expectations will result
(Harvey, 2008b). School library media specialists must continue to promote their
educational contributions and face the challenge of changing mindsets through their
words and actions (Ewbank & Moreillon, 2007)
In spite of the availability of AASL and ALA documents and the state curriculum,
administrators are still unfamiliar with school library media specialist professional role
practices. Courses concerning school library media specialists’ professional roles need to
become part of the college educational administration curriculum. Overall, administrators
view and use school library media specialists primarily as teachers, while remaining
unaware of the need for library management. School library media specialists cannot be
evaluated equally with other educators when administrators do not assign them the
223

appropriate professional tasks (Francis & Lance, 2011) that reflect their evaluation
criteria. This situation continues to remain critical, and a change of perspective is
necessary if this position is to enhance school achievement (Gavigan & Lance, 2015).
From an examination of these viewpoints, it is evident that school library media services
must continuously be assessed to develop programs that support the next generation of
learners. This change will only occur as administrators’ knowledge evolves in the area of
library science from professional development and training opportunities.
Change needs to begin in the educational preparation programs of administrators
and the advocacy approaches of school library media specialists, with committees
consisting of educational experts that instruct ages pre-kindergarten through age 20 (PK20) conducting an honest, active dialogue. Once these committees have a consensus on
the expectations of these educators, then presentations need to be delivered to the district
and state boards of education, supervisors, and specialists advocating for mandated
principles regarding the use of the library media position in school settings. Strong
documented connections between library media instruction and the College- and CareerReady Standards are evident, and through professional development opportunities
provided to administrators and school library media specialists, a common understanding
of expectations for achieving these rigorous goals can be attained.
Leadership is recognized as a valuable attribute in these educational positions
(Gavigan & Lance, 2015), including by the administrators and school library media
specialists in my study. Leadership builds professional relationships, developing dialogue
that results in understanding school library media specialists’ professional roles (Sokol,
Reeve, & Flater, 2015). My study has shown that administrators have insufficient
understanding of these professional roles, revealing mixed views of school library media
224

specialists’ responsibilities. Therefore, leadership is valuable to instigating reform
(Martin, 2013).
To initiate change, school library media specialists often have the burden of selfpromotion concerning their educational position (Hansen, 2012), yet they would be more
accepted as equals and respected by others if administrators demonstrated awareness and
support of the library personnel’s educational contributions. As administrators’
knowledge about these personnel increases, they can schedule relevant tasks for school
library media specialists to perform (AASL, 2016). Perceptions can be altered with
interdependent leadership relationships between the school library media specialist and
the administrator. Through dialogue, reflection, and learning opportunities, these
educators can reach a common understanding about professional role practices; then true
educational partnerships can form, along with the realization that library services are
essential for school success.
Recommendations for Changes in Practices
To conclude this investigation, I recommend the following strategies for
implementing changes in practices:
1. National library organizations and the Maryland College- and Career-Ready
initiative created standards for core school library instructional components.
Yet, the MSDE Code of Maryland (COMAR) Public School Library
Programs (2000a) policy does not mandate implementation, but provides a
framework for districts to develop their own public school library programs.
This COMAR regulation is too vague and needs to be revised. District and
state library media personnel at all levels can contact legislators to begin the
process of developing mandates and reassessment of the school library media
225

specialist position, focusing on their contributions toward teaching and
learning (Loertscher, 2012).
2. Professional role practices can be affected by perceptions. Therefore, the role
of the school library media specialist varies in regard to the school grade
levels, service programs, instructional opportunities, and administrative
expectations. Administrators are making decisions without an educational
background in library science. Misperceptions about the position of school
library media specialists can develop from personal experiences and the
collective beliefs of a district. These perceptions can change when
administrators and teachers become knowledgeable about this position and the
value it contributes to the school environment (Ewbank & Moreillon, 2007)
through staff development and administrative courses.
3. Decision-making dynamics often omit school library media representation and
lead to inconsistent procedures and conflicts about authority. School library
media specialists must promote their professionalism to their peers in order
for positive perceptions to be established and sustained. The American
Association of School Libraries Leadership developed training to establish a
long-term plan to build stakeholder support, which can be presented to the
district by the supervisor of library media programs.
4. With this data serving as baseline information, individual schools can
coordinate with the supervisor of library media programs to review the
outcomes and determine how the school library media specialists can be used
to support the school vision and mission, as well as overall school
improvement. The supervisor of library media programs can share the data
226

with the Board of Education to begin an evaluation of the school library media
specialist’s position to identify the implementation of 21st century practices
that support the current generation of learners. Open dialogue should be
initiated and knowledge shared that leads to moving others toward a common
view of the professional role practices of school library media specialists.
Future Research
Upon the completion of this investigation, I compiled the following list of
recommendations for areas of further research:
1. Other stakeholders, such as students, teacher, and parents, should be included
as participants in further studies. This would uncover the perceptions of noneducators and other school educators regarding the practices of school library
media specialists. Knowledge would be gained about how students and
parents use these personnel and any changes needed in services provided
would be revealed. Gathering student and parent perceptions would contribute
to a more comprehensive study by including the entire school community.
2. This qualitative method research produced common themes among
administrators and school library media specialists. These themes could be
researched as potential professional priorities in other districts. The themes
identified could be used to develop new school library media specialist job
descriptions and performance criteria that are more specific and commonly
understood by both administrators and school library media specialists.
3. Replication of the study is always encouraged to expand the data concerning
the professional roles of school library media specialists and how they are
perceived. In a time when school systems experience budget limitations, the
227

investigative outcomes can result in transforming the school library media
specialist position. This can vary according to the district’s needs, resulting in
variations in the way library media services are delivered.
4. A comparison of professional role perceptions between school-employed
library media specialists and college-enrolled students in a library certification
program would be beneficial in determining expectations of practices versus
current responsibilities. It would also contribute information regarding the
relevance of course offerings based on actual skills needed to fulfill assigned
professional roles.
Summary
Overall, the information generated from this research investigation developed a
better understanding of perceptions of the professional roles fulfilled by school library
media specialists. Regardless of the variations in professional role assignments and
additional task expectations, the school library media specialists acknowledged that their
success was based on how they were perceived by the administration, which affected how
they were accepted by the school community. Whether perceptions were influenced by
peers/mentors, formal evaluations, or student/teacher experiences, the management of
this personnel position was up to the administrators. By comparing the perceptions of
administrators and school library media specialists, this study expands information that
leads to respecting the professional responsibilities and the contributions of these
personnel (Hartzel, 2002a).
Instructional and non-instructional responsibilities were assigned by
administrators and fulfilled by school library media specialists. The professional roles of
teacher, information specialist, and instructional partner were recognized as necessary in
228

an educational environment. The practice of leadership was believed to be integrated into
the other professional roles and ,therefore, not often identified as being carried out by
school library media specialists. The administrators viewed program administration as a
negative task, but it was considered necessary by the school library media specialists in
order to provide the school community with a functioning media center. While teaching
consumed the majority of time due to administrative scheduling and library media
expectations, the other professional role tasks were undertaken when time was available.
This research also revealed common themes of instructional resource,
relationships, role priorities, skill sets, and time. These recurrent themes emerged in data
analysis, although views on them diverged among the administrators and school library
media specialists. The participants agreed that instruction was the first priority in
scheduling, but then there were differences in opinion, with administrators next assigning
supportive tasks, while school library media specialists felt that library management was
more necessary. Relationship building varied among the participants, from consistent
interaction to contact as needed. Communication between the administrators and school
library media specialists was seen as essential for perspectives to align. The
administrators valued the school library media specialists’ specific skill sets and allocated
tasks that featured these strengths. Both administrators and school library media
specialists alluded to time limitations impeding the best use of these personnel but agreed
that students’ needs were the most important criteria to consider when scheduling.
The participants also agreed that it was the responsibility of school library media
specialists to promote their practices. They indicated that, in order for others to regard the
library media position as educationally valuable, school library media specialists needed
to reach out to connect with students and staff and be viewed as a resource to enhance
229

their learning and instruction. Although administrators viewed the school library media
specialists as the hub of the school and established a schedule that prevented them from
being isolated, the school library media specialists felt that the limited flexibility in the
schedule eliminated opportunities to collaborate with others. This was another area in
which the participants agreed with the overall expectations, but differed about the best
way to achieve these goals.
Through my research, I have made a significant contribution to the education field
by contributing to previous research studies on this topic. The information gathered can
be used by administrators and school library media specialists to establish dialogue,
producing a common understanding about professional role practices. This research can
be utilized by administrators and school library media specialists to evaluate their
viewpoints, reflect on the origins of these perspectives, and make changes in the
management of these personnel to better support student and school performance.