A Bibliometric Analysis of the Proceedings of the Association for Educational
Communications and Technology (AECT) for the 1979-2009 Period

by
Vandy Pacetti-Donelson

Abstract
A Bibliometric Analysis of the Proceedings of the Association for Educational
Communications and Technology (AECT) for the 1979-2009 Period. Vandy PacettiDonelson, 2018: Applied Dissertation, Nova Southeastern University, Abraham S.
Fischler College of Education.
Keywords: Bibliometrics, citation analysis, citations (references), educational
technology, conference proceedings, network analysis, knowledge domains,
multidimensional scaling
Traditional journal analysis for the identification of diciplines is limited in developing
areas of study due to the lack of journals specific to that area of study. Identifying
knowledge domains worthy of study for the identification of developing disciplines has
been difficult.
Conferences are at the forefront of building knowledge in scientific communities,
particularly in technology related sectors, but less than 10% of conference proceedings
are available in conventional knowledge databases. As a result, conference proceedings
as a previously unconsidered knowledge domain, may provide the knowledge domain
worthy of analysis to identify developmental and incremental change within developing
areas of study.
This study proposed a bibliometric analysis of the Conference Proceedings of the
Association of Educational and Communications Technology (AECT) from 1979 through
2009 as a knowledge domain that represented Instructional/Educational Technology.
Bibliometric indicators were extracted and collected into custom databases for citation
and cocitation analyses. Gephi 0.9.2 software was used to create multidimensional graphs
to identify developmental and incremental change within the knowledge domain with the
purpose of understanding the developmental pattern of Educational/Instructional
Technology as a discipline.

Chapter 1: Introduction
“The term ‘academic discipline’ has become a term for the organization of
learning and the systematic production of new knowledge” (Krishnam, 2009).
Practitioners and researchers expand the knowledge of disciplines through the
establishment and repetition of domain specific behaviors and the communication of
those behaviors within the knowledge domain. This term is applied when newly
organized learning and systematically produced new knowledge do not find continuity
within a pre-established knowledge domain and a new domain forms. These disciplines
accumulate domain specific knowledge that is constantly expanding and should be shared
within the knowledge community for further development.
Each year academics and professionals alike attend associational conferences.
Conferences draw researchers and innovators interested in similar ideas to present
research concepts, frameworks, theories, methods, and investigations to colleagues and
add to a profession, field, or discipline through discourse. This discourse, referred to as
conference proceedings, provides some of the most recent explorations and phenomena
and provides researchers the opportunity to develop and disseminate new knowledge,
make new intellectual connections, and develop intellectual theory. These collected
works serve as a written record and are usually distributed to attendees and association
members as a journal. Once distributed, these writings often relay the latest developments
in a profession, field, or discipline and create a knowledge domain that may be
considered the research front.

2

Instructional Technology, also referred to as Educational Technology, is a
knowledge domain that quickly came to prominence with the rapid technological
developments of the twentieth century. With the premise of effectively using technology
to improve learner outcomes as the primary goal of the knowledge domain,
Educational/Instructional Technology practitioners, researchers, and professionals
struggle to codify the knowledge domain due to “the practical nature of the field”
(Simonson, 2013, p. vii). Simonson (2013) indicates that while those professionals excel
at problem solving, they do not do their best at documenting why activities are effective.
The Association for Educational Communications and Technology (AECT) is a
professional association for educators who are focused on the improvement of instruction
through technology. The AECT, founded in 1923, has provided support to professionals
as the oldest association central to instruction through technology. Each year, the AECT
holds an annual conference.
“A yearly theme is chosen, and keynote speakers are selected from leaders
in educational technology and related fields. The AECT’s organizational
structure includes a number of divisions as well as recognized affiliate
organizations and chapters, division meetings, board of directors’
meetings, and other needed governance meetings typically take place
during the annual convention” (Flynt, 2014, p. 2).

A call for proposals is made each year and, after a blind review process, submitted
research is compiled into a conference proceedings journal and distributed to membership
and made available for purchase by non-members (Al-Saleh, 2000).

3

Statement of the Problem
The AECT has provided a home for academics and professionals delving into an
area of study that is in a constant state of flux. Due to the rapid changes in technology,
terminology changes, the changes in publication, and the growth of information, those
who practice in this interdisciplinary area of study have faced the challenge of identifying
the core knowledge domain and; therefore, legitimizing instructional technology as a
profession, field, or discipline. Unfortunately, there is no clear method for differentiating
between profession, field, and discipline.
Categorization of human behavior as a specialized activity begins at its most base
level, the profession. Professions “are usually associated with an occupation” in a
particular setting, “such as law with the court” (Czerniewicz, 2008, p. 172). “Professions
[in their development to emerging fields] strive to improve their standards of
responsibility and accountability [in order to] gain the confidence of the community they
serve and those who empower and regulate them (Salam, Schepard, & Schlissel, 1996, p.
11). The concept of educational/Instructional Technology as a profession suffers for its
duplicity of setting, i.e. universities, schools, training and other educational sites in
health, the military, and corporate locales. “It is likely that professionals are [also]
employed in universities in non-academic conditions of service, thus differentiating
[from] those working as academics… Depending on the status of the practitioner’s
position, the work may be invisible and professionally acknowledge” (Czerniewicz,
2008, p. 172).

4

The duplicity of setting, on the other hand, may be a descriptor associated with a
field. Further, Salam, Schepard, and Schlissel (2008) describe emerging fields as those
that demonstrate a series of characteristics that include: a proliferation of practitioners, a
market for products and services, an increase in development and research related to the
profession, the development of legislation to regulate the profession, and an articulated
desire for professional development, networking, and conversation by practitioners of the
field (p. 10-11). As early as the 1950’s, Finn defined the movement from field to
discipline.
Finn (1953) offered that for this area of study now termed, “Instructional
Technology,” also referred to as “Educational Technology” and formerly known as
“Audio-visual Instruction” to be recognized as a discipline it must in part have an
intellectual technique, an application to human affairs, and an intellectual theory
undergoing expansion through research. Much like the difficulties of Psychology
practitioners at the turn of the 20th century in establishing a discipline,
Educational/Instructional Technology practitioners are torn between a subject matter
supplied by technological innovation, methodologies borrowed from education, and
bastardization through publication in a number of interdisciplinary journals (White &
McCain, 1998).
Godin (2006) chronicles the early efforts of scientists to legitimize the discipline
of Psychology, recognizing that statisticians focused on measuring productivity as a
measure of this science. If Educational/Instructional Technology is to be legitimized as a
discipline through identification of Finn’s criteria and practitioners are to use this

5

information to further the growth of Educational/Instructional Technology then a
knowledge base focused primarily on Educational/Instructional Technology must be
identified and analyzed to provide the necessary data to deduce its infrastructure,
scientific productivity, and contribution to science. The conference proceedings of the
AECT “are descriptive of the organization’s work—they document the written discourse
of this community and report the participants’ current interests” (Breitenstein, 2003,
p.20). Further, these proceedings have an added layer of consistency in that the
proceedings have been, since 1979, compiled by one editor, Michael R. Simonson, who is
currently a Program Professor and Instructor of Technology and Distance Education at
Nova Southeastern University. Therefore, the conference proceedings provide the
consistent knowledge base of the knowledge domain for analysis.
“AECT provides an archived, digital copy of the conference proceedings for
members. Many of the proceedings are available for download through the Education
Resource Information Center (ERIC) database” (Flynt, 2014, p. 5). All of the proceedings
are available on the Technology, Research, and Evaluation Systems website in portable
document format (PDF) files, which is maintained by the proceedings’ editor, Michael R.
Simonson.
Background/Justification
Bibliometrics, the science of statistically analyzing and measuring scientific
activity through quantitative analyses of publications, may provide the data necessary to
conduct an investigation, which may lead to the legitimization of
Educational/Instructional Technology as a discipline. “Bibliometric methods offer well-

6

tested techniques for characterizing the physical and intellectual structure of a literature
by subjecting the data to quantitative and qualitative methods of selection,
summarization, and comparison, and analysis” (Breitenstein, 2003, p. 32). Researchers
take the data, methodology, and the theory of Bibliometrics and make conclusions about
productivity (documents per year), subjects of the documents (words or co-words),
reception (readers of the documents), citation (emergence), and cocitations (importance)
of individual documents, authors, institutions, academic journals, and regions of scientific
activity to form structural maps of science and construct models of scientific growth or
change (Jacobs, 2010). Since Cattell (1903) first used his bibliographical directory to
produce statistics on scientists and their scientific productivity, researchers have
developed legitimate methodologies for scientific evaluation relating to the theory and
science of Bibliometrics. In fact, this method of measuring the properties of documents
furnishes data to propose directions for future research. As an opportunity to study the
intellectual evolution of a discipline, Bibliometrics provides an indispensable research
tool (Jacobs, 2010).
“Conference proceedings are a source and a basis for the measurement of
scientific knowledge ensuring a holistic and detailed perspective of current research”
(Hofer, et al. 2010, p. 846). The AECT has maintained one constant during its growth,
the recorded knowledge domain found in the organization’s conference proceedings.
Scholarly communication creates the literary footprint of scientific knowledge that
delineates professions, disciplines, and fields of study. Scientists, academics, and their
close partners, librarians, have historically recognized that codifying and classifying

7

scientific knowledge, applying bibliometric theories, and the recognition of knowledge
structures make information useful and accessible for further development and provide
information previously known only to experts within a knowledge domain (Shiffrin &
Borner, 2004). “Defining something as complex as a field, even a relatively young field,
requires an understanding of where the field has been in order to gauge its current state
and make intelligent predictions concerning its future” (Luppicini, 2005, p. 108). This
information may also reveal the interconnectedness among researchers, the import and
export of research among fields, growth, maturity, and diversification of the field and
economic factors as well, leading to field legitimacy (Shiffrin & Borner, 2004).
Deficiencies in the Evidence
In the last fifteen years, there have been many studies attempting to identify the
parameters of Educational/Instructional Technology. These studies have one consistency;
there is no clearly chosen knowledge domain that is studied among this research. No one
study has provided the necessary data to define Educational/Instructional Technology as
profession, field, or discipline. Czerniewicz (2008), who has made a study of the
language of studies of Educational/Instructional Technology internationally, has
acknowledged that Educational/Instructional Technology is most established in the USA
where previous studies to identify the field parameters have been made. Continued
analyses of Educational/Instructional Technology discourse may provide more data that
will lend to further visualization and a historical paradigm.

8

Audience
With technology, the distribution of science has increased in speed, efficiency,
and pervasiveness. A bibliometric analysis may describe the knowledge infrastructure
and may identify major researchers, their interconnectedness, and social networks; most
cited articles and books that may serve as reference works, and influential institutions and
geographic concentrations that serve as the base of the discipline. Structural maps may
depict ideologies, emerging trends and changes over time. “The value of mapping
knowledge domains… extends to scientists, researchers, governmental institutions,
industry, and members of society generally” (Shiffrin & Borner, 2004, p. 5183).
Knowledge management provides a variety of functions for the strata of users identified
by Shriffin and Borner (2004), but the extraction and organization of knowledge may
form the scientific core of a discipline and provide the data necessary to this study to
fulfill Finn’s (1953) requirements.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to examine the conference proceedings of the AECT
as a knowledge domain using bibliometric methods, which could reveal the intellectual
structure of Educational/Instructional Technology. “Librarians and sociologists have
studied emerging scientific disciplines, and their work may provide a model” to construct
a recent history of the instructional technology knowledge base through citation analysis
(Innes, 2006, p.12). The results may offer valuable insights to the structure of the
knowledge domain of the conference proceedings, which may formulate an identification

9

of Educational/Instructional Technology and may allow predictions on its future
developments.
Definitions
Bibliographic coupling – Documents are said to be bibliographically coupled if
they share one or more bibliographic references (Diodato & Gellatly, 2013, p.11).
Bibliometrics – “a field that uses mathematical and statistical techniques, from
counting to calculus, to study publishing and communication patterns in the distribution
of information” (Diodato & Gellatly, 2013, p.vii).
Citation Analysis – “a branch of Bibliometrics that examines the citations found
in publications such as journal articles and books to look for patterns of use. This type of
study typically involves recording the details of the reference lists of a number of
publications to determine what materials are being consulted and then analyzing those
materials by type, frequency, age, local holdings, or other factors” (Hoffman & Doucette,
2012, p. 321).
Cocitation Network Analysis – “the situation in which two (or more) authors,
documents, or journals are simultaneously cited by another document” (Diodato &
Gellatly, 2013, p. 42).
Conference Proceedings – The collected papers presented in the conference are
published in a volume called a conference proceeding (Breitenstein, 2003).
Knowledge Domain – “an intellectually self-contained body of knowledge
accumulated over a specified period of time” (Chen, 2008, p. 67).
Knowledge Community – an epistemological notion that a group of practitioners

10

“develop into a community with shared understandings” (Lindkvist, 2003, p.2).

11

Chapter 2: Literature Review
The literature reviewed in this chapter shows consideration for the many aspects
of the projected research project. The review began with a general overview of the
growth of information, the formation of knowledge domains and their knowledge
communities, and proceeded into a discussion of the development of bibliometric theory
and methodologies (content analysis, citation analysis, and cocitation analysis) and the
mapping of science. A portion of this chapter covers the discourse of
Educational/Instructional Technology as previously studied through university programs,
and journal analyses, and the consideration of conference proceedings as an acceptable
knowledge domain for analysis will be made. Finally, a content analysis of the AECT
Conference Proceedings from a Systems Theory approach is presented and the chapter
concludes with a summary.
Formation of Knowledge Domains
In the process of surviving, developing, and flourishing as a society, we have
become interested in phenomena that affect our daily lives.
“Once a phenomenon in society or in nature arouses scientists’ interest,
explanations of what this phenomenon is and why it occurs, which factors
dominate its evolution and development, etc. are to be expected and
usually happen. The phenomenon of interest attracts scientists’ attention
and make scientists want to learn more about it or to be involved in its
investigation” (Liu & Rousseau, 2013, p.585).

12

Humans naturally seek to improve the human condition through sharing experiences with
other humans. Communities of information sharing form around interesting phenomenon.
Ideas and innovation of those ideas provide the changes that humanity desires for the
improvement of life. The community and the information sharing grow. Information is
collected. A collection of those ideas, here referred to as a knowledge domain, and
defined as any given area of human experience, over time develops to a size
unmemorable by one given mind or a collection of minds and must be recorded. The
recorded information grows and then must be classified and structured in some way to
provide repeated access to the information. The collection of information grows further,
and some ideas are disproven or improved according to added human experience and
more information is recorded, classified, and added to the collection of information
(Borner, Chen, & Boyack, 2003) (Carnabucci & Bruggeman, 2009).
As time passes, for a given knowledge domain to continue to grow or exist, it
must have the capacity for innovation, which is a “social phenomenon” where the
dissemination of thought in the form of publication occurs (Chen & Lobo, 2006)
(Furman, Porter, & Stern, 2002). Researchers develop ideas, test those ideas, and read the
published works of others to theorize; and therefore, create new science. These
researchers then publish and recognize the work of others through citation, and networks
of connections are formed. These connections, or “conversations” are sustained through
repetition and develop into “knowledge communities” within the knowledge domain that
display some of the characteristics of that domain or of a discipline (Bruffee, 1993, p.
130).

13

Knowledge communities require continued communication of “ideas that lend
themselves to sustained exploration” or innovative capacity, repeatable access to the
knowledge domain, and a “critical mass of members” to further drive innovation and
strengthen the linkages of the infrastructure created in the domain; and in doing so, they
provide a body of content for analysis (Becher & Trowler, 2001, p.23) (Dirks, 1996,
Introduction). The publications of a given knowledge domain, that is the “cumulative
‘stock’ of technological knowledge upon which new ideas are developed and
commercialized, may provide the data for study of disciplines, fields, and/or professions”
(Furman, Porter & Stern, 2002, p. 2).
Identification of knowledge communities in pursuit of their discourse--and
therefore the infrastructure of a knowledge domain--has often hampered the identification
of emergent fields and disciplines. The location of content for analyses, that is the
knowledge community’s knowledge base, may be the key to identifying knowledge
domains; but where do researchers disseminate the publication of science? At no other
time in history do researchers have more options in the selection of where to publish.
Until the 1960’s most research was published in journals created by academic
institutions, academic consortiums, or professional organizations and societies. A
researcher looked no further than what may have been recommended to him during his
academic program. To further one’s own research after embarking on a professional
career, membership in a professional organization or society was a must, and publication
within the group’s publications was expected (DeBellis, 2012).

14

During the 1960’s and 1970’s, large publishing conglomerates began buying
academic publications and developing new journals and other publications recognizing
the opportunity to make these publications for-profit ventures that would serve the same
audience. “Publication evolved from simply communication into a measure of a
scientist’s worth” (Innes, 2006, p.28). These new publications drew academics, who
sought publication as required for tenure track positions. The “publish or perish
mentality” created an environment where any new publications could thrive. The
knowledge domains of science expanded exponentially. Between 1971 and 1991, 70,000
journals were founded (Chodorow, 2000, para. 14).
Other cultural phenomenon affected publication trends at this time as well. “Fear
of the Cold War and technological advances coming out of the Soviet Union, such as the
Sputnik satellite,” which led to the Space Race, fueled a need for the creation of new
scientific research (Flynt, 2014, p.21). Development of safe and affordable air
transportation offered researchers more opportunities to travel. Researchers are able to
meet, work in collaboration and to attend professional meetings and conferences to share
research and “publish” in a new manner. No longer was information sharing a once in a
lifetime event, but ongoing (DeBellis, 2012). The interdisciplinary conversations
sustained by these continued opportunities to connect created growth in the formation of
more conferences and therefore more knowledge within the domain. With these
phenomena, the conference proceedings publication became a relevant and quick method
of publishing and a new knowledge sub-domain developed.

15

The development of the World Wide Web and the Internet has expanded
knowledge domains in ways that we could not have anticipated. Researchers have been
able to establish new collaborations and connections with scientific communities around
the world without travelling. An unprecedented level of access has been established and
new forms of publication have been created as well. The Internet has broken the editorial
control on the dissemination of information. Researchers may now self-publish research
to a world-wide audience. New knowledge communities form as quickly as others
disappear and we are dependent upon Google to identify our point of entry to many
knowledge domains (DeBellis, 2012).
To further complicate identification of knowledge domains, researchers may not
disseminate science in the same manner. Inhaber (1977) remarks that “interactions in
science are made difficult by the fact that a researcher may be born in country A, be
educated in country B, teach in C, be funded by D, do his research in E, present results at
a conference in F, and publish in G” (p. 388). Numerous studies of knowledge
communities have been made in pursuit of identifying disciplines.
Early Knowledge Communities
James McKeen Cattell, an American psychologist at Columbia University created
a biographical directory in 1903 limited to men who conducted scientific research with
the purpose of studying the productivity and performance of these researchers. Cattell’s
focus was the scientist. He collected information about each subjects’ birthplace,
education, position, associational membership, honors, subject of research, and output.
Cattell made determinations about scientific productivity by country, city, university, and

16

was also able to measure the scientific productivity of scientists over the course of several
studies. Cattell’s research formed a methodology for creating a new type of statistics that
could be used to measure the growth of science.
Buchner (1912) used this methodology in a series of annual reviews from 1904 to
1913 about the discipline of psychology that appeared in the Psychological Bulletin. He
concluded that the discipline was established through the “steadiness of its literary
output” (p.5). Godin (2006) notes that Cattell continued his studies on scientific men and
their families well into the 1930s and his statistics would remain the body of this type of
research until the 1960s.
Concerns with the measurement of scientific output lagged during the World War
II era. During the 1950s and 1960s, the Space Race renewed national interest in scientific
research and development. The scientific community began to lobby for funding (Innes,
2006, p.23). Public policy called for a determination of priorities and therefore, a
motivation of and an investment in new research. The focus moved from who was
producing science to what science was being produced. But how to measure it? The
measurement of science moved from the analyses of scientists’ lives to the analyses of
the publications of science.
Bibliometrics
The conceptual origins of Bibliometrics were formed during the documentation
movement of the twentieth century. Pritchard (1969) first coined the term Bibliometrics
and its subsequent definition, “the application of mathematics and statistical methods to
books and other media of communication,” in the Journal of Documentation (p.348).

17

“Studies of Bibliometrics attempt to reconstruct the history and fundamental doctrines
and dogmas of various fields of sciences by analyzing the nature of previous academic
works” (Kim, 2012, p.6). The body of scientific knowledge can be found in the
publications of science, which we commonly refer to as journal articles, conference
proceedings, and books. These objects of communication have points of identification,
which may be counted and considered statistically to form interpretations about the
formation of science. “The main form used for identifying concrete concepts in scholarly
discourse is the bibliographic citation” (Breitenstein, 2003. P. 34). Bibliometrics employs
statistical methods that measure “the flow of information among countries, disciplines,
and groups of individuals and is used to assess the productivity of a number of different
entities based on citations, number of publications, and other text-based data” (Kurtz &
Bollen, 2011).
This information is applied to four areas of analysis according to data and
purpose: performance analysis, mapping science, information retrieval, and library
management (McIntire, 2006). Performance analysis is a form of analysis that institutions
use to measure activity, performance, and impact of researchers and their publications.
Mapping science seeks to uncover structures within knowledge domains and how those
structures change over time. Information retrieval provides researchers the opportunity to
identify bodies of literature passed on qualitative data. Bibliometrics in library
management allows for more effective selection of materials and allocation of resources
based on activity and impact.

18

Three scientists established the primary laws of Bibliometrics upon which theory
development in Bibliometrics has been based.
“Samuel Bradford was very concerned in the 1930s that scientists and
engineers were missing important information because the abstracting and
indexing services could not include every journal that might have articles
of possible relevance. He investigated further and found that articles on a
specific topic tended to cluster in a relatively small number of journals”
(Kellerman, 1997, p.8).
Bradford’s Law of Distribution of Scattering provides information specialists the “ability
to track excellence in the jungle of literature [of a knowledge domain’s publications].
Approximately 90% [of all new research], no matter the discipline, is published in a small
nucleus of core journals” (Smiraglia, 2014, pp.9-10). Identification of these core journals
allows the practitioner and information specialist alike, access to most of the writings of a
given discipline.
While Bradford’s Law focuses on core journals, Lotka’s Law concentrates on the
production of the individual scientists. Lotka’s Law of Scientific Productivity stipulates
an algorithm on the distribution of scientific papers among contributing authors (Egghe,
2005). “Lotka’s Law states that the number of authors publishing n papers is about 1/n2
of the number publishing one paper. In samples larger than ten years and when the author
size is quite large (about five thousand authors) that Lotka’s distribution should
approximate the empirical data” (McIntire, 2006, p. 21-22). Potter (1981) concluded in a
study that author productivity followed a nearly universal pattern in all knowledge

19

domains. Therefore, a close correlation exists between the quantity of scientific
publication and the achievement of eminence as contributors, or simply according to
Lotka’s calculations about sixty percent of authors in a given data set will publish once
and the remainder of the authors, forty percent or less, will provide the body of the
scientific output of a given knowledge domain.
Zipf’s Law of Distribution is concerned with the words used in a given scientific
publication. “Zipf’s law is stated as rf = c where r is the rank of the word by its frequency
in a document or aggregate of documents, f is the frequency count of the word and c is a
constant computed from the number of all words being analyzed” (McIntire, 2006, p. 22).
Zipf’s Law of Distribution proposes that the occurrence of words in a given amount of
text can be algorithmically identified (Piantadosi, 2014). According to Potter (1981), this
law has important applications in anthropology, library management, linguistics, and
bibliometrics since it broadly postulates that humans have a drive to reduce the number of
unique words used during communication and seek common keyword formulation within
a knowledge domain.
“Lotka, Bradford, and Zipf used simple mathematical statements and
graphical devices to express the empirical relation between sources and
the items they produce. Their common denominator is a striking inequality
in the pattern of information processes under observation: a few authors
turn out to be responsible for the largest portion of scientific literature in a
given research field” (DeBellis, 2012, pp.76-77).

20

Together, these laws of bibliometrics provide a theoretical framework to make
conclusions about the structure of scientific communication.
On the whole, the science of bibliometrics provides a pragmatic methodological
paradigm used in library science to identify core knowledge bases and patterns of usage
for more informed purchasing decisions in the process of providing resources for patron
use in libraries and information networks, and reliable data for informed science policy
decisions (Corrall, Kennan, & Afzal, 2013; Russell & Rousseau, 2002). These “studies of
communication within scholarly communities in a variety of contexts” are particularly
interested in the age of documents, how often documents are cited and how often the
document or publication is considered (circulated) in use (Smiraglia, 2014, p. 8). The byproduct of this type of research is the identification of structure within the formation of
the statistics.
Library scientists naturally consider the identification of structure a key element
in providing services to the patrons who will most use the information provided within
those structures. A natural consequence was “the shift in knowledge organization toward
classification of knowledge in historical, social, and cultural contexts” (Smiraglia, 2014,
p.3). Further, the analysis of these structures, more commonly referred to as domain
analysis has become an established theoretical approach with its roots in social
constructivist theory.
Bjurstrőm (2011) credits Hjőrland and Albrechtsen (1996) for “formulating the
epistemological foundation” of domain analysis.
“The social constructivist theory of semantics implies that objects are

21

‘special constructs’ and meanings are constructed in social discourse, most
often in ways that are unconscious for the agents involved. Research
articles—as well as other documents—are seen as social constructs and as
ways of arguing” (Hjőrland, 2002, p.437).

The focus of this paradigm is the analyzed social behavior of the knowledge community
or domain as demonstrated by the participants of the knowledge community through the
structure of citation. “The domain analytic perspective emanates in the practical work of
the information specialist” whose “objective is to study the structure of the domain, i.e. to
outline the knowledge production of the domain and how it is communicated, changes in
knowledge production and communication, mapping the different paradigms, and to put
the domain in its context” (Bjurstrőm, 2011, p.8). In this manner, Bibliometrics may
demonstrate the historical formulation of Educational/Instructional Technology as a
discipline.
Content Analysis—Identifying the Research Front. In its infancy, the
measurement of scientific output began as content analysis, and is commonly referred to
as descriptive Bibliometrics (Jacobs, 2010). The discourse of science, in whatever
manner delivered—book, manual, textbook, journal paper, conference proceedings
individually or in sets—is examined for the presence and distribution of certain
keywords, phrases, or topics to determine a description of the meaningful progress of
science. “Keywords reflect the researcher’s intention of the study directly; it is believed
that keyword analysis and keyword co-occurrence analysis can… identify which trends
of research are of most concern to researchers” (Kim, 2012, p.8).

22

Content analysis also provides a description of a knowledge domain through the
measurement of productivity by individual, geographic area, time period, department,
field, or discipline in raw counts of collected data at the moment measured and is “the
most frequently used indicator of the research impact of publications” (Archambault &
Gagné, 2004, p.33). Content analysis may show us what the current conversation is about
and where that conversation is taking place, but “does not take into account the linking
structure of citing journals, citing authors, or citing articles” (Yan & Ding, 2012, p.1314).
Citation Analysis—Influencers within the Field. Citation analysis, on the other
hand, commonly referred to as relational bibliometrics, seeks to identify connections and
cognitive structures among science (Borgman & Ferner, 2002). “The essence of citation
is the interaction between different ideas or perspectives on a phenomenon that is
addressed in the citing and cited articles” (Liu & Rousseau, 2012, p.585). “A citation is
an action that refers to a document; thus, a document, or a group of documents can have a
citation rate which may be analyzed” (Kurtz & Bollen, 2011). This methodology for
measuring scientific behavior was developed during the 1960’s. “Within library science,
citation analysis has matured as a methodological approach during the previous two
decades, resulting in the creation of tools and methodologies that could measure,
describe, and analyze a body of literature in a meaningful way that was increasingly
accepted within the wider research community” (Innes, 2006, p. 3). “Citation analysis
assumes that heavily cited articles tend to have greater influence on the field compared to
less frequently cited references” (Kim, 2012, p.13).

23

Eugene Garfield (1972) first proposed that citation demonstrates a connection
between ideas and in that using citations analysis is a means to identify structure within
science. He was inspired by H. G. Wells (1938) who envisioned a world information
center or a “World Brain” where all intellectual material could be accessed. Garfield’s
(1970, 1972, 1977, 1979a, 1979b, 1980, 1983, 1989) work in the 1970s and 1980s gave
the study and measurement of science new theories, methodologies, and scope. His
original intention was to provide a method by which science could be shared through a
system of easy access, namely the citation index, which gave rise to new theories of
measuring output and predicting the course of science. Today, “The most popular
analytical tool for citation analysis is frequency analysis examining how many times the
reference is cited and patterns of frequency of citations have evolved during a certain
period” (Kim 2012, p. 13).
“Citation analysis is used to describe social and intellectual networks, the
transfer of ideas between fields, the impact of an individual on peers,
career trajectories, the degree of trustworthiness between scholars, new
research fonts and relationships among authors, articles, journals and
concepts” (Innes, 2006, p, 40).

Cocitation Analysis—Fundamental Literature within the Field. While citation
analysis may define the influencers within a knowledge domain, cocitation may identify
the knowledge base of the domain. Researchers acknowledge the influential work of
others through citation and the arrangement of documents according to cocitation counts
“produce patterns of cognitive relationships” that demonstrate the structure of knowledge

24

domains (Jacobs, 2010).
“The primary utility of cocitation analysis is as a research tool for studying
the sociology and history of science and scientists. More specifically,
cocitation analysis is a tool for understanding the specialty structure of
science. The cluster of works which are connected by being co-cited are
indirect indicators of the birth, growth, and death of scientific specialties
and their social and cognitive structure… The clusters may represent
subject areas, basic concepts, or theories” (Bellardo, 1980, p. 232).
“A pioneering bibliometric technique, author cocitation analysis (ACA), is used to
discover how scientists in a particular subject field are intellectually interrelated as
perceived by authors in their scientific publications” (Lee & Chen, 2012, p. 2).
“The general process for cocitation analysis is to (1) identify a set of
reference papers, (2) calculate the similarity between pairs of reference
papers using cocitation counts, (3) calculate cocitation clusters of
reference papers using similarity values, and (4) fractionally assign the
current (or research front) papers to the cocitation clusters based on
location of their references” (Boyack & Klavens, 2010, p.2394).
Since cocitation analyses may focus on documents, journals, institutions,
keywords, or authors, author cocitation analysis has been the commonly accepted “unit”
for this type of analysis since the 1970’s. “As author cocitation normally studies a
research field by examining a set of authors highly cited in this field, the structure that is
revealed by author cocitation analysis represents the field’s knowledge base. Cocitation

25

patterns change as the interests and intellectual patterns of the field change” (Small,
1973, p.265).
“Author cocitation sums up the record by mapping the author as a single
point among other selected author points on the basis of the repeated cooccurrences. Authors with similar profiles of co-occurrences are displayed
close together. If the same authors are mapped for more than one period,
one can look for trends and discontinuities. Such is the history of a field as
told by author cocitation analysis” (White & McCain, 1998, p.329).
Bibliographic Coupling—Retrospective Analysis. Bibliographic coupling is a
deeper analysis of the citations among pairs of documents. “If documents share one or
more bibliographic references (already published, of course), they are said to be
bibliographically coupled” (Eom, 2009, p.9). The more shared citations, the stronger the
bond between the two documents. Garfield (2001) considered bibliographic coupling a
retrospective analysis in that it is a look back at what two authors considered the most
important documents to cite comparatively. Author bibliographic coupling examines
researchers active during the same period and should be conducted over longer periods of
time; therefore, it is outside the scope of this study.
Mapping Science. According to Small (1999), “a map of science is a spatial
representation of how disciplines, fields, specialties, and individual papers or authors are
related to one another as shown by their physical proximity and relative locations,
analogous to the way geographic maps show the relationships of political or physical
features on the Earth” (p. 799). By extracting relationships among a set of documents, a

26

map or visual representation of the structure may be created. “Visualization mapping is
used to explore large amounts of data and to derive new insights by identifying trends, or
clusters, in the data associated with a field of study” (Lee & Chen, 2012, p. 2). Simple
visualizations, such as Word Clouds, may be used to quickly visualize some general
patterns in text or a more complex visualization technique may be employed to show the
relationships within a knowledge domain (McNaught & Lam, 2010). A number of studies
demonstrate this more complex methodology (Small, 1999; Leydesdorff, 1994; McIntire,
2006; Rosvall & Bergstrom, 2008; Yan & Ding, 2012). Maps or graphs are created
“wherein a node usually denotes an academic entity, such as an article, a journal, or an
author, and a link usually denotes relationships such as citation, co-authorship, cocitation,
or bibliographic coupling” (Yan & Ding, 2012, p.1313). The graphs as visualizations may
provide insights into past scientific research, such as influential documents and authors,
the structure of a knowledge domain, and the direction of future developments.
These visualizations are created from data usually found in commercial databases.
In order to analyze science not stored in commercial databases, a custom database must
be created so that the data can be computed in the correct format to be read by
visualization software. Eom (2009) defined a process to create a custom database for
knowledge domains not traditionally indexed in commercial databases for the purposes of
author cocitation analysis. Eom (2009) described the process to create a custom database
as:
1. Select a source of the information to be included in the database.
2. Collect data from the source and enter the data into a custom database.

27

3. Convert the data into tables and matrices for analysis.
Once the database is complete, any number of visualization software may be
selected to conduct an analysis of the data. Eom (2009) used Statistical Analysis Software
(SAS). The analysis included the following steps in Eom’s (2009) study:
4. Preparation of the input file for compatibility with the software.
5. Multivariate statistical analysis of the correlation matrix, which includes
selecting an algorithm for the analysis.
Cocitation visualization is created in an undirected graph with straight-line edges.
“A force-directed algorithm models the graph as a system of bodies, with forces
(cocitation) acting between them” (Hu, 2010, p. 1). “The Yifan Hu layout algorithm pairs
adjacent nodes to reduce complexity and employs “a graph coarsening technique that
groups vertices and builds tighter, smaller graphs from these groups” (Khokhar, 2015,
p.85).
6. Preparation of the analysis output.
While visualization software establishes a set of presets as a beginning for mapping,
those settings may be adjusted to enhance the information revealed in the visualization.
7.

Format the results to produce final visualization.

Results may be enhanced with any number of graphical design elements, such as
weighted lines according to number of cocitations, node sizing, and color gradient
according to citation weights.
Eom’s (2009) methodology revealed a way to create a visualization of previously
unexamined knowledge domains. Pham, Derntl, and Klamma (2012) proposed and

28

demonstrated the use of a model to characterize the citation behavior within a knowledge
domain to explain its developmental pattern.

Developmental Model for Conference Communities
Figure 1. The stages through which knowledge domains develop. Adapted from “Development Patterns of
Scientific Communities in Technology Enhanced Learning,” by M. C. Pham, M. Derntl, and R. Klamma,
2012, Educational Technology & Society, 15 (3), p. 325. Copyright 2012 by the International Forum of
Educational Technology & Society (IFETS).

The model in Figure 1 was applied to conference proceedings in different areas of
computer science. In the model, the nodes represent papers or literature cited by the
papers given as proceedings of a particular conference series. The authors note that in the
beginning of development connections between nodes are limited, representing the
beginning of fundamental literature and over time bonds develop. “The citing and cited
relations between the articles of a related field may be in the formation of chain, tree, and
network structure” (Lee & Chen, 2012, p. 3). New nodes emerge, until the larger map of
citations over time may be recognized as interdisciplinary, hierarchical, or focused
depending on the pattern of connections displayed in the representative map. Though the

29

model was designed for a specific knowledge domain, it may serve to identify the
development of other knowledge domains as well (Lee & Chen, 2012).
The Discourse of Educational/Instructional Technology
The study of science, if it is to be conducted, must begin somewhere. Indeed,
early studies of the field of Educational/Instructional Technology, as in other fields,
began with content analysis. DeVaney and Butler (1996) analyzed an amalgamation of
the “socially constructed messages” that formed the first educational processes in the
field of educational technology that constitute discourse which included audio-taped oral
histories in the beginning and through research reports, manuals, journal articles, and
textbooks to “books that addressed theory, pedagogy, and application” (Section 1.2.4.2,
Textual Sources). Their purpose was to identify how the knowledge base of educational
technology was formed.
These discourses were examined for repeated statements that could be determined
as the formulation of concepts, theories, and pedagogy. While these researchers were
concerned with the beginning themes of the knowledge domain and its origins, Saettler
(2004) was concerned with why the knowledge base formed as it did. Saettler provided a
history of the field in his work, The Evolution of American Educational Technology that
is concerned with tracing the history of the process of Educational/Instructional
Technology. Neither work distinguished Educational Technology or Instructional
Technology as a discipline.

30

Products of the University Programs
Researchers in pursuit of identifying disciplines often turn to universities and the
analyses of dissertations, course catalogs, and textbooks to identify emerging fields and
specialties as we accept teaching as the practice of “acculturating others to that
conversation” (Bruffee, 1993, p. 128). These programs identify elements of the
knowledge domain of any given field or specialty in the very discourse chosen to present
to students. As curriculum designers intend to offer the most fundamental aspects of a
knowledge domain to students, the resulting curriculum is worthy of study.
Caffarella (2000) performed a content analysis of the doctoral dissertations in the
field of educational technology from 1977 through 1998 to discover how research
themes, methodologies, and research trends have changed over time. Data was collected
from a directory of dissertations previously identified with the descriptors, instructional
design and technology. Caffarella found within this data set a general increase in
qualitative studies over the time period. Key words were grouped into categories and then
were given a theme identifier. Themes identified were research on computers,
instructional systems and design, game development, and television and video.
Ma (2000) also conducted a content analysis of doctoral dissertations in
educational technology between 1977 and 1999 but limited the study to dissertations
completed in the educational technology program at the University of Wisconsin at
Madison to identify prevalent methodologies, theories, and topics. Methodologies
identified were experimental, case study, interview, and survey. Theories identified were
behavioral, cognitive constructivism, and situated learning. Topics identified were

31

audiovisual centers, educational computers, and interactive video.
West (2003) analyzed course titles for a consensus among instructional
technology programs. University programs with master’s degrees in instructional
technology were identified from one volume of the Educational Media and Technology
Yearbook. Catalogs were collected from the identified university programs. The
instructional technology programs were classified into three categories according to how
the program was identified in the course catalogs—a “program within a department”, a
“complete department”, or a “specialization through coursework”. Further, course lists
from the “complete department” and “program within a department” classifications were
created. Educational technology and instructional systems courses were specifically
included. The sample was reduced to thirty-two (32) catalogs. The course titles from the
catalogs were coded into nine (9) key concepts and forty-eight (48) content areas. West
postulated that “if a discipline is a branch of knowledge…studied in higher education, the
academic courses offered to prospective entrants into that discipline should be fairly
consistent across different academic programs” (p.86). The conclusion made was that the
programs offered courses in the theoretical foundations and courses in practical
applications.
Carr-Chellman (2006) surveyed volunteers from a list of leaders in the field
compiled in the 2003 Educational Media and Technology Yearbook. Those educational
leaders who gained tenure were asked to submit their publication record for analysis. The
study found that each scholar averaged fifteen (15) articles in their pre-tenure period and
these articles were published in seven or more outlets on average. One hundred twenty

32

(120) unique journals published at least one (1) paper identified in the study indicating
that the literature of Educational/Instructional Technology is not centrally located in a
handful of journals.
Sen (2011) conducted a content analysis of a set of articles and books
recommended by a group of IT professors. A group of IT professors, identified as experts
in the field, were surveyed to nominate foundational works of the field of Instructional
Technology. The works were then subjected to content analysis with the intent to identify
primary themes to develop a descriptive narrative.
At colleges and universities across the country, dissertations, coursework,
textbooks, and associated materials indicate a need to educate for informed professional
practice. These studies identify what has become acceptable practice and doctrine of
professionals engaging in a given specialty and may not definitively identify an emerging
research front, a field, or discipline. If not the university, where do researchers turn to
find a knowledge community with a sufficient membership creating a quality discourse?
Journal Analysis to Identify Instructional/Educational Technology
Most researchers have turned to journals that specifically focus on the field to
identify structure within the knowledge domain. Early in the formation of the field, Mayo
(1976) and Torkelson (1977) performed content analyses of Audio-Visual Review, the
first journal of the Association for Educational communications and Technology
(AECT). Mayo (1976) notes that this journal came into being to provide a venue for
communication among the members of the organization as suggested by Finn (1953).
Finn, the first editor of Audio-Visual Review, proposed that the journal would be “a

33

means for specialists within the field to construct theory and critically analyze problems
within the field” (As cited in Mayo, 1976, p.3).
Mayo (1976) examined 450 articles published in Audio-Visual Review, spanning
the years from 1953 to 1972. The researcher completed a content analysis to provide
descriptive characteristic of the research. The analysis was made difficult by a lack of
keyword descriptors demonstrating stable terminology within the field. Mayo overcame
this difficulty by creating keywords where existing terms may not have accurately
depicted the content of the article or in lieu of the absence of keyword descriptors.
Despite the initial difficulty in conducting the study, Mayo found the research of the field
represented in the first 25 years of Audio-Visual Review to be growing and increasing in
complexity of design, methodology, and analyses.
At nearly the same time, Torkelson (1977) also conducted a content analysis of
Audio-Visual Review, spanning the years from 1953 to 1977, but the analysis focused on
identifying which issues make the greatest influence on developments in the field.
Torkelson cited Mayo’s (1976) keyword construction as an aid to his analysis and
indicated that more appropriate research methods are needed for the field to grow.
Anglin, Wagner, Adams, and Unakhalu (1999) conducted a content analysis of
four journals specifically to identify major topical trends and to identify authors
contributing theoretical works. In that same year, Driscoll and Dick (1999) conducted a
content analysis of one journal, Educational Technology of Research and Development
(ETR&D) from 1992 to 1996 looking for changes in research paradigms. The researchers
determined that not many empirical studies were conducted and concluded that more

34

developmental research must take place for the field to develop. In these journal studies,
a knowledge structure could not be identified.
In similar content analysis studies, Klein (1997) and Masood (2004) looked for
emerging and diminishing themes in the field of educational technology through an
examination of the journal, Educational Technology of Research and Development
(ETR&D). Klein (1997) performed an analysis of articles from 1989 to 1997, but also
interviewed editors asking for recommendations as to what they believed the published
material was missing. The intent was to guide future studies, but the analysis also serves
to show what is present in this publication.
Much like Klein, Masood (2004) examined articles published in the same journal,
Educational Technology of Research and Development and another AECT publication,
Tech Trends, from 1993 through 2002 to again identify trends or themes in the field.
Masood noted an increase in the studies concerned with instructional design for distance
learning. These journal studies were able to identify an emerging trend, but not the
overall structure of the field.
West (2003) conducted a content analysis to identify the evolutionary state of
instructional technology wherein an analysis of the scholarly communication imparted in
four (4) journals was analyzed. American Journal of Distance Education, ETR&D,
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, and Performance Improvement
Quarterly were selected using criteria from previous studies of the field made ten years
prior. The criteria eliminated any publication from inclusion that was not specific to the
field of instructional technology no matter how relevant an article therein contained may

35

be. This redaction limited the investigation of this applied field in that most published
research of the field may share its knowledge base with other fields and consequently be
published in journals not specifically geared toward instructional technology. In short,
key research to the field may have been inadvertently eliminated from the analysis. The
conclusion of the study was that instructional technology was still an emergent field.
Hew, Kale, and Kim (2007) made a content analysis to examine and classify
instructional technology research in three journals: Educational Technology Research
and Development, Instructional Science, and the Journal of Education Computing
Research from 2000 to 2004. While authors especially note that previous studies do not
include an analysis of educational setting in which the studies take place, they do find
that the topics of psychology of learning and instruction and media of study were the
focus of all three journals with descriptive studies being the primary methodology.
Suggestions for future research were also made.
This type of analysis is not exclusive to U.S. publications. Gulbahar and Alper
(2009) researched the direction of instructional technology in Turkey through a content
analysis of five journals: The Journal of Ankara University Faculty of Educational
Sciences, Journal of Hacettepe University Faculty of Education, Journal of Gazi
University Faculty of Education, the Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology
and the Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education. The analysis focused on research
methodologies and topical issues with the intent to track any changes in the field. The
study found that the majority of the studies were quantitative studies, with fifty percent
having no theoretical considerations, and only thirty percent employing literature

36

reviews. The authors noted that references to international publications were the norm.
Hsu, et al. (2012) conducted a content analysis of five journals with the intent to
identify research trends in technology-based learning. A collection of 2,976 articles from
the British Journal of Education Technology, Computers & Education, Educational
Technology Research & Development, Educational Technology & Society, and the
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning spanning the years from 2000 to 2009 was made.
The articles were examined to identify research topic, sample group, and learning
domain. The study found that pedagogical design and theoretical studies were the most
used research topic, higher education was the most used sample group, and
engineering/computer sciences was the most referenced learning domain. The authors
concluded that technology-based learning has become the dominant instructional delivery
system at all academic levels and in all settings, and studies of motivations, perceptions,
and attitudes were on the rise in the last five years of the study.
West and Borup (2014) analyzed research papers in ten journals from 2001 to
2010 to identify trends in research methodologies, topics, citations, and authorship. The
journals were specifically selected to represent the “breadth of work in the field” and
included Educational Technology Research & Development, the American Journal of
Distance Education, the British Journal of Educational Technology, Contemporary
Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, Distance Education, Internet and Higher
Education, the Journal of Learning Services, the Journal of Research on Technology in
Education, the Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, and Performance
Improvement Quarterly. The papers were coded into the following paper types:

37

descriptive research, inferential, interpretative, theoretical/philosophical,
content/discourse analysis, and combined or mix methods. Citation patterns were
analyzed using Google Scholar to identify the most cited papers. The authors noted a
balance between quantitative and qualitative methods. The most interesting result was the
“strong history of theoretical inquiry in the field” (West & Borup, 2014, p.554).
All of these studies employing content analysis show that this method cannot
accurately portray the structure of a knowledge domain. Content analysis alone may only
render results that answer specific questions of trends of authorship, topic, method, and
locale of document sets. In combination with another bibliographic method, content
analysis may lend a more meaningful result.
Some studies of journal citation analysis have been completed as well. Anglin and
Towers (1992) used raw citations counts to compile a rank-ordered list of authors from
three journals: ETR&D, Educational Communication and Technology Journal, and the
Journal of Instructional Development to identify predecessors, scholars, and researchers
within the field. It was noted that the data may be affected by what was trending among
professionals—the areas of inquiry, theory, or design—of whom chose to submit to these
journals. The study addressed the issue that certain journals may develop a following of a
subset of researchers, which due to their similarity of interests; their location, funding, or
research may produce a limited scope in the publication.
Gall, et al (2010) examined citations from and to ETR&D. Citations from 359
core articles from 1990 to 2004 were extracted using SSCI database and classified
according to “input (cited, but not citing), output (not cited, but citing), and symbiotic

38

(frequently cited and citing of ETR&D)” (Gall, et al, 2010). The study identified nine (9)
journals through citation analysis with a symbiotic relationship: Contemporary
Educational Psychology, Educational Psychologist, Instructional Science, Journal of
Computer-Based Instruction, Journal of Educational Computing Research, Journal of
Educational Psychology, Journal of Educational Research, Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, and the Review of Educational Research. The identified journals
showed Educational/Instructional Technology’s dependence on non-technology journals
at the time of the study.
Cho, Park, Jo, and Suh (2013) conducted a citation analysis to examine the
evolution of educational technology in the past twenty (20) years. The study examined
articles published in one journal, ETR&D, from 1989 to 2011 using Publish or Perish
Software. The most influential authors and papers were tabulated. The most frequently
cited authors together were Kozma (1994) and Clark (1994), with regard to the media
debate at the time of publication. Five key research themes were identified: instructional
design, learning environments, the role of technology, educational technology research,
and psychological foundations.
Kinshuk, Sampson, and Chen (2013) completed a citation analysis of the Journal
of Educational Technology and Society (ET&S) to examine research trends among highly
cited articles published during 2003-2010. The study articles were divided into two
groups by publication year and any article cited less than fifteen times was omitted from
the study. Data about the articles was collected to form a description of the research
trends. The authors concluded that Educational/Instructional Technology continues to

39

undergo a rapid evolution.
Though no studies of Educational/Instructional Technology through mapping that
meet the demands of Pham, Dernstl, and Klamma’s (2012) model exist, Shimp (2008)
conducted a study of a related area, Distance Education, to determine what 2000 Institute
for Higher Education Policy (IHEP) benchmarks were addressed to guide further research
and practice. The sample was also subjected to cocitation analysis to create a cluster map
displaying the literature connections of the most cited articles in distance education. The
majority of the articles were published in four journals: The American Journal of
Distance Education, Journal of Distance Education, Distance Education, and Open
Learning. The cluster map identified twelve focal points that covered topics in the
following areas: interaction, critical thinking, collaborative learning, and communities of
practice.
These studies looked for a knowledge base existing in a traditional medium of
delivery, i.e. academic journals. With the rapid fluctuation in growth and changes in
terminology of Educational/Instructional Technology, the focus must not be a traditional
medium of delivery, but one that speaks to rapid development and provides “a
community of agreeable scholars” (Finn, 1953). Conference proceedings may fulfill this
need.
Impact of Conference Proceedings
Conference proceedings of the leading association of Educational/Instructional
Technology may be the knowledge base that others have yet to identify, since less than
ten percent of conference proceedings are indexed in journal databases. “Scholarly

40

communication in the sciences – particularly physics, mathematics, and computer science
-- is moving increasingly toward a new publishing model that emphasizes conference
papers, preprint archives, and the online availability of articles” (Goodrum, et al., 2001,
p.2). For example, “the most cited computer scientist (Hector Garcia-Molina) shows
results in more than 20,000 citations in Google Scholar, with most of his papers being
published and cited in conference proceedings” (Harzing & van der Wal, 2008, p.62).
While some fields rely heavily on conference proceedings, only a few studies have been
completed on the impact of conference proceedings and their role in scholarly discourse
(Drott, 1995, Visser & Moed, 2005, and Glanzel, Schlemmer, Schubert, & Thijs, 2006,
Lisee & Lariviere, 2008, and Montesi & MacKenzie-Owen, 2008).
Drott (1995) suggests that the primary functions of conference proceedings are to
provide researchers an opportunity for feedback on research, to provide a vehicle for
application reports and other difficult to publish information, and to stimulate discourse
within the field on emerging topics and conceptual shifts. Visser and Moed (2005)
studied the process of the development of conference papers into published journal
articles. Editors from twenty-two major journal publications in software engineering were
interviewed about accepting articles that were developed from conference proceedings.
Recently, Montesi and Mackenzie Owen (2008) agreed that conference proceedings can
stimulate discourse.
Lisee, Lariviere & Archambault (2008) examined the scientific impact and aging
of conference proceedings as compared to other literature. Thomson Scientific Science
Citation Index (SCI), Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), and Arts and Humanities

41

Citation Index from 1980 through 2005 were used to identify conference proceedings
cited in articles, notes, and review articles. Based on the data collected from the indexes,
the researchers found that 2% of references were made to conference proceedings and
concluded that conference proceedings are not a significant portion of the scientific
literature. Despite this conclusion, the findings did show that conference proceedings
related to computer sciences and engineering were significant to their perspective fields
and should be included in bibliometrics studies. In fact, the data also indicated an
increase in citation of conference proceedings over the last ten years. While Lisee,
Lariviere & Archambault (2008) concluded that in some fields conference proceedings
are not only becoming the final point of scientific research but are also more important to
the research front for development.
Yet other studies indicate that a fields rate of change may offer a proposal for the
importance of conference proceedings. Hofer, et al (2010) conducted a keyword analysis
of the conference proceedings of the Academy of International Business (AIB) since the
conference “was seen as an incubator for emerging research areas” in an attempt to
identify scientific development (p.846). The study was limited to an analysis of three
years of conference proceedings where topical interest was identified by the keywords
supplied by contributing authors. Articles were grouped according to keywords and
described according to cluster content to detect and reflect upon developing structures
and patterns of communication within the research of the AIB community. The results
did indicate a clear structure with three concentrations of interest that were strongly
linked. Hofer, et al (2010) acknowledges that this study in its limitation to three years

42

may only show development, not the existence of a scientific domain.
Bunker (1998) conducted a content analysis of the conference proceedings of the
International Council of Distance Education (ICDE) spanning the years from 1938 to
1995 to identify publication characteristics to determine how the conference had changed
over time. The researcher employed that a specialized vocabulary with its own
abbreviations and mechanics to examine the topic and themes of the conference
proceedings. The study did reveal a core set of people participated in publication, but a
more in-depth analysis of this aspect was not made.
Chen and Carr (1999) conducted an author cocitation analysis of the Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM) conference proceedings from 1987 to 1998 with the
purpose of mapping the literature of hypertext. Two sets of data were collected from the
proceedings. Titles and abstracts were collected for content similarity analysis and author
cocitation counts were collected for analyses as well. The study identifies key
contributors to hypertext literature, their interconnectedness, and content keywords of
hypertext. A clear structural representation of the knowledge domain is identified.
Semantic graphs also demonstrated how the literature changed over time. These studies
demonstrate the validity of using conference proceedings as a source of data for
knowledge management decisions.
Pham, Klamma, Cao, and Jarke (2011) specifically note that without
consideration of conference proceedings a study of the computer science discipline would
be incomplete since computer scientists share information in the more rapidly developing
area of the domain represented in conference proceedings. The authors concluded that the

43

computer science discipline was becoming more interdisciplinary and this could not be
determined without the inclusion of conference proceedings in the analysis. The authors
also concluded that experts in the field were more likely to present at conference and
were a key factor in sustainability.
Pham, Derntl, and Klamma (2012) analyzed the conference proceedings of five
major conferences in the Technology Enhanced Learning field to understand the
developmental patterns of communities within this field. The authors base their study on
the conclusion that there were significantly more conferences in the field than journals so
that to make an analysis of social network or citation patterns would reveal more insights
about the Technology Enhanced Learning field. The authors made determinations of the
developmental stage of each conferences portion of the knowledge domain based on
nodal network mapping. The authors determined that conferences grow through retaining
authors and experts from previous events, which in time develop into a core authorship
group that is supplemented with new authors each year demonstrating a sustaining, but
growing, knowledge domain.
Content Analysis of AECT Proceedings
Articles in conference proceedings indicate a field’s current research front and
reflect the most current interests, ideas, and research of the period represented (Flynt,
2014, p.6). The Association for Educational Communications and Technology (AECT)
may provide the “linear progression” in which Dirks (1996) describes.
“There is no question that the Association has made many significant
contributions to the field of educational technology since the earliest days

44

of its founding. Certainly, it has remained the oldest and strongest support
of educational technology through the years and has served a vital
function in its development through this century. Through its many
publications and national conferences, and its efforts in providing a
national clearing house and a collective voice for educational technology,
it has continued to serve as a catalyst for advancing the technology of
instruction” (Saettler, 2004, p. 505).
It is “a community of agreeable scholars” in that its membership is composed of
thousands of educators and others from the public and private sectors employed by the
military, museums, libraries, schools, and industry that “coalesce around the central
premise” of improving instruction through technology. The members participate in “a
uniquely defined practice of inquiry” into designing instruction and systemic approaches
to learning as they promote quality scholarship and practice in the use of
instructional/educational technology as a central organization of the field. The AECT’s
“specialized structures to support the community”, namely its divisions, affiliates,
assemblies, and conferences, provide an opportunity to identify “shared areas of interest,
focus, approach and projects” which may demonstrate an “internal consistency within the
field” (Czerniewicz, 2008, 177).
“As a discipline matures, research interests become more specialized, resistance
to change increases, and isolation from other disciplines and lay influences occurs”
(Innes, 2006, p.17). “The AECT has helped to build a more complete picture of the field
of Educational/Instructional Technology by refining ethics, describing current

45

technologies, and providing strong international connections” (Carr-Chellman, 2006).
This organization which began in 1923 may provide the historical perspective and core
values of the knowledge community through its conference proceedings of the research
front and its changes over time, and as such has created in its conference proceedings a
knowledge domain worthy of study.
Al-Saleh (2000) conducted a content analysis of a five-year period of the annual
proceedings of the AECT from 1996 to 2000 with the purpose of identifying areas of
study for future research. Seven characteristics of 293 papers were collected. 64.50 % of
the published papers were research studies. 45.70 % of papers dealt with computer
mediated communications as the major topic. The most prevalent study types were
experimental (24.50 %) and qualitative (23.8 %). In this five-year period, Nancy Nelson
Knupfer was the most published author among the papers studied and three universities,
Arizona State University, Indiana University, and Pennsylvania State University,
exceeded others in contributed papers. Only 5.4 % of the published papers were
contributed from outside the United States. The study recommended further research that
would organize the information into subject clusters and analyze publication origins
given the expanse of resources present in the data (Al-Saleh, 2000). A brief description of
the knowledge domain of the AECT at the time of the study was made but does not
denote structure since relational and evaluative bibliometric analyses were not applied.
Recently, Flynt (2014) completed a content analysis of the conference
proceedings of the AECT, spanning the years from 1979 to 2013. The researcher focused
on a systems approach, which employs a “conceptual framework to simplify the study of

46

complex systems by examining parts, their interactions, and functions” to observe what
effect that cited theories in the research presented in the conference proceedings had on
the changing definition of the field given by the organization (Flynt, 2014, p. 8).
Although “previous researchers,” in Flynt’s (2014) view, “had noted gaps between theory
and practice,” the author intended “to establish a firmer link between theory and practice
in the field of educational technology” (p. 8).
Flynt examined 2,635 articles produced in the thirty-five-year span for the
inclusion of the word, “theory”, keywords that were synonymous with an established or
evolving theory and conceptualized theoretical approaches and found that an average of
48% of the articles included a theory or multiple theories. The sample was divided into
three chronological sets of twelve conference proceedings groups and further examined
for a general branch of theory employed or a named theory. Of the 521 observed uses of
the word “theory” in the sample, 34 referred to the general category of theory while 487
referred to named theories.
This analysis further revealed that the top three theories in frequency of
occurrence over the entire data set were systems theory, dual code theory, and elaboration
theory (Flynt, 2014, p. 129). During the first chronological set (1979-1990), the most
frequent theories by category were Instructional theory, Learning Theory, and
Instructional Design Theory. The most used individual theories in the first data segment
were Elaboration Theory and Schema Theory.
The second data set (1991-2001) revealed the top theory categories as
Instructional and Instructional design. This data set also revealed a high point in theory

47

development and convergence of multiple theory categories (Instructional Theory,
Instructional Design Theory, Constructivist Theory, Learning Theory, Design Theory,
Cognitive Theory, Critical Theory, Information Processing Theory, Behaviorism,
cognitive Learning theory, Educational Theory, and Grounded Theory). “The top named
theories of this period were Systems Theory and cognitive Flexibility Theory” (Flynt,
2014, p. 85).
In the third chronological data set (2002-2013), Education, Grounded,
Instructional, and Instructional-Design Theories were used in all twelve conference
proceedings. The top theories of the third segment were focused on social theories (Social
Capital, Social Cognitive, Social Comparison, Social Constructivist, Social Dominance,
Social Identity, Social Interdependence, Social Media Communication, Social Network,
Social Presence, and Socio-cultural) (Flynt, 2014, p.102-111).
Flynt (2014) then examined the data for trends through linear forecasting. The
forecasts were then submitted to analysis using Gartner’s Hype Cycle, which contends
that “innovation typically follows a pattern, or lifecycle” (p. 97). Through this analysis,
the researcher revealed that Behaviorism, Systems Theory, and Communication Theory
peaked as innovative theories before 1979. Cognitivism peaked in 1987 as an innovative
theory in the conference proceedings and Constructivism peaked in 2005 (Flynt, 2014,
pp. 97-99).
Since Educational/Instructional Technology practice occurs in a number of
different settings, the researcher also examines the chronological data sets by setting. The
AECT identifies membership from six educational settings: higher education institutions,

48

K-12 educational systems, business and industry, medical facilities, branches of the
military, and international settings. The researcher discerned only minor differences in
theory by setting. Some noted preferences of theory to setting were behaviorism to the
government setting, cognitivism to the health setting, constructivism to the business
setting, and systems theory and communication theory to the health setting.
Finally, the four changes in the field definition of Educational/Instructional
Technology in 1972, 1977, 1994, and 2008 were compared to the analysis of theories.
Flynt (2014) concluded that the “data from the study showed that the definition reflects
what has previously happened’, rather than driving the innovation in the field (p. 154).
The researcher also noted a gradual decline in the use of theories in the research of the
conference proceedings across the thirty-five-year span. Flynt surmised that this finding
may indicate a need for refocus on theory; however, no other conclusions were offered
for this observation.
Flynt (2014) concluded that while this study has offered a “what” is happening
with theory development in Educational/Instructional Technology, the study does not
indicate a “who” or “why”, Flynt does offer the idea for future research to include
analysis of the conference proceedings with other theoretical frameworks which may be
used to provide insights about Educational/Instructional Technology, and in comparison,
with the results from this study may yield further understanding of the field.
Summary
Knowledge domains form as the result of the continuing activity of knowledge
communities. The connections within knowledge communities display the characteristics

49

of the domain. Identification of the infrastructure of a given knowledge domain may
demonstrate evidence of or a change in emergent fields and disciplines (Shriffin &
Borner, 2004). Traditionally, journals and journal databases have been used to perform
investigations of knowledge domains. With the changes in the places in which authors
choose to publish, new knowledge domains have resulted. Bibliometrics provides a
theoretical framework in which to examine and make conclusions about the structure of
scientific communication (De Bellis, 2009).
“Among the different aspects analyzed, these indicators show the
researchers, the themes, institutions, knowledge areas, more fertile or
more productive countries, as well as the research front of a knowledge
field, collaboration networks among scientists, groups, institutions or
countries and citation and cocitation networks” (Oliveira & Grácio, 2013,
p. 15).
The first studies of the knowledge domain of Educational/Instructional
Technology began with “socially constructed messages” and moved to the first journal
articles and textbooks in the field (DeVaney & Butler, 1996, Section 1.2.4.2., Textual
Sources). Study of the knowledge domain moved to the products of university programs,
i.e. catalogs, textbooks, dissertations (Brufee, 1993; Caffarella, 2000; Ma, 2000; West,
2003; Carr-Chellman, 2006; and Sen, 2011). As the field began to grow, a number of
investigations in the form of content analysis of field journals were conducted (Mayo,
1976; Torkelson, 1977; Anglin, Wagner, Adams & Unakhalu, 1999; Driscoll & Dick
1999; Klein, 1997; Masood 2004; West, 2003; Hew, Kale, & Kim, 2007; Gulbahar &

50

Alper, 2009; Hsu, et al., 2012; and West & Borup, 2014). During this time, other studies
employing citation analysis were performed to offer a different perspective on the field of
Educational/Instructional Technology (Anglin & Towers, 1992; Cho, et al., 2013; Gall, et
al., 2010; and Kinshuck, Sampson, & Chen 2013). Only one study which attempted to
visually map a related area of study, Distance Education, was discovered and included a
cluster map of the cocitations with twelve focal points (Shimp, 2008).
New knowledge domains form as researchers find more methods to publish.
Another domain, which provides a dataset for study is conference proceedings, though
few studies consider the quality of this domain (Drott, 1995; Glanzel, et al. 2006; Lisee,
Lariviere & Armchambault, 2008; and Visser & Moed, 2005). Conference proceedings
are providing valuable information about the knowledge domain of other fields (Visser &
Moed, 2005). Some studies of conference proceedings have been made in peripheral
fields to Educational/Instructional Technology (Bunker, 1998; Chen & Carr, 1999; Pham,
Klamma, Cao, & Jarke, 2011; Pham, Derntl, & Klamma, 2012), while only two studies
with any methodology of the conference proceedings of the AECT, content analysis, has
been made (Al-Saleh, 2000; Flynt, 2014). Conference proceedings provide a knowledge
domain yet to be fully explored for the field of Educational/Instructional Technology.
This study is therefore planned to provide a more comprehensive picture of the
knowledge domain of Educational/Instructional Technology through “a combination of
cocitation-based mapping, analysis of output (articles), and analysis of impact (citations)”
(Archambault & Gagné, 2004, p.41).

51

Research Questions
This research investigated the following questions:
1. What researchers, main themes, individuals, institutions, and geographic areas of
production have influenced instructional technology as evidenced in the conference
proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009 and what portion of the knowledge
base may be derived from these analyses?
2. What authors, research, academic publications, and reference works may be
identified through citedness in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period
1979-2009 and what portion of the knowledge base may be derived from these analyses?
3. What intellectual structure may be identified through author co-citedness in the
conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009?

52

Chapter 3: Methodology
Librarians and policy makers have used bibliometrics for library collection
building and management, and to the allocation of funding to further scientific
development. Researchers attempt to “mathematically model certain regularities in
textual or bibliographic statistical distributions” of the publication of research for a
variety of functions, including the identification of knowledge structures such as
disciplines (White and McCain, 1998, p. 336). During scientific activity, knowledge is
created, and we may examine it for intellectual linkages in each knowledge domain for
structure and future developments.
Bibliometric analysis begins with the collection of quantifiable data from an
acquired data set. The data processing may require several sub-processes, which may
include clustering, measuring significances of distributions, computing parameters, and
mapping visual interpretations (Chen, 2003). Each analysis technique plays a different
role in the examination of the bibliometric data and should be integrated to promote
more meaningful and insightful analysis of the knowledge domain (Kim, 2012, p.13).
Finally, the analyst must interpret the formulated data to draw conclusions from the
results.
Bibliometric analysis allows the analyst to view the work of the researcher from
multiple perspectives. The first view is that of the contributing researcher, their origins,
and their choices of keyword descriptors of the published research in terms of
productivity, which may indicate the developers, innovations, and research front of the
domain over the course of time. The second view is from the shoulder of the researcher

53

to identify impact, where the analysis of cited documents provides a look at scholars,
seminal works, academic publications, and geographic concentrations of the knowledge
base of the domain. Author cocitation analysis, which is a further development in
bibliometric analysis, provides a third view of the domain identifying the structure or
communication between scientists, which “seeks to uncover the principle components of
a domain; the relative importance of the components; the relatedness of the components,
and how these three attributes of the domain have changed over time” (McIntire, 2006,
p. 19).
Since the goal of the dissertation was to gain an understanding of the knowledge
domain presented in the conference proceedings of the AECT, three data sets were
collected to address the three views represented in the domain. Each data set was further
subdivided into six chronological subsets (1979-1984, 1985-1989, 1990-1994, 19951999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009) for discerning change over time. The length of the
chronological subsets was made to “ensure that the [subsequent] analysis would be
relevant…and yield reliable results” (Archambault & Gagné, 2004, p. 43).
Research Question 1
What researchers, main themes, individuals, institutions, and geographic areas of
production have influenced instructional technology as evidenced in the conference
proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009 and what portion of the knowledge
base may be derived from these analyses?

54

Sample
The sample (Data Set 1) included all complete papers published in the conference
proceedings of the AECT during the years 1979-2009 and extracted bibliometric
descriptive data.
Instruments
Data Set 1 was collected and segmented by publication year (1979-1984, 19851989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009) into six custom databases.
Procedures
Data Set 1 was compiled from the primary sources—the papers themselves. The
Annual Conference Proceedings of the AECT were made available on the organization’s
website, through the founding editors consulting firm’s website, www.tresystems.com,
and the ERIC database and were downloaded for the data collection. Descriptive data was
collected about all complete papers appearing in the conference proceedings for the
period, 1979-2009. The complete papers were referred to as the “citing documents”.
Figure 2 shows a sample of the layout of the citing documents databases that were
developed for each chronological segment of Data Set 1.
Doc
No
01031

Author

A Title

Smith,
T

Profess
or

A Dis

Inst Aff

Informa NOVA
tion
Systems
Figure 2. Citing Documents Databases Sample

Geo
Area
USMS

Title

Keywords

A Case
for
Cocitation

Cocitation
ACA
bibliometrics

NoCit

Descriptive data included:
•

Doc No = The document number is a coded combination where the first
two digits are indicative of the conference number (01), and digits three

55

through five indicate the citing document number (031).
•

Author = Last name and initials, as provided by the citing document’s
author. Post name identifiers, such as Jr. and III. Were included where
provided.

•

A Title = Professional Title of the Author, as provided by the citing
document’s author.

•

A Dis = Degree field or Reference Discipline of the Author, as provided
by the citing document’s author.

•

Inst Aff = Institutional Affiliation of the Citing Document’s Author, as
provided by the citing document’s author.

•

GeoArea = Geographic area of Author, as provided by the citing
document’s author.

•

Title = Title of citing document

•

Keywords = Keyword Descriptors used to describe the citing document’s
focus as included by author, editor, or extracted from title.

All data was entered into a custom database. The conference papers were entered
into the table in published order and numbered in that sequence. Bibliometric
characteristics (document number, author name, author’s discipline, author’s institutional
affiliation, author’s geographic area, title of document, keyword descriptors, and number
of citations) for each segment was computed. All authors were entered into the database.
The relative eminence of publishing authors in the conference proceedings were
determined in terms of citedness. Prominence of major institutions, reference disciplines

56

and geographic areas of production were traced through affiliations of publishing authors
and determined in terms of citedness (raw counts). Descriptive statistics were reported.
Keyword descriptors and or the nouns from the titles of citing documents where
keyword descriptors were not provided also were entered into the database to form a
preliminary list. Counts (frequencies) of the keyword descriptors and/or title words were
used to determine main themes, or research front. A word cloud of the keyword
descriptors for the entire data set was created with Wordle, an online word cloud
formation tool.
Limitations
Not all data about each individual author was available in the publication, and
therefore, was excluded from the study.
Authors writing about similar topics may not have employed the same keyword
descriptors to describe similar publications; therefore, keyword descriptors may not
accurately describe similar publications.
Research Question #2
What research, academic publications, and reference works may be identified
through citedness in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009
and what portion of the knowledge base may be derived from these analyses?
Sample
The initial sample referred to as Data Set 2 included reference lists from all
complete papers (citing documents) published in the conference proceedings of the

57

AECT for the period 1979-2009.
Instruments
Data Set 2 was collected and segmented by publication year (1979-1984, 19851989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009) into six custom databases.
Procedures
Data was collected about the cited documents from all complete papers (with
reference lists) appearing in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period
1979-2009. All data were entered into a custom database. The cited documents in the
conference papers were entered into the table in reference order and numbered in that
sequence. The data set included all authors. Citation characteristics were collected. Figure
3 shows a sample of the layout of the cited documents databases that was developed for
each segment of Data Set 2.
Doc No

Author

Pub Yr

Cited Doc
Name
01031014 Smith, T 1985
A Case for
Cocitation
Figure 3. Cited Authors Databases Sample

Doc Type
Journal

Source B or
J
J of Info Sci

Descriptive data included:
•

Doc No = The document number was a coded combination where the first
two digits are indicative of the conference number (01), digits three
through five indicate the citing document number (031), and digits six
through eight indicate the cited document (014).

•

Author = Last name and First initial of the cited author, as provided by the
citing document’s author

58

•

Cit No = Position of the cited document in the list of citations of the citing
document, as provided by the citing document’s author.

•

Pub Yr = Cited document’s publication year, as provided by the citing
document’s author.

•

Cited Doc Name = Title of cited document, as provided by the citing
document’s author.

•

Doc Type = Document type of cited document. B = Book, J = Journal, C =
Conference, D = Dissertation, T = Thesis, or O = Other noted document
source.

•

Source B, J = Name of Book or Journal in which cited document is
published.

All citations, including self-citations were included. The relative eminence of
cited authors within the cited documents was determined in terms of citedness. The core
reference works and journals were determined in terms of citedness.
A comparative analysis of citing authors from Data Set 1 and cited authors from
Data Set 2 was made to determine established and emerging scholars. Descriptive
statistics were reported to indicate mean number of papers per conference per segment,
mean citations per paper per segment, percentage of citations per document type, and
percentage of citation age by decade. Descriptive statistics were reported.
Limitations
Not all reference works were cited correctly by citing authors, and therefore, the
results may be affected.

59

Research Question #3
What intellectual structure may be identified through author co-citedness in the
conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009?
Sample
The sample included citing documents from authors with five or more citing
documents within the Dataset 1. Cocitations was tabulated for authors with ten or more
citations identified in Dataset 2.
Instruments
Data Set 3 were collected and segmented by publication year (1979-1984, 19851989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009,) into six citation count
worksheets and factored into six custom cocitation matrices.
Procedures
Author cocitation analysis (ACA) was conducted for each segment. The citing
documents of authors with five or more authorships from Dataset 1 were divided into six
data subsets and examined for ACA. Dataset 2 includes thousands of authors who have
been cited only once within each data subset and many others with only marginally
higher citation counts (frequencies). Author cocitation data was collected about the top
cited authors with ten or more citations.
The most cited authors and their cocitations were used to create a visual
representation of interconnectedness based on raw cocitation counts. An Excel
spreadsheet was created for each segment of the data set constructing a chart of cited
author counts (frequencies). A cocitation matrix was created for each data subset.

60

AUTHORS

CITING DOCUMENTS
001001
001002
001003
Apple
4
Benard
2
Shepard
4
Simonson
10
Figure 4. Raw Cocitation Counts

001004

001005
2

1

Each row of the spreadsheet contained a name of one most cited authors in
alphabetical order in the first column. When the author was cited in a document it was
noted in the corresponding article column. Authors with no author cocitations were
omitted from the dataset. The raw cocitation counts were converted into a correlation
matrix. The author-author counts showed the relationship of authors cited in more than
one document and the number of documents in which the authors were cited. The
threshold of authors (five or more citations) from the cocitation matrix were entered into
the correlation matrix. In the axis cell, the mean of the values for that author’s cocitedness were entered.
AUTHORS Apple
Benard
Apple
121
16
Benard
16
62.5
Shepard
25
13
Simonson
66
25
Figure 5. Transposed Correlation Matrix

Shepard
25
13
118
53

Simonson
66
25
53

Each data subset matrices were then converted into an ARC list and saved as a Comma
Delimited file (CSV) for input into the visualization software. Multi-dimensional
visualizations of the cocitations in each segment were made with Gephi 9.2.1 software.
The CSV output file for each data subset were imported into the software. Multivariate
statistical analysis of the correlation matrices was made with the Yifan Hu algorithm. A
composite map was graphed. Cocitation connections were displayed with weighted lines
between the nodes, with a line weight scale set to five levels. Nodes were weight-sized

61

according to cocitation rate, with a node weight scale set to 1 to 100 degrees. A
description of each node was made.
Limitations
Not all authors were cited correctly by citing authors, and therefore, the results
may be affected.
All authors were considered equal with no distinction between primary author and
secondary authors, and therefore, the results may be affected.
Summary
This methodology sought to describe and understand the field of
Educational/Instructional Technology. An analysis of a knowledge domain, in this case
the conference proceedings of the AECT, was made. To obtain a dynamic view of
Educational/Instructional Technology, the study spanned a thirty-year period. Metadata
was collected from the articles within the conference proceedings and descriptive
statistics were formulated. Those descriptive statistics were used to conduct author
cocitation analysis and domain mapping to form models of scientific growth and change
which demonstrate evolution within the knowledge domain. Assumptions about the field
of Educational/Instructional Technology were made based on the analyses.

62

Chapter 4: Findings
Bibliometrics allows the researcher “to identify significant patterns and
frequencies of use over time” (Koshnick, 2013, p. 127). The conference proceedings of
the Association for Educational and Communications Technology (AECT) was selected
as a knowledge domain for analysis because it represented a sampling that was unique to
Instructional/Educational Technology. This study examined a knowledge domain of
Instructional/Educational Technology to determine the origins, the researchers, and
contributors and their connections, and the development of ideas through the research
front of Instructional/Educational Technology. Statistical data was collected from the
conference proceedings and subjected to content analysis, author cocitation analysis, and
multi-dimensional mapping to provide the origins, history, and development of
Instructional/Educational Technology. Three research questions were considered:
1. What researchers, main themes, individuals, institutions, and geographic areas of
production have influenced instructional technology as evidenced in the conference
proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009 and what portion of the knowledge
base may be derived from these analyses?
2. What authors, research, academic publications, and reference works may be
identified through citedness in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period
1979-2009 and what portion of the knowledge base may be derived from these analyses?
3. What intellectual structure may be identified through author co-citedness in the
conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009?
The research design included three different methodologies: content analysis, citation

63

analysis, and multi-dimensional mapping through author cocitation. This chapter
provides a descriptive summary of the conducted analyses.
Description of AECT Conference Proceedings Papers
To begin a description of the knowledge domain, descriptive statistics were
collected. The first research question asked, “What researchers, main themes, institutions,
and geographic areas of production, have influenced instructional technology as
evidenced in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009 and what
portion of the knowledge base may be derived from these analyses?” Descriptive
statistics (frequency counts) of all authors and their published documents in the
conference proceedings of the AECT from 1979 through 2009 were collected.
The conference proceedings were grouped into six chronological subsets (19791984, 1985-1989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009) for discerning
change over time. The total number of published papers, 2,353 documents, were
examined in these chronological subsets. Table 1 summarizes the conference proceedings
by year, the location of the conferences, and the number of documents per year.

64

Table 1
Association for Educational Communications and Technology Conference Proceedings by Year

Conf. No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Year
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

Location
New Orleans
Denver
Philadelphia
Dallas
New Orleans
Dallas
Anaheim
Las Vegas
Atlanta
New Orleans
Dallas
Anaheim
Orlando
Washington, D. C.
New Orleans
Nashville
Anaheim
Indianapolis
Albuquerque
St. Louis
Houston
Long Beach & Denver
Atlanta
Dallas
Anaheim
Chicago
Orlando
Dallas
Orlando
Orlando
Louisville

No. of Documents
32
31
31
47
35
31
44
47
47
50
46
47
58
74
73
76
67
77
56
55
65
137
163
126
136
211
143
108
93
51
96

Note. Two conferences were held in 2000. These were treated as one and appear as conference no. 22.

65

The conference proceedings demonstrate a relative steady growth in publication
with a surge in publication during the first decade of the 21st century. Figure 6 shows this
growth in publication through the number of published papers within the conference
proceedings.

Document Counts Per Data Subset
Figure 6. Summary of document counts by Data Subset.

Data Subset 1979-1984
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1979 to 1984 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the published AECT Conference Proceedings, 207 citing documents
were examined in the first subset. Table 2 summarizes the keyword descriptors taken
from the Cumulative Index 1979-1983 found in 1986 Conference Proceedings of the

66

AECT. Research appears to be the chief concern as indicated by the descriptors reported
in the fist data subset. Visual aspects of instruction and learning are prevalent throughout
the main themes of this period.

67

Table 2
Data Subset 1979-1984 Main Themes (Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n = 207
Research
29 (14%)
Pictorial Research
19 (9%)
Instructional Design
18
Cognitive Styles
17
Attitudes
16
Learning
15
Visualization
15
Behavioral Objectives
13
Computers
13
Instructional Effect
11
Theory
10
Color
9
Evaluation
9
Achievement
8
Comprehension
8
Computer Assisted Instr.
7
Field Dependence/Independence
7
Instructional Media
7
Visualized Instruction
7
Aptitude
6
Encoding
6
Persuasion
6
Retention
6
Teleconference
6
Television
6
Testing
6
Educational Technology
5
Field Dependence
5
Illustrations
5
Imagery
5
Media Techniques
5
Media Utilization
5
Naturalistic Inquiry
5
Task Analysis
5
Time-Compressed Speech
5
Visual Testing
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

68

Authorship production was tabulated, and Table 3 shows the distribution of
authors and their authorship. Approximately 75% of authors produced 141 authorships or
46% of authorship in this data subset. Ten authors produced five or more authorships
within the subset or 5% of authorship. These ten authors represent 22% of the total
document production within this subset responsible for authoring 68 papers within the
subset. F.M. Dwyer (12) from Pennsylvania State University produced the most
documents within the subset followed M. R. Simonson (9) from Iowa State University.
Table 3
Data Subset 1979-1984 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=189
5 or more Authorships
10 (5%)
2 to 4 Authorships
37 (20%)
1 Authorship
141 (75%)

All Authorships
n=306
68 (22%)
97 (32%)
141 (46%)

Table 4
Data Subset 1979-1984 Individual Authors with >5 Authorships.
All Authorships
Variable
n=306
Dwyer, F. M.
12 (6%)
Simonson M. R.
9 (4%)
Canelos, J.
8 (4%)
Hannafin, M. J.
8 (4%)
Winn, W. D.
6 (3%)
Berry, L. H.
5 (2%)
Jonassen, D. H.
5
Joseph, J. H.
5
Lamberski, R.
5
Taylor, W.
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

69

Approximately 50% of authors within the subset included an individual position
descriptor on the title page of their submitted papers as shown in Table 5. “Assistant
Professor” (14%), “Associate Professor” (10%), and “Professor” (10%) were the most
reported descriptors.
Table 5
Data Subset 1979-1984 Individual Position Descriptions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=306
Assistant Professor
43 (10%)
Professor
13 (4%)
Director
11 (4%)
Research Associate
11 (4%)
Graduate Student
6 (2%)
Coordinator
5
Note: 147 of 306 authors or 50% of Authorship reported individual position descriptors. Complete list
in Appendices.

Table 6 includes the author’s reference disciplines. Authors were more apt to
report the reference to which they were affiliated. More than half of the authorship (66%)
listed departmental affiliation and these affiliations were measured by frequency to
identify associated disciplines. “Education” was identified by 18% of authorship as
reference discipline followed by “Educational Technology” (9%) and “Curriculum &
Instruction” (4%). Most affiliations of authorship in this subset are related to Education
departments within colleges and universities.

70

Table 6
Data Subset 1979-1984 Reference Disciplines Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=306
Education
55 (18%)
Educational Technology
29 (9%)
Curriculum & Instruction
13 (4%)
Medicine
11 (4%)
Instructional Technology
10 (3%)
Secondary Education
7
Educational Comm. & Tech.
6
Engineering
5
Library & Information Science
5
Note: 201 of 306 authors or 66% of authorship reported individual reference discipline. Complete list in
Appendices.

In Table 7, 252 authors reported an insitutional affiliation in higher education in
the representing 63% of the authorship of the subset with institutions located mainly in
the United States. Pennsylvania State University topped the list representing 11% of
authorship of the subset. Arizona State University followed representing 8% of
authorship of the subset. International authors represented 10% of the subset with
authorships from Canada, Australia, Brazil, United Kingdom, and Egypt. Corporate
authors in the United States represented 5% of the subset.

71

Table 7
Data Subset 1979-1984 Contributing Institutions by Authorship Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=306
Pennsylvania State University
34 (11%)
Arizona State University
25 (8%)
Indiana University (Illinois)
11 (4%)
Iowa State University
11 (4%)
University of Calgary
9
Ohio State University
8
University of Colorado
7
Northern Illinois University
6
Texas A&M University
6
University of Pittsburgh
6
University of South Dakota
6
University of Wisconsin
6
Boston University
5
Concordia University
5
Syracuse University
5
University of Kansas
5
University of Maryland
5
University of Minnesota
5
University of North Carolina
5
Virginia Polytechnic Institute
5
Note: 252 of 306 authors or 63% of authorship reported Institutional Affiliation. Complete list in
Appendices.

Figure 7 shows a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the data subset. A strong concentration of authorships was located in the
rustbelt and the southwest of the United States. A majority, 92% of contributors
originated in higher education as shown in Table 8.

72

Data Subset 1979-1984 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 7. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

Table 8
Data Subset 1979-1984 Performance Setting of Authorship Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=306
Higher Education
252 (92%)
International
30 (10%)
Corporate
15 (5%)
K-12
7 (2%)
Government/Military
4
Health
1
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional Affiliation reports.

Data Subset 1985-1989
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1985 to 1989 as represented in the knowledge

73

domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 234 citing documents were
examined in the second subset. Keyword descriptors were provided in a keyword index
for 1985-1988 conference proceedings. Keyword descriptors from the 1989 conference
proceedings were missing from the archived copy of the proceedings; therefore, keyword
descriptors were extracted from the titles of the documents in the proceedings. Extraction
was made based on similarity to other keywords within the subset. No interpretive
keyword extraction was made. Table 9 summarizes the keyword descriptors collected and
extracted from the subset. “Computer Based Instruction” appears to be the main theme as
indicated by the keyword descriptors. The majority of keyword descriptors focus on some
aspect of computers within instructional practice.

74

Table 9
Data Subset 1985-1989 Main Themes (Extracted Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n=234
Computer-Based Instruction
55 (24%)
Computers
22 (9%)
Computer-Assisted Instr.
21
Research
20
Feedback
14
Learning Strategies
14
Cognitive Style
13
Television
13
Practice
11
Teachers
11
Educational Technology
10
Persuasion
10
Attitude
9
Computer Display
9
Screen Design
9
Equity
8
Ethics
8
Problem Solving Skills
8
Recall
8
Effect
7
Learning Styles
7
Motivation
7
Videodisc
7
Cognition
6
Schema Theory
6
Theory
6
Video
6
Apple Center of Tomorrow
5
CBI Screen Design
5
Learner Control
5
Pacing
5
Perception
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Authorship production was tabulated gor the 1985-1989 Data Subset, and Table
10 shows the distribution of authors and their authorship. Approximately 74% of authors

75

produced 176 authorships or 45% of authorship in this data subset. Sixteen authors
produced five or more authorships within the subset or 7% of authorship. Sixteen authors
represented 28% of the total document production within this subset responsible for
authoring 111 papers within the subset. M. J. Hannafin (10) from Pennsylvania State
University produced the most documents within the subset followed J. C. Belland (8)
from Ohio State University as shown in Table 11.
Table 10
Data Subset 1985-1989 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=237
5 or more Authorships
16 (7%)
2 to 4 Authorships
45 (19%)
1 Authorship
176 (74%)

All Authorships
n=394
111 (28%)
107 (27%)
176 (45%)

76

Table 11
Data Subset 1985-1989 Individual Authors with > 5 Authorships Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=394
Hannafin, M. J.
10 (3%)
Belland, J. C.
8 (2%)
Rieber, L. P.
8
Ross, S. M.
8
Taylor, W. D.
8
Canelos, J.
7
Dwyer, F. M.
7
Jonassen, D. H.
7
Morrison, G. R.
7
Smith, P. L.
7
Tennyson, R. D.
7
Dalton, D. W.
6
Grabinger, R. S.
6
Baker, P. R.
5
Simonson, M. R.
5
Winn W. D.
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Approximately, 38% of authors within the subset included an individual position
descriptor on the title page of their submitted papers, as shown in Table 12. “Professor”
(10%), “Associate Professor” (6%), and “Assistant Professor” (5%) continue to be the
most reported descriptors.
Table 12
Data Subset 1985-1989 Individual Position Descriptions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=394
PROFESSOR
40 (10%)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR
25 (6%)
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR
18 (5%)
DIRECTOR
8 (2%)
DOCTORAL CANDIDATE
5
Note: 150 of 394 authors or 38% reported individual position descriptors. Complete list in Appendices.

77

Table 13 includes the authors’ reference disciplines. Reference disciplines were
reported by 73% of authors and these disciplines were counted to identify associated
disciplines. “Education” was reported by 27% of authors as their discipline followed by
“Curriculum and Instruction” (11%) and “Communication Arts” (8%). Most affiliations
of authors in this subset were related to Education departments within colleges and
universities.
Table 13
Data Subset 1985-1989 Reference Disciplines Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=394
Education
78 (27%)
Curriculum & Instruction
31 (11%)
Communication Arts
22 (8%)
Instructional Technology
22 (8%)
Educational Technology
22 (8%)
Research & Dev. In Ed. Comp.
19 (7%)
Educational Research
15 (5%)
Res. On Learning & Teaching
14 (5%)
Needs Assessment & Plan.
10 (3%)
Engineering
7 (2%)
Instructional Systems Technology
5
Note: 290 of 394 authors or 73% of authorships reported individual reference discipline. Complete list in
Appendices.

In Table 14, 377 authors reported an institutional affiliation in higher education
representing 95% of the authors of the subset with institutions located mainly in the
United States. Pennsylvania State University continued to top the list with 37 authors
representing 9% of authorship of the subset. Ohio State University followed with 27
authors representing 7%, Florida Sate University and Memphis State University with 25
authors representing 6% of authorship of the subset respectively. International affiliations
represented less than 1% of the authorship, with authors from Canada, Australia, and

78

Scotland. Corporate authors in the US represented 3% of the subset.
Table 14
Data Subset 1985-1989 Contributing Institutions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=394
Pennsylvania State U
37 (9%)
Ohio State University
27 (7%)
Florida State University
25 (6%)
Memphis State University
25 (6%)
University of Wisconsin
16 (4%)
Iowa State University
12 (3%)
University of Colorado
11 (3%)
University of Texas
11 (3%)
Indiana University
10 (2%)
Indiana University of Pa
10
Northern Illinois University
10
University of Washington
10
Arizona State University
9
Syracuse University
9
University of Minnesota
9
University of Kansas
8
Texas A&M University
7
San Diego State University
6
Kent State University
5
Southern Illinois University
5
University of Arkansas
5
Note: 377 of 394 authors or 95% of authorships reported Institutional Affiliation. Complete list in
Appendices.

Figure 8 shows a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the data subset. While the Rustbelt continued to have a strong
concentration of authorships, other areas of the country began to establish strong
authorship bases. A majority, 90% of contributors originated in higher education as
shown in Table 15.

79

Data Subset 1985-1989 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 8. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

Table 15
Data Subset 1985-1989 Performance Setting of Authorship Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=394
Higher Education
351 (89%)
Corporate
13 (3%)
International
8 (2%)
K-12
5
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional reports.

80

Data Subset 1990-1994
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1990 to 1994 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 328 citing documents were
examined in the third subset. By the 1990’s, the main themes of Instructional/Educational
Technology as represented in the conference proceedings of the AECT have become
grounded in the terminology of the profession. “Instructional Design” tops this list
followed by “Computer Based Instruction” and “Distance Education”. The main themes
focused on how computers may be used in education and what should be considered in
the research for this practice. Table 16 summarized the keyword descriptors extracted of
the 328 citing documents from the subset. Extraction was made based on similarity to
other keywords within the subset. No interpretive keyword extraction was made.

81

Table 16
Data Subset 1990-1994 Main Themes (Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n=328
Instructional Design
42 (13%)
Computer Based Instruction
32 (10%)
Distance Education
23 (7%)
Instructional Strategies
16
Learner Control
16
Feedback
15
Research
15
Metacognition
14
Channel One
13
Computer Assisted Instr.
13
Learning Styles
11
Expert Systems
10
Hypermedia
10
Instructional Development
10
Adult Education
9
Cognitive Style
9
Computer Simulations
9
Educational Technology
9
Motivation
9
Telecommunications
9
Tutoring
9
Constructivist Design
8
Critical Theory
8
Ethics
8
Interactive Videodisc Instr.
8
Case Based Instruction
7
Collaborative Learning
7
Computers
7
Information Processing
7
Instructional Technology
7
Interactive Video
7
Learning Strategies
7
School Restructuring
7
Note: Complete list in appendices.

82

Authorship production was tabulated, and Table 17 shows the distribution of
authors and the authorship for the subset. Approximately 71% of authors produced 278
authorships or 45% of authorship in this data subset. Sixteen authors produced five or
more authorships within the subset or 4% of authorship and represented 16% of the total
document production responsible for authoring 101 papers within the subset. N. N.
Knupfer (10) from Kansas State University produced the most documents within the
subset followed J. D. Klein (9) from Arizona State University.
Table 17
Data Subset 1990-1994 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=393
5 or more Authorships
16 (4%)
2 to 4 Authorships
99 (25%)
1 Authorship
278 (71%)

All Authorships
n=618
101 (16%)
239 (39%)
278 (45%)

83

Table 18
Data Subset 1990-1994 Individual Authors with > 5 Authorships Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=618
Knupfer, N. N.
10 (2%)
Klein, J. D.
9
Jonassen, D. H.
8
Wilson, B. G.
8
Cole, P.
7
Grabowski, B. L.
7
Januszewski, A.
6
Ross, S. M.
6
Berry, L. H.
5
Bohlin, R. M.
5
Koetting, J. R.
5
McIsaac, M. S.
5
Muffoletto, R.
5
Orey, M. A.
5
Rieber, L. P.
5
Yeaman, A. R. J.
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Only 8% of authors reported their position on the title pages of their papers in
1990-1994 Data Subset as shown in Table 19. “Associate Professor” (5%) and
“Professor” (2%) top the list of position descriptors.
Table 19
Data Subset 1990-1994 Individual Position Descriptors Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=618
Associate Professor
31 (5%)
Professor
13 (2%)
Coordinator
3
Media Specialist
1
Project Manager
1
Superintendent
1
Note: 50 of 618 authors or 8% reported individual position descriptors.

84

Table 20 includes the author’s reference disciplines. 30% of authors listed their
departmental affiliation and these affiliations were measured by frequency to identify
associated disciplines. “Education”(7%) continued as the top identified discipline
followed by “Instructional Technology” and “Learning and Instructional Technology”.
Most affiliations of authors in this subset, as in others, continued to relate to Education
departments, schools, or units with more emphasis on units.
Table 20
Data Subset 1990-1994 Reference Disciplines with > 5 Reports Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=618
Education
48 (8%)
Instructional Technology
17 (3%)
Learning & Instr. Technology
13 (2%)
Educational Technology
11
Teachers College
10
Curriculum and Instruction
6
Educ. Media & Computers
5
Instr. Design & Technology
5
Note: 186 of 618 authors or 30% reported individual reference disciplines. Complete list in Appendices.

Institutional affiliation was reported by 391 authors related to higher education
and represented 63% of the authorship of the subset with instiutions located mainly in the
United States. Arizona State University topped the list with 36 authorships representing
6% of the subset. University of Colorado followed with 31 authors representing 5% of
authors of the subset.

85

Table 21
Data Subset 1990-1994 Contributing Institutions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=618
Arizona State University
36 (6%)
University of Colorado
31 (5%)
Indiana University
17
Memphis State University
14
Pennsylvania State U.
14
Kansas State University
12
Southern Illinois University
11
Columbia University
10
Syracuse University
9
University of Kansas
9
Florida State University
8
Lehigh University
8
University of Minnesota
8
University of Oklahoma
8
University of Wisconsin
8
Ohio State University
7
University of Georgia
7
University of Pittsburgh
7
California State University
6
Iowa State University
6
Purdue University
6
Texas A&M University
6
University of Northern Iowa
6
University of South Alabama
6
Michigan State University
5
San Diego State University
5
San Jose State University
5
University of Nevada
5
Yeaman and Associates
5
Note: 391 of 618 authors or 63% of authorship reported contributing institutions. Complete list in
Appendices.

86

Figure 9 shows a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the 1990-1994 Data Subset. This subset demonstrates a disbursement of
concentration of authorship throughout the United States

Only 63% of contributing

authorships reported institutional affiliation and, of those authorships, 59% originated in
higher education as shown in Table 22.

Data Subset 1990-1994 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 9. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

87

Table 22
Data Subset 1990-1994 Performance Setting of Authorship Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=618
HIGHER EDUCATION
363 (59%)
CORPORATE
11 (2%)
INTERNATIONAL
11
K-12
4
GOVERNMENT/MILITARY
1
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional Reports.

While international authors represented less than 1% of the authorship, authors
from around the world participated within this subset with authors from Australia,
Canada, Brazil, The Netherlands, Palestine, the Philippines, and Taiwan. Reported
corporate authorships in the United States represented 2% of the subset.
Data Subset 1995-1999
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1995 to 1999 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 320 citing documents were
examined in the fourth subset. Table 23 summarizes the keyword descriptors extracted
from the subset. Extraction was made based on similarity to other keywords within the
subset. No interpretive keyword extraction was made. “Instructional Design” was the
most reported keyword descriptor followed by “Computer Based Instruction”. The
“Internet” was the next keyword identified in the subset which may have coincided with
technological developments with society.

88

Table 23
Data Subset 1995-1999 Main Themes (Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n=320
Instructional Design
36 (5%)
Computer Based Instruction
17 (2%)
Internet
16
Distance Education
15
Educational Technology
15
Critical Perspectives
11
Gender
8
High School Mathematics
7
Web Based Instruction
7
Constructivism
6
Learning Environments
6
Cognitive Task Analysis
5
Constructivist Materials
5
Higher Education
5
Hypermedia
5
Info. Processing Strategies
5
Instructional Television
5
Problem Based Learning
5
Teaching
5
Theory
5
Video
5
Visual Communication
5
World Wide Web
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Authorship production was tabulated, and Table 24 shows the distribution of
authors and their authorship. Approximately 74% of authors produced 345 authorships or
46% of authorship in this data subset. Thirteen authors produced five or more authorships
within the subset or 3% of authorship. These 13 authors represent 12% of the total
document production responsible for authoring 82 papers within the subset. N. N.
Knupfer (12) from Kansas State University produced the most documents within the

89

subset followed by H. L. Schnackenberg (8) from Arizona State University.
Table 24
Data Subset 1995-1999 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=464
5 or more Authorships
13 (3%)
2 to 4 Authorships
106 (23%)
1 Authorship
345 (74%)

All Authorships
n=679
82 (12%)
252 (37%)
345 (51%)

Table 25
Data Subset 1995-1999 Individual Authors with > 5 Authorships Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=679
Knupfer, N. N.
12 (2%)
Schnackenberg, H. L.
8
Cennamo, K. S.
7
Januszewski, A.
7
Land, S. M.
7
Marcinkiewicz, H. R.
6
Hannafin, M. J.
5
Harvey, F. A.
5
Jones, M. G.
5
Klein, J. D.
5
Moallem, M.
5
Small, R. V.
5
Wilson, B. G.
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Approximately 14% of authorships within the subset included an individual
position descriptor on the title page of the submitted papers as shown in Table 26.
“Assistant Professor” (4%), “Associate Professor” (3%), and “Graduate Student” (2%)
were the most reported descriptors.

90

Table 26
Data Subset 1995-1999 Individual Position Descriptions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
n=679
Assistant Professor
26 (4%)
Associate Professor
18 (3%)
Graduate Student
15 (2%)
Professor
12
Note: 93 of 679 Authors or 14% of Authorships reported individual position descriptions.

Table 27 includes the authors’ reference disciplines Authors were less apt to
report the reference discipline to which they were affiliated with 52% reporting.
“Education” continued to top the list at 15%, followed by “Instructional Systems
Technology” and “Instructional Technology”. Most authorships continue to be affiliated
with higher education settings.
Table 27
Data Subset 1995-1999 Reference Disciplines Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=679
Education
100 (15%)
Instructional Systems Technology
36
Psychology in Education
22
Ed. Computing & Instr. Development
21
Educational Psychology
8
Educational Science & Technology
8
Instructional Systems
8
Information Studies
8
Teachers College
8
Curriculum & Instruction
6
Educational Technology
6
Learning & Instruction Technology
6
Lifelong Learning & Instruction
6
Agricultural Education & Studies
5
Education & Human Services
5
Note: 351 of 680 Authorships or 52% of Authorship reported individual reference discipline. Complete
list in Appendices.

91

In the subset, 661 authorships reported an institutional affiliation in higher
education representing 98% of the authorships of the subset with institutions located
mainly in the United States. University of Hawaii (10) tops the list with the University of
Colorado (9), the University of Memphis (9), the University of North Carolina (9), and
the University of Oklahoma. International authors represented 10% of the authorship of
the subset with 50 authors from countries around the world including Taiwan, The
Netherlands, South Korea, Australia, Canada, Guam, Portugal, France, Germany, Israel,
Nigeria, and Palestine. Corporate authors represented 4% of the subset.
Table 28
Data Subset 1995-1999 Contributing Institutions Determined by Frequency
Variable
All Authorships
N=679
University of Hawaii
University of Colorado
University of Memphis
University of North Carolina
University of Oklahoma
Columbia University
Florida State University
University of Missouri
Wayne State University
California State University
Iowa State University
Storage Technology Corp.
University of Connecticut
University of Minnesota
University of Virginia
University of Wyoming
Kent State University
Kutztown University
San Diego State University
Tamkang University
University of Central Florida
University of Wisconsin
Utah State University
Note: Complete lists in Appendices.

10
9
9
9
9
8
7
7
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

92

Figure 10 shows a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the 1995-1999 Data Subset. Authorship within the subset has been more
distributed across the United States with strong concentrations that continued in the
Rustbelt, the Southwest, and some Southern states. Only 50% of contributing authorships
reported institutional affiliation, and of those authorships, 37% originated in higher
education as shown in Table 29.

Data Subset 1995-1999 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 10. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

93

Table 29
Data Subset 1995-1999 Performance Setting of Authorship Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=679
Higher Education
232 (37%)
International
50 (8%)
Corporate
28 (4%)
K-12
7
Government/Military
4
Health
2
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional Reports

Data Subset 2000-2004
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 2000 to 2004 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 773 citing documents were
examined in the fifth subset. Table 30 summarizes the keyword descriptors extracted
from the subset. Keywords were provided in the conference proceedings for the years
2000 through 2003, but no keywords were supplied in the 2004 conference proceedings.
Therefore, keywords were extracted from the titles of the articles. Extraction was made
based on similarity to other keywords within the subset. No interpretive keyword
extraction was made. “Instructional Design” tops the list of keyword descriptors
followed by “Technology Integration” and “Distance Education”. The main themes of the
subset focus on less on the technology tool and more on the process of learning.

94

Table 30
Data Subset 2000-2004 Main Themes (Extracted Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n=773
Instructional Design
14 (2%)
Technology Integration
13
Distance Education
10
Problem Based Learning
10
Teacher Education
9
Collaborative Learning
8
Distance Learning
8
Preservice Teachers
8
Instructional Technology
7
Motivation
7
Self Efficacy
7
Web Based Instruction
7
Case Studies
6
Online Discussion
6
Problem Solving
6
Self Regulated Learning
6
Simulations
6
Computer Mediated Comm
5
Human Performance Technology
5
Online Learners
5
Online Learning
5
Research
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Authorship production was tabulated, and Table 31 shows the distribution of
authors and their authorship. Approximately 69% of authors produced 635 authorships or
43% of authorship in this data subset. Twenty-seven authors produced 5 or more
authorships within the subset or 3% of authorship. These 27 authors represent 13% of the
total document production within this subset responsible for authoring 188 papers within
the subset. J. D. Klein (11) from Arizona State University produced the most documents
within the subset followed by W. C. Savenye (10), also from Arizona State University.

95

Table 31
Data Subset 2000-2004 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=918
5 or more Authorships
27 (3%)
2 to 4 Authorships
256 (28%)
1 Authorship
635 (69%)

All Authorships
n=1470
188 (13%)
647 (44%)
635 (43%)

Table 32
Data Subset 2000-2004 Individual Authors with > 5 Authorships
All Authorships
Variable
N=1470
Klein, J. D.
11
Savenye, W. C.
10
Johnson, T. E.
9
Koszalka, T. A.
9
Ku, H. Y.
9
Park, S. H.
9
Tuzun, H.
9
Cifuentes, L.
8
Dwyer, F. M.
8
Ertmer, P. A.
8
Frick, T. W.
8
Grabowski, B. L.
8
Javeri, M.
7
Maushak, N. J.
7
Cornell, R.
6
Kim, K. J.
6
Yu, B. M.
6
Bollinger, D. U.
5
Bray, M.
5
Mazur, J. M.
5
Schaffer, S. P.
5
Schnackenberg, H. L.
5
Shoffner, M. B.
5
Varank, I.
5
Verhagen, P. W.
5
Wang, C. X.
5
Winograd, D. M.
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

96

Individual position descriptors and reference disciplines were not included on the
title page of the submitted papers for the 2000-2004 Data Subset. Most authorships
continues to be affiliated with higher education settings. In the subset, 1,434 authorships
reported an institutional affiliation in higher education representing 98% of the
authorships of the subset with institutions located mainly in the United States. Indiana
University (179) topped the list followed by Arizona State University (103) and
Pennsylvania State University (103). International authors represented 9% of the
authorship of the subset with 131 authors from countries around the world including
Taiwan, The Netherlands, South Korea, Australia, Canada, Guam, Portugal, France,
Germany, Israel, Nigeria, and Palestine. Corporate authors represented 3% of the subset.

97

Table 33
Data Subset 2000-2004 Contributing Institutions Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=1470
Indiana University
179 (12%)
Arizona State University
103 (7%)
Pennsylvania State University
103 (7%)
Florida State University
71 (5%)
U of Northern Colorado
69 (5%)
Purdue University
47 (3%)
Texas Tech University
47 (3%)
University of Central Florida
35
University of Georgia
34
Georgia State University
22
California State University
19
Open University of The Netherlands
19
Syracuse University
18
Northern Illinois University
17
University of North Carolina
17
University of South Alabama
15
University of Twente
14
Anadolu University
13
Concordia University
12
Iowa State University
12
University of Missouri
12
Suny
11
University of Hawaii
11
University of Kentucky
11
University of Colorado
10
Brigham Young University
9
East Carolina University
9
Lehigh University
9
University of Toledo
9
Wayne State University
9
Note: Complete lists in Appendices.

Figure 11 showed a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the 2000-2004 Data Subset. Authorship within the subset was more

98

distributed across the United States with strong concentrations continued in the Rustbelt,
the Southwest, and some Southern states in keeping with the growing technology sectors
across the country. While authorships from the private sector increased to 9% of
authorships, the majority of authorships continue to originate in higher education with
94% as shown in Table 34.

Data Subset 2000-2004 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 11. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

99

Table 34
Data Subset 2000-2004 Performance Setting of Authorship Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=1470
Higher Education
1380 (94%)
International
131 (9%)
Corporate
49 (3%)
K-12
4
Government/Military
1
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional Reports

Data Subset 2005-2009
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 2005 to 2009 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 491 citing documents were
examined in the sixth subset. Table 35 summarizes the keyword descriptors extracted
from the subset. Keywords were not provided in the conference proceedings for the years
2005 through 2009. Therefore, keywords were extracted from the titles of the articles.
Extraction was made based on similarity to other keywords within the subset. No
interpretive keyword extraction was made. “Case Study” and “Instructional Design” top
the list of extracted keyword descriptors followed by “Collaboration” and “Preservice
Teachers”.

100

Table 35
Data Subset 2005-2009 Main Themes (Extracted Keyword Descriptors) Determined by
Frequency
All Articles
Variable
n=491
Case Study
17
Instructional Design
17
Collaboration
16
Preservice Teachrs
14
Assessment
11
Problem Solving
10
Self Regulation
9
Technology Integration
9
Attitudes
8
Blended Learning
8
Evaluation
8
Problem Ased Learning
9
Scaffolding
7
Discussion Forums
7
Educational Technology
6
Animated Instruction
6
Digital Storytelling
6
Hybrid Learning Environment
6
Interaction
6
Motivation
6
Online Learning
6
Performance
6
Research Framework
6
Community
5
Community of Practice
5
Constructuvust Learning
5
Cross Cultural Study
5
Ict Implementation
5
Instructional Designers
5
Integration
5
Online Courses
5
Podcasting
5
Professional Development
5
Teacher Education
5
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

101

Authorship production was tabulated for the 2005-2009 Data Subset, and Table
36 shows the distribution of authors and their authorship. Approximately 73% of authors
produced 518 authorships or 47% of authorship in this data subset. Twenty-two authors
produced five or more authorships within the subset or 3% of authorship. These twentytwo authors represent 13% of the total document production within this subset
responsible for authoring 141 papers within the subset. P. A. Ertmer (13) from Purdue
University produced the most documents within the subset followed by Y. Ma (10) from
University of Louisiana.
Table 36
Data Subset 2005-2009 Author Production
All Authors
Variable
n=715
5 or more Authorships
22 (3%)
2 to 4 Authorships
174 (24%)
1 Authorship
518 (73%)

All Authorships
n=1092
141 (13%)
433 (40%)
518 (47%)

102

Table 37
Data Subset 2005-2009 Individual Authors with > 5 Authorships Determined by
Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=1092
Ertmer, P. A.
Ma, Y.
Cifuentes, L.
Correia, A. P.
Frick, T. W.
Richardson, J. C.
Cagiltay, K.
Kang, M. J.
Pan, C. C.
Williams, D. C.
Baran, E.
Bonk, C. J.
Grant, M. M.
Ke, F.
Koszalka, T. A.
Lin, H.
Magiuka, R. J.
Pedersen, S. J.
Su, B.
Sullivan, M.
Wilson, B. G.
York, C. S.

13
10
8
8
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Individual position descriptors and reference disciplines were not included on
most of the title pages of the submitted papers for 2005-2009 Data Subset. Most
authorships continue to be affiliated with higher education settings. In the subset, 991
authorships reported an institutional affiliation in higher education and represented 91%
of the authorships of the subset. Pennsylvania State University (71) tops the list with
Indiana University (65) and Purdue University (63). International authors represented
16% of the authorship of the subset with 176 authors from countries around the world
including Australia, Canada, China, Egypt, Germany, India, Israel, Japan, Mexico, The

103

Phillipines, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Taiwan, Thailand, The Netherlands, and
Turkey . Corporate authors represented 2% of the subset.
Table 38
Data Subset 2005-2009 Contributing Institutions
All Authorships
Variable
N=1092
Pennsylvania State University
Indiana University
Purdue University
Texas A&M University
Iowa State University
University of Louisiana
Georgia State University
Middle East Technical U
Ewha Womans University
University of Missouri
Arizona State University
University of Minnesota
University of Central Florida
Florida State University
University of Texas
Seoul National University
Northern Illinois University
Anadolu University
University of Houston
University of Memphis
Western Illinois University
Oklahoma State University
Syracuse University
University of Georgia
University of N Colorado
Cuny
East Carolina University
Kent State University
University of Balearic Islands
University of Wyoming
Note: Complete lists in Appendices.

71 (7%)
65 (6%)
63 (6%)
59 (5%)
31 (3%)
24 (2%)
22
22
21
21
20
20
19
18
18
16
15
14
13
13
13
12
12
12
10
9
9
9
9
9

104

Figure 12 shows a saturation map of the United States according to author
productivity for the data subset. A strong concentration of authorships was located in the
Rustbelt of the United States, but the Southern states also produced strong concentrations
of authorships in Texas, Georgia, and Florida as well as Arizona in the West. A majority,
92% of contributors originated in higher education as shown in Table 39.

Data Subset 2005-2009 State Saturation of Author Productivity
Figure 12. Areas of the United States where author productivity is saturated. Saturations determined by
reported geographic area of author production.

105

Table 39
Data Subset 2005-2009 Performance Setting of Authorship
All Authorships
Variable
N=1092
Higher Education
991 (92%)
International
176 (16%)
Corporate
24 (2%)
K-12
8
Government/Military
0
Note: Determined from Reference Discipline and Institutional Reports

Summary of AECT Conference Proceedings Papers
The knowledge domain of the AECT Conference Proceedings may be described in
terms of the authorship of its papers. During the thirty-year span (1979-2004), most of the
authorship were professors and graduate students serving in Education departments at
higher learning institutions across the United States. Table 40 summarizes the authorship of
the thirty-year span (1979-2009) of the AECT Conference Proceedings. The number of
authors with five or more authorships represented an average of 4%, with two to four
authorships represented an average of 23%, and with one authorship represented an average
of 73%. While there are no established standards of authorship rate to determine knowledge
domain strength and while Lotka based his Law of Scientific Productivity on a ratio of 60%
to 40%, the percentages here, 73% to 27% with a variance of 7% over the thirty-year span,
may represent a committed authorship to the knowledge domain, growth in contributions,
and an openness to new authorship.

106

Table 40
Author Statistics by Data Subset
Subset
5 or More
Authorships
1979-1984
10 (5%)
1985-1989
16 (7%)
1990-1994
16 (4%)
1995-1999
13 (3%)
2000-2004
27 (3%)
2005-2009
22 (3%)

2 to 4 Authorships

1 Authorship

37 (20%)
45 (19%)
99 (25%)
106 (23%)
256 (28%)
174 (24%)

141 (75%)
176 (74%)
278 (72%)
345 (74%)
635 (69%)
518 (73%)

The AECT began publication of its conference proceedings in 1979. The research
front of the knowledge domain of the conference proceedings may be represented by the
most published authors and the rise of new authors as defined in the data subsets over the
course of the thirty-year span as seen in Table 41. The names of new researchers entering
the list of the most published researchers for the first time appear in bold text, and four
authors, Dwyer, Hannafin, Jonassen, and Klein, had long productive periods as they
appeared in more than two data subsets within the list. This would demonstrate a
knowledge domain open to new researchers and a consideration for the established
researchers of the knowledge domain.

107

Table 41
Authors Representing the Research Front
19791985199019951984
1989
1994
1999
Dwyer
Hannafin
Knupfer
Knupfer
Simonson Belland
Klein
Schnackenberg
Canelos
Rieber
Jonassen
Cennamo
Hannafin Ross
Wilson
Januszewski
Winn
Taylor
Cole
Land
Berry
Canelos
Grabowski
Marcinkiewicz
Jonassen
Dwyer
Januszewski Hannafin
Joseph
Jonassen
Ross
Harvey
Lamberski Morrison
Berry
Jones
Taylor
Smith
Bohlin
Klein
Tennyson
Koetting
Moallem
Dalton
McIsaac
Small
Grabinger
Muffoletto
Wilson
Baker
Orey
Simonson
Rieber
Winn
Yeaman

20002004
Klein
Savenye
Johnson
Koszalka
Ku
Park
Tuzun
Cifuentes
Dwyer
Ertmer
Frick
Grabowski
Javeri
Maushak
Cornell
Kim
Yu
Bollinger
Bray
Mazur
Schaffer
Schnackenberg
Shoffner
Varank
Verhagen
Wang
Winograd

20052009
Ertmer
Ma
Cifuentes
Correia
Frick
Richardson
Cagiltay
Kang
Pan
Williams
Baran
Bonk
Grant
Ke
Koszalka
Lin
Magiuka
Pedersen
Su
Sullivan
Wilson
York

The keyword descriptors overtime may provide a view of the main themes of the
knowledge domain. Instructional Design, Computer Based Instruction, and Learning
come to the forefront in the keyword descriptors and may identify the purpose or focus of
this knowledge domain.

108

Keyword Descriptors Word Cloud
Figure 13. Keyword descriptor frequencies were used to create a word cloud.

The conference proceedings of the AECT has been as an outlet of publication for
academics as evidenced by an average institutional affiliation rate of 92%. The published
documents in the first data subset largely originated in the Rustbelt of the United States.
Over the course of the thirty-year span, published documents have demonstrated growth
in other areas of the United States in keeping with technological development centers.
The Rustbelt continued to be the geographical base of the knowledge domain over the
thirty-year span as the largest producer of research in the knowledge domain.
Cited Documents within the Conference Proceedings
The second research question asked, “What authors, research, academic
publications, and reference works (Cited Documents) may be identified through citedness

109

in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period 1979-2009 and what
intellectual structure may be derived from these analyses?” The citations from all the
citing documents with reference lists were collected from the conference proceedings of
the AECT (1979-2009) as Data Set 2. Citations to statistical program manuals, software
programs and commercial databases were omitted. Citations with incomplete information
were also omitted from the data set. All authors, where a cited document was created by
more than one author, were treated as equal counts to honor all contributions of the
authors and to avoid omitting possible author/researcher connections. Special cases
where non-authors were also included were government reports,
Instructional/Educational technology related organization publications and institutional
research groups and institute publications. All other references were excluded in the data
set. The data set was segmented into six chronological subsets (1979-1984, 1985-1989,
1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and 2005-2009) and citation characteristics were
collected from 3,632 authors of 2,354 documents with 48,063 citations. Findings from the
bibliometric analysis were reported.
Data Subset 1979-1984
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1979 to 1984 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 4,644 cited documents were
examined in the first subset. Table 42 summarizes authorships of cited documents. Just
over half of the authorships (54%) in the cited documents were of journal articles. Books
accounted for 31% of the authorships in the cited documents.

110

Table 42
Data Subset 1979-1984 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=7,168
Journals
3,864 (54%)
Books
2,233 (31%)
Other
385 (5%)
Dissertations
346 (5%)
Conference Proceedings
319 (4%)
Theses
17

Table 43 shows the most cited authors with in the subset. F. M. Dwyer from
Pennsylvania State University, who published the most papers within the data subset, was
also the most cited author of the subset. M. R. Simonson, W. D. Winn, L. H. Berry, R. and
J. Lamberski also appeared on the most published authors from Data Set 1 and the most
cited authors list here in the 1979-1984 Data Subset.

111

Table 43
Data Subset 1979-1984 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
All Authors
Variable
N=1092
Dwyer, F. M.
106 (10%)
Witkin, H. A.
72 (7%)
Salomon, G.
69
Gagne, R. M.
56
Snow, R. E.
52
Paivio, A.
50
Cronbach, L. J.
42
Goodenough, D. R.
42
Clark, R. E.
37
Winn, W. D.
37
Levin, J. R.
35
Fleming, M. L
34
Simonson, M. R.
34
Levie, W. H.
29
Ausubel, D. P.
28
Travers, R. M. W.
28
Lamberski, R. J.
27
Merrill, M. D.
27
Karp, S. A.
25
Berry, L. H.
22
Mayer, R. E.
22
Oltman, P. K.
22
Allen, W. H.
20
Briggs, L. J.
20
Cox, P. W.
19
Foulke, E.
19
Raskin, E.
19
Tulving, E.
19
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Despite journal articles accounting for over half of the cited documents in the data
subset, the most cited research in the dataset came from books. Table 44 lists the top cited

112

documents in the data set. Strategies for Improving Visual Learning and A Guide for
Improving Visualized Instruction, both by F. M. Dwyer, were the most cited research in the
data set. Only two documents of the most cited research were journal articles.
Table 44
Data Subset 1979-1984 Cited Research Determined by Frequency

Variable
1. Strategies for Improving Visual Learning by F. M. Dwyer
2. A Guide for Improving Visualized Instruction by F. M. Dwyer
3. “Field Dependent and Field Independent Cognitive Styles and
Their Educational Implications” by D. R. Goodenough
4. Aptitudes and Instructional Methods by Cronbach and Snow
5. A Manual for the Embedded Figures Test by H. A. Witkin
6. Interaction of Media Cognition and Learning by G. Salomon
7. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
8. Imagery in Verbal Processes by A. Paivio
9. “Reexamining the Methodology of Research on Media and
Technology in Education” by R. M. Gagne
10. Instructional Message Design by Fleming and Levie
11. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs

All Cited
Documents
N=4,644
31
23
23
22
20
19
17
15
14
13
13

Table 45 shows the most cited academic publications within the data set. The data
set included 389 academic publications with a total of 3,864 citations. Three of the top ten
academic publications may be considered educational/instructional technology academic
publications. The remainder are academic publications in the discipline of Education.
Audio-Video Communication Review was the most cited academic publication in this
subset.

113

Table 45
Data Subset 1979-1984 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by Frequency
All Academic Publication
Citations
Variable
N=3,864
Av Communications Review
414 (11%)
J of Educational Psychology
316 (8%)
J of Experimental Psychology
232 (6%)
Review of Educational Research
228 (6%)
Ectj
187 (5%)
Educational Technology
113 (3%)
J of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior
96
Perceptual & Motor Skills
88
Child Development
66
Bulletin of Psychonomic Society
62
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

The 1979-1984 Data Subset demonstrated 2,233 citations to books or books
chapters. Table 46 lists the most cited reference works for the subset. F. M. Dywer and R.
M. Gagne had two books each within the most cited reference works list. The reference
works focus on instruction and instructional methods.

114

Table 46
Data Subset 1979-1984 Most Cited Reference Works Dtermined by Frequency
All Book
Citations
Variable
N=2,233
1. Aptitudes and Instructional Methods by Cronbach and
31
Snow
2. Strategies for Improving Visual Learning by F. M. Dwyer
31
3. A Guide for Improving Visualized Instruction by F. M.
23
Dwyer
4. Imagery in Verbal Processes by A. Paivio
23
5. A Manual for the Embedded Figures Test by H. A. Witkin 22
6. Interaction of Media Cognition and Learning by G.
19
Salomon
7. Creativity: Its Educational Implications by Gowan,
18
Demos, and Torrance
8. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
17
9. Instructional Message Design by Fleming and Levie
16
10. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
15
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Data Subset 1985-1989
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1985 to 1989 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 4,976 cited documents were
examined in the second subset. Table 47 summarizes authorships by cited documents.
Just over half of the authorships (56%) in the cited documents were to journal articles.
Books accounted for 32% of the authorships in the cited documents.

115

Table 47
Data Subset 1985-1989 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Cited Authorships
Variable
N=7,725
Journals
4,294 (56%)
Books
2,438 (32%)
Other
461 (6%)
Conference Proceedings
376 (5%)
Dissertations
145 (2%)
Theses
11

Table 48 shows the mosted cited authors within the 1985-1989 Data Subset. R. D.
Tennyson from University of Minnesota was also the most cited author of the data subset.
Citations to R. D. Tennyson’s research rose to 132 citations from 12 citations in the
previous subset. R. M. Gagne, R. E. Clark, G. Salomon, and M. D. Merrill also increased in
citations from the previous subset.

116

Table 48
Data Subset 1985-1989 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
Variable
N=3,548 All Authors
Tennyson, R. D.
Gagne, R. M.
Clark, R. E.
Hannafin, M. J.
Salomon, G.
Merrill, M. D.
Anderson, R. C.
Snow, R. E.
Reiguluth, C. M.
Witkin, H. A.
Dwyer, F. M.
Ross, S. M.
Kulik, J. A.
Mayer, R. E.
Winn, W. D.
Kulhavy, R. W.
Rakow, E. A.
Heinich, R.
Levin, J. R.
Rieber, L. P.
Levie, W. H.
Briggs, L. J.
Canelos, J. J.
Phillips, T. L.
Hartley, J. R.
Norman, D. A.
Park, O. C.
Cronbach, L. J.
Goodenough, D. R.
Jonassen, D. H.
Paivio, A.
Anderson, J. R.
Rumelhart, D. E.
Simonson, M. R.
Taylor, W. D.
Wager, W. W.
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

132 (3%)
91
83
81
81
52
45
43
42
37
35
33
31
31
29
28
28
27
27
27
26
25
24
24
23
23
23
22
22
22
22
21
21
21
21
21

117

Despite journal articles accounting for over half of the authorships in the data
subset, the most cited research in the dataset came from books. Table 49 lists the top cited
documents in the data set. “Reconsidering Research on Learning from Media” by R. E.
Clark and The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne were the most cited research in the
data subset. Five of the most cited research documents were journal articles.
Table 49
Data Subset 1985-1989 Most Cited Research Determined by Frequency

Variable
1. “Reconsidering Research on Learning from Media” by R. E.
Clark
2. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
3. Aptitudes and Instructional Methods by Cronbach and Snow
4. Interaction of Media, Cognition and Learning by G. Salomon
5. Instructional Message Design by Fleming and Levie
6. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
7. “Field Dependent and Field Independent Cognitive Styles and
Their Educational Implications” by Cox, Goodenough, Moore,
and Witkin
8. “The Proper Study of Instructional Technology” by R. Heinrich
9. “Evidence for Confounding in Computer Based Instruction
Studies: Analyzing the Meta Analyses” by R. E. Clark
10. “Instructional Control Strategies and Content Structure as Design
Variables in Concept Acquisition Using Computer Based
Instruction” by R. D. Tennyson
11. Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View by D. P. Ausubel
12. Imagery and Verbal Processes by A. Paivio
13. Strategies for Improving Visual Learning by F. M. Dwyer
14. The Conditions of Learning by F. M. Dwyer

All Cited
Documents
N=4,976
20
16
15
15
14
13
12

12
10
10

10
10
10
10

118

Table 50 shows the most cited academic publications within the 1985-1989 Data
Subset. The data subset included 468 academic publications with a total of 4,294 citations.
Four of the top ten academic publications may be considered Instructional/Educational
Technology academic publications. The remainder were academic publications in the
discipline of Education. Journal of Educational Psychology was the most cited academic
publication in this data subset.
Table 50
Data Subset 1985-1989 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by Frequency
All Academic
Publication Citations
Variable
N=4,294
J of Educational Psychology
496 (12%)
ECTJ
400 (9%)
Review of Educational Research
236 (5%)
Educational Technology
182 (4%)
J of Computer-Based Instruction
140 (3%)
J of Instructional Development
117
J of Exp Psych: Human Learning & Memory
104
Av Communications Review
80
J of Educational Research
62
J of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior
61
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Table 51 shows the cited reference works in the subset. The data subset
demonstrated 2,438 citations to books or books chapters. Instructional Design Theories and
Models: An Overview of Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth topped the list of most
cited reference works.

119

Table 51
Data Subset 1985-1989 Most Cited Reference Works Determined by Frequency
All Book Citations
Variable
N=2,438
1. Instructional Design Theories and Models: An Overview 32
of Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth,
2. The Conditions of Learning by Gagne and Dwyer
26
3. The Technology of Text: Principles for Structuring,
25
Designing, and Displaying Text by D. H. Jonassen
4. Handbook of Research on Teaching by N. L. Gage
24
5. Instructional Technology: Foundations by R. M. Gagne 16
6. Aptitudes and Instructional Methods by Cronbach &
15
Snow
7. Instructional Message Design by Fleming and Levie
15
8. Interaction of Media, Cognition and Learning by G.
15
Salomon
9. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne, Briggs,
15
and Wager
10. Instructional Designs for Microcomputer Courseware
13
by D. H. Jonassen
11. Learning Strategies by H. F. O'Neil, Jr.
13
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Data Subset 1990-1994
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1990 to 1994 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 8,235 cited documents were
examined in the third subset. Table 52 summarizes authorships by cited documents. Just
over half of the authorships (54%) in the cited documents were to journal articles. Books
accounted for 33% of the authorships in the cited documents.

120

Table 52
Data Subset 1990-1994 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Cited Authorships
Variable
N=13,458
Journals
7,255 (54%)
Books
4,385 (33%)
Conference Proceedings
913
Other
695
Dissertations
198
Theses

12

Table 53 shows the most cited authors with in the 1990-1994 Data Subset. D. H.
Jonassen from University of Colorado was also the most cited author of the subset.
Citations to the research of R. M. Gagne, M. J. Hannafin, and C. M. Reigeluth rose to over
100 citations to each authors research in the subset.

121

Table 53
Data Subset 1990-1994 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
All Authors
Variable
N=6,008
Jonassen, D. H.
135 (2%)
Gagne, R. M.
106
Hannafin, M. J.
105
Reigeluth, C. M.
102
Ross, S. M.
83
Tennyson, R. D.
78
Salomon, G.
72
Merrill, M. D.
70
Mayer, R. E.
68
Keller, J. M.
65
Johnson, D. W.
63
Dwyer, F. M.
62
Clark, R. E.
61
Johnson, R. T.
59
Wittrock, M. C.
56
Carrier, C. A.
52
Briggs, L. J.
50
Morrison, G. R.
47
Rieber, L. P.
46
Collins, A. M.
44
Brown, J. S.
42
Dick, W. D.
40
Kulik, J. A.
38
Winn, W. D.
38
Hooper, S.
37
Norman, D. A.
36
Wager, W. W.
36
Sullivan, H. J.
33
Anderson, J. R.
32
Dansereau, D. F.
32
Steinberg, E. r.
32
Anderson, R. C.
31
Spiro, R. J.
31
Brown, A. L.
30
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

122

While journal articles still account for over half of the authorships in this data
subset, only one journal article is included in the top ten most cited research. Table 54 lists
the top cited documents in the data subset. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An
Overview of Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth was the most cited research in the
data subset.
Table 54
Data Subset 1990-1994 Most Cited Research Determined by Frequency

Variable
1. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of Their
Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
2. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
3. Instructional Designs for Microcomputer Courseware by D. H.
Jonassen
4. Handbook of Research on Teaching by N. L. Gage
5. Instructional Technology: Foundations by R. M. Gagne
6. The Technology of Text by D. H. Jonassen
7. The Systematic Design of Instruction by W. Dick and L. Carey
8. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
9. “Situated Learning and the Culture of Learning” by Brown,
Collins, and Duguid
10. Designing Hypermedia for Learning by Jonassen and Mandl
11. Instructional Technology: Past, Present, and Future by G. J.
Anglin

All
Citations
N=8,235
65
36
30
29
24
22
21
18
18
17
17

Table 55 shows the most cited academic publications within the the data subset.
The data subset included 663 academic publications with a total of 7,255 journal citations.
The Journal of Educational Psychology was the most cited journal in this data subset. The
majority of the journals listed in the table continue to be journals from the Education and
Psychology disciplines.

123

Table 55
Data Subset 1990-1994 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by Frequency
All Journal Citations
Variable
N=7,255
J of Educational Psychology
661(9%)
Educational Technology
426
ETR&D
322
ECTJ
312
J of Computer-Based Instruction
252
Educational Researcher
177
Review of Educational Research
173
American Educational Research Journal
170
J of Educational Research
148
J of Educational Computing Research
142
J of Instructional Development
139
Educational Psychologist
132
Contemporary Educational Psychology
99
Instructional Science
95
J of Experimental Psychology
95
Av Communications Review
76
J of Experimental Education
64
Educational Leadership
63
Cognitive Science
60
Performance & Instruction
58
Cognitive Psychology
55
Org Behavior & Human Decision Processes
54
British J of Educational Technology
52
J of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior
48
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

The 1990-1994 Data Subset demonstrated 4,385 citations to books and book
chapters. Table 56 lists the top cited documents in the data subset. Instructional Design
Theories & Models: An Overview of Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth was the most
cited reference work in the data subset.

124

Table 56
Data Subset 1990-1994 Most Cited Reference Works Determined by Frequency
All Book Citations
Variable
N= 4,385
1. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of
65
Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
2. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
36
3. Instructional Designs for Microcomputer Courseware by
30
Jonassen
4. Handbook of Research on Teaching by N. L. Gage
29
5. Instructional Technology: Foundations by R. M. Gagne
24
6. The Technology of Text by D. H. Jonassen
22
7. The Systematic Design of Instruction by Dick and Carey
21
8. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
18
9. Designing Hypermedia for Learning by Jonassen and Mandl
17
10. Instructional Technology: Past, Present, and Future by G. J.
17
Anglin
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Data Subset 1995-1999
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 1995 to 1999 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 7,671 cited documents were
examined in the fourth data subset. Table 57 summarizes authorships of cited documents.
Journal articles fell to 50% from the previous data subset’s 54% in the cited documents.
Books increased to 36% of the authorships in the cited documents. Of note, the citations
to conference proceedings papers, dissertations, theses, and other documents remained
relatively the same as in the previous data subset despite an increase in citation.

125

Table 57
Data Subset 1995-1999 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=12,461
Journals
6,207 (50%)
Books
4,444 (36%)
Conference Proceedings
909 (7%)
Other
688 (6%)
Dissertations
198 (2%)
Theses
15

Table 58 shows the mosted cited authors with in the subset. R. M. Gagne from
Florida State University and D. H. Jonassen from University of Colorado were the most
cited authors of the subset, swapping positions in the list from the previous data subset. Of
particular note is the inclusion of a group author, Cognition & Technology Group at
Vanderbilt, into the most cited authors list.

126

Table 58
Data Subset 1995-1999 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
All Authors
Variable
N=5,932
Gagne, R. M.
101
Jonassen, D. H.
97
Hannafin, M. J.
93
Keller, J. M.
71
Reigeluth, C. M.
61
Collins, A.
52
Duffy, T. M.
51
Brown, J. S.
50
Dick, W.
50
Dwyer, F. M.
50
Ross, S. M.
49
Salomon, G.
46
Klein, J. d.
41
Johnson, D. W.
40
Johnson, R. T.
39
Merrill, M. D.
39
Hooper, S.
36
Sullivan, H. J.
35
Wilson, B. G.
35
Cognition & Technology Group at Vanderbilt (CTGV)
34
Slavin, R. E.
34
Briggs, L. J.
33
Morrison, G. R.
33
Wager, w. w.
32
Knupfer, N. N.
31
Richey, R. C.
31
Duguid, P.
30
Spiro, R. J.
30
Tessmer, M.
30
Wittrock, M. C.
30
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Cited journal articles decreased in authorships in this data subset, with 2 journal
articles included in the top ten of most cited research. Table 59 lists the top cited documents

127

in the data subset. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of Their Current
Status by C. M. Reigeluth was the most cited research in the data subset. Six documents in
the top cited research focus on Instructional Design.
Table 59
Data Subset 1995-1999 Most Cited Research Determined by Frequency
Variable
1. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of Their
Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
2. The Systematic Design of Instruction by W. Dick, L. Carey, and J.
O. Carey
3. “Situated Learning and the Culture of Learning” by Brown,
Collins, and Duguid
4. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
5. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and
Technology by D. H. Jonassen
5. Instructional Technology: Past, Present, and Future by G. J.
Anglin
7. The Art of Human Computer Interface Design by Laurel and
Mountford
8. Instructional Designs for Microcomputer Courseware by Jonassen
9. “Rapid Prototyping: An Alternative Instructional Design Strategy”
by Tripp and Bichelmeyer
10. Constructivist Learning Environments: Case Studies in
Instructional Design by B. G. Wilson

All Citations
N=7,671
33
30
30
26
23
23
23
21
21
20

Table 60 shows the most cited academic publications within the the data subset.
The data subset included 689 academic publications with a total of 6,207 journal citations.
Educational Technology Research and Development (ETR&D) was the most cited journal
in this data subset. In this data subset, instructional technology journals took precedence
with a mixture of journals from the Education and Psychology disciplines and other fields
as well.

128

Table 60
Data Subset 1995-1999 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by
Frequency
All Journal Citations
Variable
N=6,207
ETR&D
317 (5%)
Educational Technology
295
J of Educational Psychology
140
Educational Researcher
104
Review of Educational Research
91
Educational Psychologist
73
J of Computer Based Instruction
70
J of Research on Computers in Education
59
ECTJ
58
Performance Improvement Quarterly
56
J of Instructional Development
53
Contemporary Educational Psychology
49
American Educational Research Journal
48
Performance & Instruction
45
Tech Trends
44
J of Educational Computing Research
40
Educational Leadership
37
American Pscyhologist
34
J of Personality & Social Psychology
34
Instructional Science
33
J of Educational Technology
33
Av Communications Review
32
The American J of Distance Education
32
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

The 1995-1999 Data Subset demonstrated 4,444 citations to books and book
chapters. Table 61 lists the top cited documents in the data subset. Instructional Design
Theories & Models: An Overview of Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth was the most
cited reference work in the data subset.

129

Table 61
Data Subset 1995-1999 Most Cited Reference Works Determined by Frequency
All Book Citations
Variable
N=4,444
1. Instructional Design Theories &Models: An Overview of Their 33
Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
2. The Systematic Design of Instruction by Dick and Carey
30
3. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
26
4. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and
23
Technology by D. H. Jonassen
5. Instructional Technology: Past, Present, and Future by G. J.
23
Anglin
6. The Art of Human Computer Interface Design by Laurel and
23
Mountford
7. Instructional Designs for Microcomputer Courseware by
21
Jonassen
8. Constructivist Learning Environments: Case Studies in
20
Instructional Design by B. G. Wilson
9. Constructivism and the Technology of Instruction: A
18
Conversation by Duffy and Jonassen
10. The Conditions of Learning by R. M. Gagne
17
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Data Subset 2000-2004
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 2000 to 2004 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 12,437 cited documents were
examined in the fifth data subset. Table 62 summarizes authorships of cited documents.
Journal articles continued to fall from previous data subsets with a drop to 48%. Books
showed a slight drop to 34% of the authorships in the cited documents. Of note, the
citations to conference proceedings papers and other cited documents (websites,
government documents, and unpublished papers) rose in citations.

130

Table 62
Data Subset 2000-2004 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=21,067
Journals
10,152 (48%)
Books
7,206 (34%)
Other
1,858 (9%)
Conference Proceedings
1,574 (7%)
Dissertations
250 (1%)
Theses
27

Table 63 shows the mosted cited authors with in the subset. D. H. Jonassen from
University of Colorado was the most cited author of the subset with 173 citations. Cited
authors increased 40% over the previous data subset.

131

Table 63
Data Subset 2000-2004 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
All Authors
Variable
N=9,978
Jonasson, D. H.
173 (2%)
Reiguluth, C. M.
81
Mayer, R. E.
80
Duffy, T. M.
72
Hannafin, M. J.
68
Keller, J. M.
65
Gagne, R. M.
61
Dick, W.
60
Bandura, A.
58
Collins, A.
54
Clark, R. e.
53
Ertmer, P. A.
53
Wenger, E.
50
Bonk, C. J.
49
Moore, M. G.
48
Gunawardena, C. N.
47
Richey, R. C.
47
Sweller, J.
47
Becker, H. J.
45
Carey, L. M.
42
NCES
42
Schunk, D. H.
42
Wilson, B. G.
42
Salomon, G.
41
Van Merrienboer, J. J. G.
40
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

Table 64 lists the top cited documents in the 2000-2004 Data Subset. Handbook of
Research on Educational Communications and Technology by D. H. Jonassen was the
most cited research in the data subset. Five documents in the top cited research focus on
Instructional Design with two documents that focus on instruction on the internet and two
documents on Educational Technology.

132

Table 64
Data Subset 2000-2004 Most Cited Research Determined by Frequency
All Citations
Variable
N=12,438
1. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications 133
and Technology by D. H. Jonassen
2. Web Based Instruction by B. H. Khan
73
3. Instructional Design Theories and Models: A New
Paradigm of Instructional Theory by C. M. Reigeluth
66
4. Electronic Collaborators: Learner Centered
Technologies for Literacy, Apprenticeship, and
49
Discourse by Bonk and King
5. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of 47
Their Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
6. The Systematic Design of Instruction by Dick and Carey 44
7. Instructional Design Competencies: The Standards by
42
Field, Richey, and Foxon
8. Building Learning Communities in Cyberspace: Effective 36
Strategies for the Online Classroom by Palloff and Pratt
9. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
36
10. Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments by
Jonassen and Land
27

Table 65 shows the most cited academic publications within the the data subset.
The data subset included 1,196 academic publications with a total of 10,152 journal
citations. Educational Technology Research and Development (ETR&D) was the most
cited journal in this data subset.

133

Table 65
Data Subset 2000-2004 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by Frequency
All Journal Citations
Variable
N=10,152
ETR&D
433
Educational Technology
338
J of Educational Psychology
338
The American J of Dist Education
157
J of Edu Computing Research
153
J of Res on Computing on Education
144
Performance Improvement Quarterly
138
Review of Educational Research
124
Educational Researcher
122
Educational Psychology
103
Tech Trends for Leaders in Edu& Trn
100
Instructional Science
98
British J of Educational Technology
84
J of Personality & Social Psychology
80
Contemporary Edu Psychology
77
J of Research in Science Teaching
72
Educational Leadership
71
Distance Education
70
International J of Instr Media
67
J of Technology & Teacher Education
65
American Educational Research Journal
58
Computers in Human Behaviors
52
Online J of Distance Learning Admin
50
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

The 2000-2004 Data Subset demonstrated 7,206 citations to books and book
chapters. Table 66 lists the top cited documents in the data subset. Handbook of Research
for Educational Communications Technology by D. H. Jonassen was the most cited
reference work in the data subset.

134

Table 66
Data Subset 2000-2004 Most Cited Reference Works Determined by Frequency
All Book Citations
Variable
N=7,206
1. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and
133
Technology by D. H. Jonassen
2. Web Based Instruction by B. H. Khan
73
3. Instructional Design Theories and Models: A New Paradigm of
Instructional Theory by C. M. Reigeluth
66
4. Electronic collaborators: Learner Centered Technologies for
Literacy, Apprenticeship, and Discourse by Bonk and King
49
5. Instructional Design Theories & Models: An Overview of Their
47
Current Status by C. M. Reigeluth
6. The Systematic Design of Instruction by W. Dick, L. Carey, and 44
J. O. Carey
7. Instructional Design Competencies: The Standards by Field,
42
Richey, and Foxon
8. Building Learning Communities in Cyberspace: Effective
36
Strategies for the Online Classroom by Palloff and Pratt
9. Principles of Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs
36
10. Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments by Jonassen
and Land
27
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Data Subset 2005-2009
Assuming the Data Subset represented the typical writings and research of
Instructional/Educational Technology from 2005 to 2009 as represented in the knowledge
domain presented in the AECT Conference Proceedings, 18,519 cited documents were
examined in the sixth data subset. Table 67 summarizes authorships of cited documents.
Journal articles rebounded to 53% from the previous data subset’s 48%. Books showed a
slight drop again to 30% of the authorships in the cited documents.

135

Table 67
Data Subset 2005-2009 Most Cited Documents Determined by Frequency
All Authorships
Variable
N=18,519
Journals
9,813 (53%)
Books
5,613 (30%)
Conference Proceedings
1,489 (8%)
Other
1,389 (8%)
Dissertations
193 (1%)
Theses
23

Table 68 shows the most cited authors within the subset. D. H. Jonassen from
University of Colorado was the most cited author of the subset with 133 citations.

136

Table 68
Data Subset 2005-2009 Most Cited Individual Authors Determined by Frequency
All Authors
Variable
N=9,301
Jonassen, D. H.
133 (1%)
Mayer, R. E.
96
Garrison, D. R.
88
Anderson, T.
81
Ertmer, P. A.
62
Sweller, J.
60
Reigeluth, C. M.
56
Archer, W.
54
Hannafin, M. J.
51
Bandura, A.
49
Keller, J. M.
49
Pintrich, P. R.
48
Schunk, D. H.
48
Wenger, E. C.
48
Bonk, C. J.
46
Duffy, T. M.
45
Klein, J. D.
43
Vygotsky, L. S.
42
Moreno, R.
40
Gunawardena, C. N.
38
Brown, J. S.
37
Zimmerman, B. J.
37
Bruner, J. S.
36
Bransford, J. D.
34
Collins, A.
34
Land, S. M.
34
Richey, R. C.
32
Rieber, L. P.
32
Van Merrienboer, J. J. G.
32
Frick, T. W.
31
Johnson, D. W.
30
Note: Complete list in Appendices.

137

Table 69 lists the top cited documents in the data subset. Handbook of Research for
Educational Communications and Technology by D. H. Jonassen was the most cited
research in the data subset.
Table 69
Data Subset 2005-2009 Most Cited Research Determined by Frequency
All Citations
Variable
N=10,100
1. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications
62
and Technology by D. H. Jonassen
2. Instructional Design Theories and Models: A New
60
Paradigm of Instructional Theory by C. M. Reigeluth
3. Self-Regulated Learning: From Teaching to Self27
Reflective Practice by Schunk and Zimmerman
4. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher
26
Psychological Processes by L. S. Vygotsky
5. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation by
Lave and Wenger
21
6. Case Study Research: Design and Methods by R. K. Yin
20
7. Handbook of Distance Education by Moore and Anderson
19
8. Trends and Issues in Instructional Design and Technology
42
by Reiser and Dempsey
9. Educational Media and Technology Yearbook by Orey,
17
McClendon, and Branch
10. Psychology of Learning for Instruction by M. P. Driscoll
17
11. “Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning” by J. S.
17
Brown

Table 70 shows the most cited academic publications within the the data subset.
The data subset included 1,603 academic publications with a total of 9,813 journal
citations. Educational Technology Research and Development (ETR&D) was the most
cited journal in this data subset.

138

Table 70
Data Subset 2005-2009 Cited Academic Publications
Variable
Etr&D
J of Educational Psychology
Educational Technology
J of Educational Computing Research
Educational Researcher
Review of Educational Research
Performance Improvement Quarterly
J of Technology & Teacher Education
Educational Psychologist
British J of Educational Technology
Tech Trends
J of Research on Computing in Education
J of Asynchronous Learning Networks
Instructional Science
American Educational Research Journal
American J of Distance Education
Educational Psychology Review
The American J of Distance Education
Distance Education
J of Computer Assisted Learning
Computers & Education
J of Research on Technology in Edu
Computers in Human Behavior
J of The Learning Sciences
Contemporary Educational Psychology
J of Edu Multimedia & Hypermedia
International J of Instructional Media
Cognition & Instruction

All Journal Citations
N=9,813
321 (3%)
124
117
91
84
78
76
72
68
65
65
62
59
57
56
55
54
41
40
40
39
39
38
38
37
35
34
30

Note: Complete List in Appendices.

The data subset demonstrated 7,206 citations to books and book chapters. Table 71
lists the top cited documents in the data subset. Handbook of Research on Educational
Communications Technology by D. H. Jonassen was the most cited reference work in the

139

data subset.
Table 71
Data Subset 2005-2009 Most Cited Reference Works Determined by Frequency
All Book Citations
Variable
N=5,613
1. Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and
62
Technology by D. H. Jonassen
2. Instructional Design Theories and Models: A New Paradigm
60
of Instructional Theory by C. M. Reigeluth
3. Self-Regulated Learning: From Teaching to Self-Reflective
27
Practice by Schunk and Zimmerman
4. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
26
Processes by L. S. Vygotsky
5. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation by
Lave and Wenger
21
6. Case Study Research: Design and Methods by R. K. Yin
20
7. Handbook of Distance Education by Moore and Anderson
19
8. Trends and Issues in Instructional Design and Technology by
42
Reiser and Dempsey
9. Educational Media and Technology Yearbook by Editors
17
10. Psychology of Learning for Instruction by M. P. Driscoll
17
Note: Complete List in Appendices.

Summary of Cited Documents
Table 72 summarizes the number of cited documents, cited authorships, and cited
authors with five or more citations from each data subset. The number of authors with five
or more citations over the thirty-year period represented an average of 7% and a stable
knowledge base within the knowledge domain.

140

Table 72
Citation Statistics by Data Subset Determined by Frequency
Subset
Total Cited
Total Cited
Documents
Authorships
1979-1984
4,644
7,168
1985-1989
4,976
7,725
1990-1994
8,235
13,458
1995-1999
7,671
12,461
2000-2004
12,437
21,067
2005-2009
10,100
18,519

No. of Authors with
5 or More Citations
238 (5%)
272 (7%)
468 (8%)
434 (7%)
699 (7%)
605 (7%)

Table 73 summarizes the cited documents types and the percentage of authorship of
each document type. The average percentage of cited journals was 53% with a variance of
7.5% and a standard deviation of 2.7%. The average percentage of cited books was 33%
with a variance of 4% and a standard deviation of 2%. The average percentage of cited
Conference Proceedings was 6% with a variance of 2% and a standard deviation of 1.4%.
The average percentage of cited other documents was 6.5% with a variance of 2.2% and a
standard deviation of 1.5%. The average percentage of cited dissertations was 2% with a
variance of 2% and a standard deviation of 1.4%. While there are no established standards
of citation rate to source type to determine knowledge domain strength, these percentages
may represent a stability within the citation record of the knowledge domain.
Table 73
Citation Document Type by Data Subset Determined by Frequency
Subset
1979-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2009

Journals
3,864(54%)
4,294(56%)
7,255(54%)
6,207(50%)
10,152(48%)
9,813(53%)

Books
2,223(31%)
2,438(32%)
4,385(33%)
4,444(36%)
7,206(34%)
5,613(30%)

Conf. Pro.
319(4%)
376(5%)
913(7%)
909(7%)
1,574(7%)
1,489(8%)

Other
385(5%)
461(6%)
695(5%)
688(6%)
1,858(9%)
1,389(8%)

Dissert. Thes
346(5%) 17
145(2%) 11
198(1%) 12
198(2%) 15
250(1%) 27
193(1%) 23

141

The most cited authors within the knowledge domain may represent the human
knowledge base and the change of that knowledge base over time may be represented
by changes in citedness between data subsets. Table 74 represents the most cited
authors within the thirty-year span and the knowledge base of
Instructional/Educational Technology in this knowledge domain. Gagne, Hannafin,
Jonassen, Dwyer, and Reigeluth were the most cited authors within the knowledge
domain.
Table 74
Authors Representing the Knowledge Base Detemined by Frequency
197919851990199520001984
1989
1994
1999
2004
Dwyer
Tennyson
Jonassen Gagne
Jonasson
Witkin
Gagne
Gagne
Jonassen
Reiguluth
Salomon
Clark
Hannafin Hannafin
Mayer
Gagne
Hannafin
Reigeluth Keller
Duffy
Snow
Salomon
Ross
Reigeluth Hannafin
Paivio
Merrill
Tennyson Collins
Keller
Cronbach
Anderson
Salomon Duffy
Gagne
Goodenough Snow
Merrill
Brown
Dick
Clark
Reiguluth
Mayer
Dick
Bandura
Winn
Witkin
Keller
Dwyer
Collins
Levin
Dwyer
Johnson
Ross
Clark
Fleming
Ross
Dwyer
Salomon
Ertmer
Simonson
Kulik
Clark
Klein
Wenger
Levie
Mayer
Johnson
Johnson
Bonk
Ausubel
Winn
Wittrock Johnson
Moore
Travers
Kulhavy
Carrier
Merrill
Gunawardena
Lamberski
Rakow
Briggs
Hooper
Richey
Merrill
Heinich
Morrison Sullivan
Sweller
Karp
Levin
Rieber
Wilson
Becker
Berry
Rieber
Collins
CTGV
Carey
Mayer
Levie
Brown
Slavin
NCES
Oltman
Briggs
Dick
Briggs
Schunk
Allen
Canelos
Kulik
Morrison
Wilson
Briggs
Phillips
Winn
Wager
Salomon

20052009
Jonassen
Mayer
Garrison
Anderson
Ertmer
Sweller
Reigeluth
Archer
Hannafin
Bandura
Keller
Pintrich
Schunk
Wenger
Bonk
Duffy
Klein
Vygotsky
Moreno
Gunawardena
Brown
Zimmerman
Bruner
Bransford

142

Figure 14 represents the most cited reference works within the thirty-year span
of Instructional/Educational Technology represented in this knowledge domain. The
most influential reference work of the period studied is Principles of Instructional
Design by Gagne and Briggs with over a twenty-five-year span of influence. Two
other titles influential over a twenty-year span were The Conditions of Learning by
Gagne, and Instructional Design Theories and Models: An Overivew of Their Current
Status by Reigeluth.

Timeline of Most Cited Reference Works and Their Span of Influence
Figure 14. Timeline of the most cited Reference Works presented in linear scale over the division of the
data subsets with each Reference Work title orb indicating span of influence. Created with Online
Diagram Software & Visual Solution | Lucidchart. Copyright 2018 by www.lucidchart.com.

143

During the thirty-year span of the knowledge domain, the establishment of
Instructional/Educational Technology academic publications (journals) became
established and rose to the most cited publications within the knowledge domain.
Table 75 represents the most cited academic publications within the thirty-year span of
Instructional/Educational Technology represented in this knowledge domain.
Table 75
Data Set 2 Most Cited Academic Publications Determined by Frequency
All Journal Citations
Variable
N=48,063
J of Educational Psychology
2075
Educational Technology
1471
ETR&D
1393
Review of Educational Research
930
ECTJ
657
AV Communications Review
602
J of Exp Psych: Human Learning & Memory
495
Educational Researcher
487
J of Computer Based Instruction
462
American Educational Research Journal
332
J of Instructional Development
309
The American J of Distance Education
285
Instructional Science
283

144

Mapping Science
The third research question asked “What intellectual structure may be identified
through author co-citedness in the conference proceedings of the AECT for the period
1979-2009?” Dataset 3 was created from the papers of the conference proceedings written
by researchers who authored five or more papers within each data subset of Dataset 1.
Those papers were examined for cocitations counts of the authors with ten or more
citations identified in Dataset 2. All authors were treated as equal authorships and
frequencies were tabulated to factor citation counts and form a correlation matrix for each
data subset to form an Arc List of cocitation weights and convert it into a Comma
Delimited File.
Gephi 0.9.2 software was used to produce multidimensional graphs of the
structure of each data subset and Dataset 3 to identify the structure of
Instructional/Educational Technology identified in the knowledge domain that the
conference proceedings of the AECT may represent. The Yifan Hu layout algorithm, “a
force directed algorithm that models the physical system of bodies with forces acting
between them,” was employed (Hu, Y. 2005). This algorithm “made use of a scheme
that combined a force-directed model and a graph coarsening technique” (Khokhar,
2017 p. 85). Graph coarsening grouped the cocitation pairs and built a smaller and
tighter graph from the groupings.
The multidimensional graphs were created where each author was represented as
a node, the lines connecting the nodes represented the cocitations between authors, and
the proximity of these points relected the relationships of authors as recognized through

145

citation by multiple citers. Node size indicated citation strength or frequency within
Dataset 2. Line thickness indicated degree of cocitations between two given authors or
nodes as determined in Dataset 3. “The network analyses provide a diagrammatical
representation of the relative distances between authors, in terms of influence (citedness)]
and illustrated structural patterns and differing positions within the network”
(Benchendorff, 2009, p.9). Each multidimensional network analysis was formed and
analyzed, and descriptive cluster analyses were reported.
Data Subset 1979-1984
Ten researchers in the first subset of Dataset 1 were identified as authoring five
or more documents within the conference proceedings. These researchers contributed 68
papers that were examined for the cocitations of 69 authors identified as most cited in
the first data subset of Dataset 2. The 69 authors’ cocitation counts were tabulated into a
correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited File, which was graphed in
Gelphi 0.9.2 software. Sixty-seven nodes were mapped, and 1,211 connections or
cocitations for the most influential authors were identified in the graph represented in
Figure 15. Average degree length was 18.203 with six communities of influence.
Figure 15 shows only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Identifying clusters of nodes
with central points is a common analysis technique within cocitation network analysis
(Benckendorff, 2009, p.9). Four clusters of related nodes were identified within the
graph. The central node of the main cluster, Cluster 1, of the graph is held by F. M.
Dwyer. In close proximity to Dwyer in trine were R. M. W. Travers and R. J.

146

Lamberski. Cluster 1 provided the most density or degree of influence within the graph.
Cluster 2 was formed by another trine of authors in close proximity. Winn was
the central node of Cluster 2 with Goodenough, Karp, Witkin, Fleming, and Levie
forming a strongly cocited collaborative shell within this cluster. Cluster 3 and 4
comparatively represent relational perspectives. Cluster 3, with M. R. Simonson as the
central node, indicates a strong leadership role of influence among a semi-circle or
spore-like extention of semi-influentual cocited authors. Cluster 4 indicates a strong
collaborative cluster of influence with authors including Pavio as the central node and
Salomon, Winn, and Foulke forming a relational cluster.
Some strong nodes of citation appeared outside of the clusters. These nodes may
indicate growing nodes of influence. Several authors appeared as radical points outside
the main cluster which indicated influencial writers gaining prominence in the domain
by intorudcing a new theory, concept or paradigm.

147

Data Subset 1979-1984 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 15. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 19791984 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Data Subset 1985-1989
Sixteen researchers in the second subset of Dataset 1 were identified as authoring
more than five documents within the conference proceedings. These researchers
contributed 111 papers that were examined for the cocitations of 121 authors identified
as most cited in the second data subset of Dataset 2. The 121 authors’ cocitation counts
were tabulated into a correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited File,

148

which was graphed in Gelphi 0.9.2 software. One hundred-ten nodes were mapped, and
1,607 connections or cocitations for the most influential authors were identified in the
graph represented in Figure 16. Average degree length was 26.149 with 16 communities
of influence.
Figure 16 shows only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Clusters of nodes were
identified with central points for network analysis. Five clusters within the graph were
identified. The central node of Cluster 1 indicated a strong leadership role of influence
among a circle of cocited authors with a strong subcluster of influence within Cluster 1
with Phillips as the secondary central node. Cluster 2 and 3 comparatively represented
relational perspectives to Cluster 1. Cluster 2 shows a strong collaborative cluster of
influence with authors including Baker, Belland, Canelos, Dwyer, and Taylor forming
the cluster with Dwyer as the central node. R. D. Tennyson served as the central node of
Cluster 3 and indicated a strong leadership role of influence among a circle of cocited
authors. Cluster 4, a more compact cluster with Anderson as the central node formed
interconnectivity with Clusters 1 and 3.
This network identified disassociated clusters, wherein there was limited or no
connection between the disasociated cluster and the main cluster of the graph. One
disassociated cluster was graphed. Cluster 5, with M. R. Simonson as the central node,
indicated a leadership role of influence among a semi-circle or spore-like extention of
cocited authors. In addition, three free nodes, nodes with no connections, were graphed
and indicate three authors with citations levels that would demonstrate influence within

149

the knowledge domain.

Data Subset 1985-1989 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 16. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 19851989 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Data Subset 1990-1994
Sixteen researchers in the third subset of Dataset 1 were identified as authoring
more than five documents within the conference proceedings. These researchers

150

contributed 101 papers that were examined for the cocitations of 192 authors identified
as most cited in the third data subset of Dataset 2. The 192 authors’ cocitation counts
were tabulated into a correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited File.
One hundred sixty-four nodes were mapped, and 1,607 connections or cocitations were
identified in the graph represented in Figure 17. Average degree length was 5.948 with
82 communities of influence.
Figure 17 shows only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Clusters of nodes were
identified with central points for network analysis. Three interrelated clusters within the
graph were identified. The central node of Cluster 1 indicated a strong collaboration
cluster of influence with authors including Reigeluth, Jonassen, Gagne, Salomon,
Merrill, and Wittrock.
Cluster 2 and 3 also presented strong collaboration formations emerging from the
central node. Cluster 2, with Hannafin as the central node was also a collaborative
cluster of influence with authors including Ross Tennyson, Morrison, Carrier, Johnson
R, and Johnson, D in close proximity. Cluster 3 indicated a strong collaborative cluster
of influence with authors including Dwyer, Keller, Rieber and Wittrock with Dwyer as
the central node.
This network is the first to show dendronic extensions extending far beyond the
proximity barriers of the clusters, which indicate the development of new related
paradigms and growth in the knowledge domain.

151

Data Subset 1990-1994 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 17. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 19901994 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Data Subset 1995-1999
Thirteen researchers in the fourth subset of Dataset 1 were identified as authoring
more than five documents within the conference proceedings. These researchers
contributed 82 papers that were examined for the cocitations of 147 authors identified as
most cited in the fourth data subset of Dataset 2. The 147 authors’ cocitation counts
were tabulated into a correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited File.
One hundred thirty-six nodes were mapped, and 2,012 connections or cocitations were

152

identified in the graph represented in Figure 18. Average degree length was 2.476 with
89 communities of influence.
Figure 18 shows only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Clusters of nodes were
identified with central points for network analysis. Seven clusters, one large central
cluster with six relational clusters form the body of the graph. One disassociated cluster
and five free nodes within the graph were identified.
The body of the graph is portioned within or from Cluster 1 with Hannafin as the
strong central node of the graph. All cocitation connections within the graph were
connected to Hannafin. Cluster 2, 3, and 4 represented relational perspectives to Cluster
1. Each cluster had a strong central node of influence but remained within the
cocitational boundaries of Cluster 1. Jonassen, Sullivan, and Gagne served as central
nodes of these clusters. Cluster 5 and 6 were dendronically connected to Cluster 1 but
have central nodes that have emerged from the cocitation boundary of Cluster 1 to
demonstrate spore-like protrusions from the central node.
This network identified one disassociated cluster, wherein there is limited or no
connection between the disasociated cluster and the main cluster of the graph. Vygotsky
was identified as the central node of Cluster 7. Some dendronic protrusions were
emerging from Cluster 1 and five free nodes have appeared in the upper left quadrant of
the graph, which may indicate the formation of new concepts or paradigms and growth
within the knowledge domain.

153

Data Subset 1995-1999 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 18. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 19951999 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Data Subset 2000-2004
Twenty-five researchers in the fifth subset of Dataset 1 were identified as
authoring more than five documents within the conference proceedings. These

154

researchers contributed 188 papers that were examined for the cocitations of 268 authors
identified as most cited in the fifth data subset of Dataset 2. The 268 authors’ cocitation
counts were tabulated into a correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited
File.Two hundred fifty-three nodes were mapped, and 5,062 connections or cocitations
were identified in the graph represented in Figure 19. Average degree length was 7.629
with 83 communities of influence.
Figure 19 shows only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Enlargement of the graph was
required to focus on the developing clusters for identification for network analysis.
Figure 20 shows the embryonic nature of the central cluster of the graph. Multiple
clusters of cocotation formed in close proximity to three prominent central clusters with
Hannafin, Dick, and Duffy as the central nodes. This embryonic cluster represented the
explosion in developmental growth of the knowledge domain within this period.

155

Data Subset 2000-2004 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 19. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 20002004 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

156

Central Embryonic Cluster of Data Subset 2000-2004 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 20. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 20002004 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

157

Figure 21 and Figure 22 provide a view of the 3 most prominent clusters within the
original graph for this data subset. While Cluster 1, Cluster 2, and Cluster 3 overlap in
close proximity due to a low degree measure, these clusters represent strong central
leadership roles of influence emanating from three strong central nodes. These clusters
represent the knowledge base with this violatile period of development within the
knowledge domain.

Enlarged View of Cluster 1 of Data Subset 2000-2004 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 21. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 20002004 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

158

Enlarged View of Cluster 2 and Cluster 3 of Data Subset 2000-2004 Cocitation Network
Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 22. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 20002004 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Data Subset 2005-2009
Twenty-seven authors in the sixth subset of Dataset 1 were identified as
authoring more than five documents within the conference proceedings. These

159

researchers contributed 198 papers that were examined for the cocitations of 208 authors
identified as most cited in the sixth data subset of Dataset 2. The 208 authors’ cocitation
counts were tabulated into a correlation matrix and converted into a Comma Delimited
File. One hundred seventy-four nodes were mapped, and 4,592 connections or
cocitations were identified in the graph represented in Figure 23. Average degree length
was 30.798 with 41 communities of influence.
Figure 23 showed only those links with ten or more cocitations in order to keep
the diagram relatively uncluttered and easier to interpret. Clusters of nodes were
identified with central points for network analysis. Enlargement of the graph was
required to focus on the developing clusters for identification for network analysis.
Figure 23 shows the development from embryonic graph of the previous subset to the
dendronic and cluster nature of the current graph. The distance between clusters has
grown 75% from the previous data subset graph.

160

Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of the Most Influential Authors
Figure 23. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 20052009 from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the
Yifan Hu algorithm.

Figure 24 shows Cluster 1 with Jonassen as the central node. This cluster is a
fully developed cocitation cluster demonstrating subcluster and dendronic growth.
Previous disaccociated nodes are now connected to this central cluster, such as
Vygotsky in the upper left quadrant.

161

Enlarged View of Cluster 1 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 24. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

162

Figure 25 shows Cluster 2 with Reigeluth as the central node. This cluster is a fully
developed cocitation cluster demonstrating subcluster and dendronic growth. The
subclusters also demonstrate relational connectivity to other nodes.

Enlarged View of Cluster 2 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 25. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

163

Figure 26 shows Cluster 3 with Ertmer as the central node. This cluster is a fully
developed cocitation cluster demonstrating subcluster and dendronic growth. The
subclusters also demonstrate relational connectivity to other nodes, such as Sweller on the
left side of the graph.

Enlarged View of Cluster 3 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 26. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

164

Figure 27 shows Cluster 4 with Mayer as the central node. This cluster is an
example of developing cocitation cluster that resembles the spore or seed development of
a plant. The nodes emanating from the central point represent nodes rising in influence
and connectivity to other clusters within the network.

Enlarged View of Cluster 4 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 27. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

Figure 28 shows Cluster 5 with Engestrom as the central node. This cluster is an
example of developing cocitation cluster that resembles the spore or seed development of
a plant. The nodes emanating from the central point represent nodes rising in influence
and connectivity to other clusters within the network. This cluster appears in the graph to
floating in space but with dendronic connections to other clusters. Clusters of this nature
demonstrate connections to the established knowledge base and to new theories, concepts,
or paradigms.

165

Enlarged View of Cluster 5 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 28. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

166

Enlarged View of Cluster 6 of Data Subset 2005-2009 Cocitation Network Analysis of
the Most Influential Authors
Figure 29. A bibliometric multi-dimensional map of the author cocitations from the Data Subset 2005-2009
from the Conference Proceedings of the AECT. Visualized with Gephi 0.9.2 software employing the Yifan
Hu algorithm.

167

Figure 29 shows Cluster 6 shows a strong collaborative cluster of influence with
authors including Bandura, Pintrich, Garrison, Kang, and Seaman forming the cluster
with Garrison as the central node. This cluster is a strong relational cluster with
connections to other clusters and dendronic development.
The graph and cluster graphs for this data subset demonstrate a well developed and
complex knowledge domain with different levels of development of the authorial
influence and therefore intellectural connections.
Summary of Findings
The conference proceedings of the AECT, published from 1979 to 2009,
provide a consistent set of papers to analyze and graph the cocitations and determine the
structure of the knowledge domain. The first data subset, Data Subset 1979-1984,
provides a structural view of a small group of authors relationally interacting through
cocitation focused on one or two ideas that were visually demonstrated in the network
graph. The network, according to Pham, Derntl, and Klammas (2012) Developmental
Model, may be identified as an interdisciplinary knowledge domain.
The second data subset, Data Subset 1985-1989, provides a structural view of a
group realationally interacting through cocitation. The network, according to Pham,
Derntl, and Klammas (2012) Developmental Model, may be identified as an emerging
knowledge domain. Development and growth has occurred since the previous data
subset within the knowledge domain.
The third data subset, Data Subset 1990-1994, provides a structural view of a

168

group of authors relationally interacting through cocitation with new authors
establishing eminence over the previous subset that were visually demonstrated in the
network graph. The network, according to Pham, Derntl, and Klammas (2012)
Developmental Model, may be identified as a focused knowledge domain. Not only has
growth and development occurred since the previous data subset, but also growth in the
participation within the knowledge domain.
The fourth data subset, Data Subset 1995-1999, provides a structural view of a
group of authors relationally interacting through cocitation and largely within a focused
group that were visually demonstrated in the network graph. The network, according to
Pham, Derntl, and Klammas (2012) Developmental Model, may be identified as a
focused knowledge domain. This knowledge domain is subtedly different from the
previous domain in that development is directed internally within the primary cluster.
Dendronic protrusions coupled with free nodes indicate a shift within the field to a new
paradigm.
The fifth data subset, Data Subset 2000-2004, provides a structural view of a
group of authors relationally interacting through cocitation and visually demonstrated in
the network graph. The network, according to Pham, Derntl, and Klammas (2012)
Developmental Model, may be identified as a hierarchical knowledge domain
experiencing embryonic intellectual development. The graph is covered in
developmental clusters as well as three central clusters connected in trine, that for the
first time, represent a knowledge base layered under an explosion of development of
new concepts and paradigms within the knowledge domain.

169

The sixth and last data subset, Data Subset 2000-2004, provides a structural view
of a group of authors relationally interacting through cocitation and visually
demonstrated in the network graph. The network, according to Pham, Derntl, and
Klammas (2012) Developmental Model, may be identified as structurally mature
incorporating elements of interdisciplinary, hierarchical, and focused knowledge
development. Clusters are varied and spread with a multitude of dendronic activity and
interrelational development at different levels indicating maturity of growth and
development of the knowledge domain.

170

Chapter 5: Discussion
Science is not recognized as knowledge until it is shared. We share science most
aptly through publication. Publications record the actions of science including
connections of thought through citation.
“Citations are cultural artifacts. They are complex textual symbols and one
of the most direct means through which we report, imply, and convey our
perspective about and uses of previous work. To study citations as
expressions of use is to track the ways in which we, collectively, decide to
retrieve only some sources in order to readdress and re-animate ideas from
the past in new contexts and for ongoing work” (Koshnick, 2014, p. 137).
It is through this process that a physical record of communication within a paradigm
may be identified and knowledge domains are created. “Examination of bibliographic
data is meant to proxy the examination of products of science” (Koshnick, 2015, p. 27).
New knowledge domains may form as researchers acting within a paradigm find
more pathways to publication. Conference proceedings provide a knowledge domain
worthy of study. The Association for Educational Communications and Technology
(AECT) has provided support to professionals as the oldest association central to
instruction through technology. The goal of this research was to provide a more
comprehensive picture of the knowledge domain of Educational/Instructional
Technology through a combination of bibliometric analyses that described the
researchers, their scientific output, and the communication within the knowledge domain
through cocitation network analysis.

171

Summary of Findings
The Conference Proceedings of the AECT provide a consistent view of
Instructional/Educational Technology. The proceedings have been a peer-reviewed
publication since 1979 compiled by Michael R. Simonson as the sole founding and
continuing editor. Michael R. Simonson began his career in Instructional/Educational
Technology in Iowa which is located in America’s Industrial Heartland, also referred to as
the Rustbelt, where Instructional/Educational Technology and the AECT find their origins.
This study sought to describe Instructional/Educational Technology through an analysis of
the researchers and research presented within the Conference Proceedings of the AECT.
First, the knowledge domain of the AECT Conference Proceedings was described
in terms of the authorship of its papers. During the thirty-year span (1979-2009), most of
the researchers were professors and graduate students serving in Education departments at
higher learning institutions across the United States originating in the Rustbelt. The
Scientific Productivity ratio was determined at 73% to 27% with a variance of 7% over the
thirty-year span, which represented a committed authorship to the knowledge domain,
growth in contributions, and an openness to new authorship.
The research front of the knowledge domain was represented by 118 authors
over the course of the thirty-year span. Four authors, Dwyer, Hannafin, Jonassen, and
Klein, had long productive periods as they appeared in more than two data subsets of the
study. This phenomenon would demonstrate a knowledge domain open to new
researchers and a consideration for the established researchers of the knowledge domain.

172

The main themes of the knowledge domain changed over time with
technological and cultural developments. Instructional Design, Computer Based
Instruction, and Learning come to the forefront in the keyword descriptors and identify
the purpose or focus of this knowledge domain at the conclusion of the study.
Next, the knowledge domain of the AECT Conference Proceedings was
described in terms of the cited authors within its published papers. Over 48,000 citations
were analyzed with 7% of the cited authorship representing the knowledge base of the
domain. The document type percentage rate also remained the same throughout the thirtyyear span and represented stability within the citation record of the knowledge domain.
The most cited authors within the knowledge domain may represent the human
knowledge base and the change of that knowledge base over time. Gagne, Hannafin,
Jonassen, Dwyer, and Reigeluth were the most cited authors within the knowledge
domain over the thirty-year span.
The most influential reference work of the period studied was Principles of
Instructional Design by Gagne and Briggs with over a twenty-five-year span of
influence. Two other titles influential over a twenty-year span were The Conditions of
Learning by Gagne, and Instructional Design Theories and Models: An Overivew of
Their Current Status by Reigeluth. In addition, titles changed from focus on the tool to
focus on the learning and this was reflected in the book titles within the dataset.
During the thirty-year span of the knowledge domain, Instructional/Educational
Technology academic publications (journals) became established and rose to the most
cited publications within the knowledge domain. Educational Technology and

173

Educational Technology: Research and Development (ETR&D) were the most
influential.
Lastly, six cocitation network analysis graphs were created over the thirty-year
span. The graphed cocitation networks of each data subset indicated a strong affinity
for citation drawing from within the knowledge domain and structural development
occurred and changed over time. The knowledge domain began as a small set of
researchers focused on a concept with elements borrowed from other disciplines that
developed into a paradigm. In the second subset, the knowledge domain emerged
intellectually and became focused on its own communication within the third subset. A
subtle shift in focus began in the fourth subset that blossomed into full blown
embryonic development of a hierarchically developing knowledge front interacting
over a firmly affixed knowledge base within the knowledge domain that demonstrated
maturity of intellectual connections within the last data subset.
Interpretation of Findings
The purpose of this study was to examine the conference proceedings of the
AECT as the consistent knowledge domain of Instructional/Educational Technology
using bibliometric methods, which would reveal the intellectual structure of
Educational/Instructional Technology. Librarians, data scientists, and sociologists have
long studied knowledge domains to identify intellectual structure and other information
in support of the sharing of science (Innes, 2006). The results formulated here offer
valuable insights into the structure of Instructional/Educational Technology as presented
in the Conference Proceedings of the AECT.

174

Finn (1953) argued that in order for Instructional/Educational Technology to be
recognized as a discipline, it must have an intellectual technique, an application to
human affairs, and an intellectual theory undergoing expansion through research. In this
study, Finn’s (1953) criteria have been met. The studied knowledge domain provided a
measured contribution of scientific productivity that was continuous over the thirty-year
span. Instructional Design was identified as the prominent intellectual technique, and
Computer Based Education was identified as an application to human affairs. The
development of intellectural theories was identified by Flynt (2017) in a previous study.
Instructional/Educational Technology is a discipline according to the outcomes of this
study.
Context of Findings
“Any analysis is limited by the quality of the data” (Shriffin & Börner, 2004, p.
5183). Only 10% of conference proceedings are recorded in informational databases and
made available for research. Additionally, more and more research is finding its home in
knowledge domains other than the traditional knowledge domain that peer-reviewed
academic publications, i.e. journals, represent. “The researcher must be careful not to
assume that some event did not occur simply because he or she is not aware of some
record of the event” (Connoway & Powell, 2004, p. 223).
“Few journals are devoted to topical areas that are as narrowly defined as most
knowledge domains under study” in the course of their development (Smiraglia, 2014,
P. 9). All previous attempts to identify the structure of Instructional/Educational
Technology as a discipline have failed due to the lack of sufficient data in academic

175

publications (journals) as a knowledge domain for bibliometric analysis. Conference
proceedings increasingly are providing the knowledge domain worthy of study in a
number of fields for domain network analysis.
Any knowledge domain that can provide “patterns of author production,
literature growth rates, and related statistical distributions to evalutae authors, assess
disciplines, and manage collections” can be used for domain network analysis
(O’Connor & Voos, 1981, p. 9). More analyses of conference proceedings in the future
should be made “to counteract the neglect of silent evidence” that many conference
proceedings represent (Cronin & Sugimoto, 2014, p.7).
Implications of Findings
This study demonstrated a bibliometric analysis in order to identify
communication and form models of scientific growth and change which demonstrated
evolution within the knowledge domain of Instructional/Educational Technology.
“It has been stated that the domain analytic approach is a social
perspective, where the study of sociology of the knowledge domain is vital
for the practice of information services. We have seen that Hjorland and
Albrechtsen argue that knowledge domains should be thought of as
discourse communities and that knowledge organization, structure,
cooperation patterns, language and communication forms, information
systems, and relevance criteria are a reflection of the object of the work of
these communities and of their role in society” (Bjurström, 2011).
“To begin, theories, paradigms, and disciplines are merely labels we place on

176

individuals, so we can categorize their interests and beliefs” (Connaway & Powell,
2004, p. 290). Citations serve as markers of relationships of communication and
“citation analysis links bibliometrics to other automatic algorithmic methods to
construction of knowledge organization systems” and “shares the same epistemoloigcal
foundation, empiricism to knowledge organization” (Shneider & Börland, 2004, p.
531).
“Historical research is most productive when the researcher attempts to
synthesize or integrate the facts into meaningful generalizations” Connaway & Powell,
2004, p. 223). Within Bibliometrics, theory development in describing information
production patterns, use, and citation patterns has been guided by established
bibliometric laws (Bjurström, 2011). These laws provide a premise in which
generalizations about domain analysis that “give the promise of revealing implicit
knowledge that is presently known only to domain experts” can be made (Shiffrin &
Börner, 2004, p. 5183).
“Research has established the aggregate properties of publications, references,
and citations—properties that are essential to know in order to build valid indicators
that can be used to measure at various scales, changes in the landscape of science”
(Gingras, 2014, p.15). Knowledge domain analysis, according to Koshnick (2013),
may be made at three levels of analyses: the particle level, the wave level, and the field
level. At the particle level, the characteristics of “the thing itself” relate the units of
expression for analysis. At the wave level, the “range of variation” over time of
scientific productivity is considered and described. At the field level, “the distribution

177

of the thing” –how it is percieved within the structure of the knowledge domain and
how does it correspond to relevant issues of the field is analyzed and interpreted. Taken
collectively, these levels of analysis provide an authoritative view of a knowledge
domain. The consistent knowledge domain of the Conference Proccedings of the AECT
was analyzed at the particle, wave, and field level and specificity resulted providing the
authoritative view of Instructional/Educational Technology as a discipline.
Limitations of the Study
Bibliometric studies by their nature are inherent with apparent limitations and
consideration should be made for the purposes of bibliometric study. This dissertation
focused on the articles which appeared in the Conference Proceedings of the AECT
from 1979 through 2009. The research was concerned with “Who”, “What”, “Where”,
and “With whom” of Instructional/Educational Technology with the intention of
mapping science to discover the nature of the communication network to make a
determination about the type of network represented. Is Instructional/Educational
Technology a profession, field, or discipline?
The first research question asked about the researchers, the main themes of their
research, and their origins within the field of Instructional/Educational Technology.
Unfortunately, one of the major limitatons to the study of conference proceedings as a
knowledge domain is the limited amount of information that is recorded about the
researchers. Not all data about each individual author was available in the publication,
and therefore, was excluded from the study, which may affect the strength of some
authors’ influences. Further, validity may be limited as paper counts decrease.

178

In addition, as paradigms develop, researchers use descriptive terminology that
may or may not represent the culture of the overall field of study. Authors writing about
similar topics may not have employed the same keyword descriptors to describe similar
publications; therefore, keyword descriptors may not accurately describe similar
publications.
The second research question asked about the resources of the research and its
authors, i.e. What reference works, academic publicatons, and their authors were
researchers relying on to create science? In this instance, humanity plays a role in the
external validity of the study. Not all reference works were cited correctly by citing
authors, and therefore, the results may be affected. Another concern is authors’
tendencies to cite for reasons other than true influence; therefore, creating influence
where none or little may exist.
The third, and last research question asked what intellectual structure may be
derived through multidimensional scaling. This information may lead to conclusions
about the nature of Instructional/Educational Technology. Again, external validity is
affected by human foiables. Not all authors were cited correctly by citing researchers,
and therefore, the size of clusters and connections within the network graphs may be
affected. These results may also have been affected by a tendency of researchers tend to
cite within their own field of reference as a matter of course to influence publication.
Network analysis is also affected by the fractionalizing of scientific contribution
by primary and secondary authors and whether these authors were treated as equal
contributors to the science or not. In this study, all authors were considered equal with

179

no distinction between primary author and secondary authors, and therefore, the results
may have presented a different network structure that expected in other studies, and an
effect on external validity also may have resulted.
Future Research Directions
Research develops through the communication of science by its researchers. No
one study can define all the communication connections that exist within science or the
specialized communication that is defined and existing within disciplines. “Disciplinary
development is an incremental social process that can be analyzed and understood in
terms of social theory. Theories, paradigms, and eventually disciplines emanate from a
context of these socially constructed areas of knowledge discovery and production”
(Connaway & Powell, 2004, p. 290). Conference proceedings by their nature, are a
socially constructed knowledge domain worthy of study. The purpose of this study was
to visualize Instructional/Educational Technology as presented in a consistent
knowledge domain that the AECT Conference Proceedings provided and describe its
development.
The data gathered in this study answered the question “How does scholarly
communication develop in the knowledge domain presented in conference proceedings
and can this microcosm represent the discipline?” This study demonstrated:
•

Conference proceedings represent a knowledge domain worthy of study,

•

Bibliometric analyses of conference proceedings may identify the research front,
knowledge base, and influencers of a knowledge domain,

180

•

Eom’s (2009) methodology for data collection and network analysis is applicable
to conference proceedings as a knowledge domain, and

•

A knowledge domain (Instructional/Educational Technology) may be graphed
for developmental and incremental change to provide insight about the
communication of science.

Future studies of other conference proceedings with a similar methodology may
reinforce the findings may by this study and may answer questions about the strength of
conference proceedings as a viable knowledge domain for analysis. Studies of the same
knowledge domain in different publications types may also provide information for
comparative study and further validate these findings.
Bibliometric analysis provides a wealth of information to be studied. This study
considered an epistemological view of the conference proceedings as a knowledge
domain to graph its development; and, in this study, developmental and incremental
change was identified. Similar cocitation analysis studies, examining different indicators
within the dataset, are recommended, such as the analysis of gender and ethnicity in
correlation with citation behavior or an examination of collaborative networks between
researchers, which may provide insight into developing paradigms for future research. It
is also recommended that future researchers compare these findings with the network
analysis of other knowledge domains of Instructional/Educational Technology to
develop paradigmatic genealogies that will “study the extent to which knowledge and
epistemic practices are transmitted” through institutional versus intellectual structures
and identify chains of continuity within the discipline (Cronin & Sugimoto, 2014, p. 36).

181

This information may be used to create an ontological view of the disicpline of
Instructional/Educational Technology.